 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discerning the Meaning of Being as Love:  
How Prayer Preserves Thought from Ideology  
according to Ferdinand Ulrich 
 
by 
Robert Bruce Van Alstyne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Thesis submitted to the Faculty of Regis College 
and the Graduate Centre for Theological Studies of the Toronto School of Theology. 
In partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Theology 
awarded by Regis College and the University of Toronto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright by Robert Bruce Van Alstyne 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Discerning the Meaning of Being as Love:  
How Prayer Preserves Thought from Ideology 
according to Ferdinand Ulrich 
Robert Bruce Van Alstyne 
Master of Theology 
Regis College and the University of Toronto 
2020 
 
Abstract 
This thesis offers an interpretation of Ferdinand Ulrich’s metaphysical anthropology in order to 
argue that prayer helps preserve thought from ideology. Out of fear that the gift of being will be 
withheld, reason is tempted to cling to it by treating it as though it were a substance. Whenever 
thought proceeds from such hunger, attempting to mediate being dialectically, it inevitably falls 
into ideology. By praying, however, one receives being as a gift, realizing the existential truth of 
Aquinas’ teaching that being is a simple fullness precisely as nonsubsistent, a unity of wealth and 
poverty. By fostering the disposition of a kenotic freedom that gives itself away gratuitously, 
prayer enables thought to carry out its task of properly enacting the ontological difference 
between being and beings. As an alternative to dialectical mediation, Ulrich thus proposes a 
prayerful thinking as thanking for being as God’s gift of love. 
ii

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 1 
Chapter One  Prayer: Receiving the Gift of Kenotic Freedom .......................... 6 
1. 
“Poverty in a Positive Sense:” Beginning to Pray in Gratitude ...................................... 10 
2. 
Venturing a Gratuitous Affirmation and Letting Oneself be Distributed ......................... 18 
3. 
The Virgin-Mother: Prayer as the Unity of Wealth and Poverty ..................................... 26 
 
Chapter Two: The Movement of Being’s Finitization into Subsistence ........ 32 
1. 
Logicized Spirit and Pneumatic Reason ........................................................................ 33 
2. 
The Ontological Moments: Reality, Ideality, Bonicity ..................................................... 35 
 
Chapter Three:  The Fruitfulness of Prayer for the Critique of Ideology ..... 46 
1. 
The Structure of the Philosophical Act as the Fundamental Form of Human Self-
Realization ............................................................................................................................. 47 
2. 
The Pseudo-Philosophical Structure of Ideology ........................................................... 51 
2.1 
The Logicization of Being Underlying Both Ideology and Its Critique ......................... 51 
2.2 
Only Love Pursues the Superessential Light of Being ................................................. 53 
3. 
Realigning the Critique of Ideology with Its Authentically Philosophical Trajectory ....... 57 
 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................ 66 
 
Bibliography ......................................................................................................................... 71 
 
iii

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
St. Paul prays that the Ephesians might “know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, 
that you may be filled with all the fullness of God” (Eph 3:19 [RSV]). Can a finite mind know 
that which surpasses knowledge? What does it mean to know love, especially Christ’s love? 
How could one be filled with the fullness of God without falling into some form of idolatry? 
This thesis will argue that it is only by knowing that “which surpasses knowledge,” that is, by 
knowing the love of Christ through prayer, that one can keep from falling into some ideology. 
Christ’s love exceeds knowledge because it continuously pours itself out for all anew. By 
receiving this self-emptying love, one remains open to the fullness of God, thereby keeping 
one’s mind open to the superessential light of being and resisting ideology. By perceiving in the 
kenotic love of Christ the disclosure of the meaning of human existence and of being itself, 
Ferdinand Ulrich offers a philosophical anthropology that can help us appreciate the importance 
of prayer for thought.1 By attuning one to the kenotic love of Christ, prayer keeps thought open 
to the superessential light of being and thereby saves it from ideology. 
Ulrich writes of being as a gift of love. So that love may be more clearly grasped as being’s 
“necessary meaning” (notwendige Seinsinn), Ulrich lets Christ’s kenosis elucidate philosophical 
inquiry.2 He finds being itself interpreted as kenotic love in the Christian metaphysics of 
Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas offers such an account by speaking of being as at once both a 
fullness, that is, as “complete and simple,” and yet as not clinging to itself, not self-withholding, 
 
1 Ferdinand Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, trans. DC Schindler (Washington, DC: 
Humanum Academic Press, 2018), 1: As he writes at the outset of his Homo Abyssus, “The subject matter itself has 
transcended ontology into anthropology, and anthropology into Christology—and I have followed in the wake of 
this movement.”   
2 Ulrich, 23: by writing of love as being’s notwendige Seinsinn, Ulrich means that being (Sein) has a certain 
“meaning” or “sense” or “direction” (Sinn) that is essential according to the structure by which it is given. (We will 
analyze this structure in chapter two.) Thus, this meaning is “necessary” in the sense of “inevitable” carried by the 
Latin necessarium. Ulrich also means, however, that this meaning is not-wendig in the sense of the German roots: it 
is need-relieving. By recognizing and obeying the necessary meaning of being, namely, that it is a gift of love, 
reason lets itself be liberated (wendig) from distress (Not) into which it falls, in which it is tempted to fix being’s 
meaning ideologically. The thesis of the paper is thus summarized in this phrase. See the entries, “necessary sense 
of being” and “need-relieving / necessary,” in the translator’s glossary in Ulrich, 501–502. If Christian revelation 
has helped bring this necessary meaning to light, already prior to the Incarnation the history of philosophy was 
progressing in its discovery of the meaning of being as a unity of wealth and poverty. Ulrich indicates this in his 
analysis and evaluation of the extent to which Plato and Aristotle disclosed the non-subsistence of being, i.e., “the 
convertibility of being and ‘nothing’” (Ulrich, 30–36). 
1

 
2 
but always already given away, that is, as “non-subsistent.”3 In other words, for Aquinas, being 
is well interpreted according to its necessary sense where it is recognized as not merely a 
fullness in itself, nor merely an abstract concept or nothing in reality, but as a unity of wealth 
and poverty. From a Thomistic metaphysics of the real distinction between being and essence, 
Ulrich finds resources for thinking through a philosophy of gift. It is to this central mystery of 
being as a gift of love, as Ulrich discloses it, reflecting on Aquinas’ insights, that we will 
continually return in this thesis. The understanding of being as a gift of love in terms of unity of 
wealth and poverty affords Ulrich a criterion for discernment with which he enters into dialogue 
with modern thinkers such as Marx, Nietzsche, and Hegel. As we consider some aspects of his 
dialogue with these modern thinkers, this unity of wealth and poverty will help us recognize the 
importance of prayer for liberating thought from ideology. 
Writing of being as a unity of wealth and poverty, a fullness that is always already poured out 
into beings, Ulrich develops a philosophy of gift in dialogue with the tradition of modern 
metaphysics. This philosophy of gift offers a critique of Hegel’s dialectics.4 The ultimate unity 
of wealth and poverty, the synthesis in which the ontological difference is sublated is the triune 
love of God.5 It is not only to be achieved at the end of time; it is also the beginning, the source.6 
Being arrives as a unity of wealth and poverty because, as a gift, it bears resemblance to the 
Giver, with whom it remains archetypally united: it is “the likeness of the divine goodness.”7 
One does not arrive at this synthesis through dialectical reasoning, but rather receives it as a gift. 
As such, being is also not merely an empty concept, a quality of every entity which reason can 
 
3 Quaestiones Disputatae de Potentia (hereafter De Pot.) 1.1: esse significat aliquid completum et simplex sed non 
subsistens. 
4 For an analysis of Ulrich’s engagement with Hegel, see Marine de La Tour, Gabe im Anfang: Grundzüge des 
metaphysischen Denkens von Ferdinand Ulrich, Münchener philosophische Studien, Band 32 (Stuttgart: W. 
Kohlhammer, 2016), 31–58; Marine de la Tour, “The Light of the Gift in Homo Abyssus,” Communio 46, no. 1 
(Spring 2019): 27–40. See especially the section “Dialectics or Gift?” (32–36), which offers an interpretation of 
Ulrich’s response to Hegelian dialectics to which I am especially indebted throughout this thesis.  
5 On the divine essence of the Trinity considered as a unity of life (i.e., wealth) and death (i.e., poverty) see 
Ferdinand Ulrich, Leben in der Einheit von Leben und Tod (Freiburg: Johannes Verlag, 1999), 122–25. 
6 For “what the mind first conceives and as it were knows best, and into which it resolves all of its conceptions, is 
esse” (De ver. 1.1, as quoted and translated in Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 11). 
Ulrich translates Thomas’ “ens” as Sein, which Schindler then renders as esse in the English translation of Homo 
Abyssus. Although this gives rise to the perplexity of replacing one of St. Thomas’ words, ens, with a different 
Latin term, esse, this serves to emphasize that it is “to be” as such that the mind first conceives, rather than a 
particular concrete being or substance (which ens often means). As one of the readers of this thesis helpfully 
suggested, while Thomas is right to speak of this metaphysical subject as ens, Schindler might be within his rights 
to transpose Thomas’ ens as esse, provided that what is implied is something like “this particular created to-be, 
which is limited by its created essence:” illud esse creatum. 
7 Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate (hereafter De Ver.) 22.2.2. 

 
3 
abstract from them. Being “can never mediate itself into a subsisting unity next to God, but is 
‘dependent’ on the essence” of every existent; for being itself “does not flow into a single 
essence.”8 As superessential, being cannot be brought under a concept even though it gives itself 
as “what the mind first conceives.”9 We are never departing from a “pure beginning”, but 
always traveling along the path of inquiry, always in via, without thereby having to despair of 
ever arriving at our goal: “Instead, being preserves a difference within itself, the liberating 
difference of the goal from the progress of thinking among the multiplicity of beings. This 
difference places us in the not-yet of hope, which pervades the innermost region of speculative 
thought as its vital element.”10 Having always already received the gift of being and yet never 
exhaustively comprehending it, we are not empowered by revelation to foreclose inquiry into 
the meaning of being; by thinking of being as a gift of love, we do not construct an 
ontotheological ladder to God as the summum ens. Thus, Ulrich enters into dialogue also with 
Heidegger, offering a philosophy of “thinking as thanking” for the gift of being, which draws us 
ever deeper into the ontological mystery.11  
Thought, because it is called to follow the gift of being, cannot begin from or ever arrive at an 
absolute system, but must rather proceed in via, along “the little way” of finite beings in the 
 
8 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 24, 24n6, 52, 73. See Aquinas, De Potentia, 1.1. 
9 De ver. 1.1. 
10 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 10. 
11 Ulrich understands thought to find fulfillment in following the movement of being into finitude, and to be, 
therefore, a kind of thanksgiving for this gift of being. Heidegger asks, “How can we give thanks for this 
endowment, the gift of being able to think what is most thought-provoking, more fittingly than by giving thought to 
the most thought-provoking? The supreme thanks, then, would be thinking?” (Martin Heidegger, What Is Called 
Thinking?, trans. Fred Wieck and J. Glenn Gray [New York: Harper & Row, 1968], 143; see also 138–147). Ulrich 
takes up Heidegger’s notion of “thinking as thanking,” perhaps shifting the emphasis that Heidegger accords 
thinking to an emphasis on thanking by developing Heidegger’s etymological reflection into a Eucharistic 
philosophy of gift: “At its most original roots, to think thus means: to apprehend being, but to do so along the 
incalculable path of human poverty amid the variety and multiplicity of beings. Only the one who thinks in 
obedience to being thinks in the proper sense… The one who hoards the gift as a thing to be seized does not thank; 
that is, he does not bow down in gratitude to the origin in response to the gift, the origin to which the hypostasized 
being is no longer transparent. Thinking means thanking, because being cannot be degraded into the crisis into a 
self-enclosed thing and thus made into a despotic power opposed to God; but it is also not fixed and trapped in the 
substance that receives it. In both cases, thinking is negated as thanking. It is only in the properly enacted 
movement of being’s finitization that thinking occurs as thanking. This thanking, however, is sustained by the 
exinanitio of the Logos, which ruptures the hypostasis of being, since he does not consider his ‘glory something to 
be grasped at,’… He hands this thanksgiving down to us in his Spirit as εὐχαριστία, in which we possess the pledge 
of ontological obedience in faith until the Lord comes again” (Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question 
of Being, 113–14; here and throughout this thesis, all italicization in quotations from Ulrich’s works are original, 
unless otherwise noted). In this passage, two significant footnotes appear. The first makes explicit the reference to 
Philippians 2:6–10, drawing the analogy between Christ’s kenosis and the act of creation as interpreted in terms of 
being’s movement into finitization. In the second, Ulrich extends the analogy to include the Eucharist, observing, 
“It cannot be an accident that the one whose thinking was uniquely founded on the superessential dimension of 
being—namely, Thomas Aquinas—had such a great love for the celebration of the mystery of the Holy Eucharist.”  

 
4 
superessential light of being as such.12 Thought progresses by not resolving this tension in such 
a way that would close this ontological difference between being and beings, but rather by 
persevering in thinking out of this difference. Man must carry out the task this difference 
implies through obedience to being’s necessary sense. It is in this obedience that he discovers 
his freedom. By praying, he receives the gift of being, and remains attuned to the Giver, offering 
his grateful assent to the task that the gift implies. Prayer therefore preserves the objective 
perspective that only spiritual consolation, the experience of genuine freedom in obedience to 
God, affords.13  
This thesis will thus proceed in three chapters: the first explores prayer as the experience of 
kenotic freedom, which discloses the meaning of being as a gift of love; the second unfolds that 
meaning of being as a unity of wealth and poverty into the foundations of a metaphysical 
anthropology; the third focuses on the philosophical act and the importance of prayer for 
preserving that act from falling into ideology. Each chapter draws its considerations from one of 
Ulrich’s works. The first chapter will draw from Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt to consider 
prayer as the lived experience of kenotic freedom.14 As the creature’s central act, prayer opens 
one to experience freedom as a received unity of wealth and poverty. From this experience of 
freedom, we will unfold in the second chapter the metaphysics of being as a gift of love, as 
Ulrich develops it in his Homo Abyssus. There, Ulrich transposes a Thomistic structure of 
participation into a philosophy of being as gift, in terms of what he refers to as being’s 
movement of finitization into subsistence. It is thought’s task to follow this movement, which it 
carries out in obedience to the necessary sense of being as a gift of love. This second chapter 
thus highlights the unity of love and reason in the philosophical act of “thinking as thanking.” 
 
12 Over against the temptation to begin centering on the wealth of being as such, reason must let itself be directed 
outward in poverty, along “the little way” among finite beings. Ulrich thus associates ratiocination, the humble task 
of reason to proceed discursively in via, with the humility of “the little way” of St. Thérèse of Lisieux: a spirituality 
of charity in the simple events of daily life (Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 22). 
13 Ulrich’s emphasis on the importance of obeying the necessary meaning of being and the corresponding role that 
bonicity plays in uniting ideality and reality (which we shall discuss in the second chapter), thus serve to bring out 
the epistemological insights of St. Ignatius’ rules for the discernment of spirits: only in spiritual consolation are we 
sufficiently under the guidance of the good spirit so as to see clearly the way to a good decision: “For, just as in 
consolation it is more the good spirit who guides and counsels us, so in desolation it is the bad spirit, and by 
following his counsels we can never find the right way” (Ignatius of Loyola, Personal Writings, ed. Joseph A. 
Munitiz and Philip Endean, [New York: Penguin Classics, 1997], 349). 
14 Ferdinand Ulrich, Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt (Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 1973); Ferdinand Ulrich, “A 
Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” trans. Adrian Walker, Communio: International 
Catholic Review 23, no. 1 (Spring 1996): 36–46. The first two sections of Gebet’s first chapter have been 
previously published in Communio as “A Dangerous Reflection…” When I have quoted from these sections (pages 
9–19 in Gebet), I have drawn from Walker’s translation. All other translations of Gebet are my own. Gebet is 
quoted extensively with the kind permission of Johannes Verlag. 

 
5 
Where it is carried out well, the philosophical act perseveres in thinking out of the ontological 
difference of freedom through loving obedience to the gift of being in concrete subsistence. In 
our third chapter, we will consider Ulrich’s argument for the way in which this philosophical act 
can be fruitful for the critique of ideology, an argument he presents in his article, Der 
philosophische Akt als Ideologiekritik.15 There, Ulrich argues that the philosophical act enables 
us to avoid falling into ideology by keeping thought open to the superessential light of being. I 
will argue, in light of our analysis from previous chapters, that prayer is necessary for this 
philosophical act. It makes an essential contribution to the way in which the philosophical act 
preserves thought from ideology. As the lived unity of wealth and poverty and the act of 
thanksgiving for the gift of being, prayer is the act of love whereby one overcomes the 
temptation to fear that the gift will be withheld—the temptation which underlies every 
ideological attempt to fix being in ideality or absolutize finite reality. Prayer, by preserving our 
receptivity to God’s gift of love, keeps reason open to the superessential light of being. It 
thereby preserves reason from falling into ideology, enabling it to carry out its task of thinking 
out of the ontological difference.  
 
 
 
15 Ferdinand Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” Atti Del XXI Convegnó Del Centro Di Studi 
Filosofici Tra Professori Universitari, Gallarate, 1966: Ideologia e Filosofia 21 (1967): 328–358. All translations 
of quotations from this article are my own.  

 
6 
Chapter One  
Prayer: Receiving the Gift of Kenotic Freedom 
 
Perhaps the most fundamental issue of this thesis, an issue that underlies the arguments of each 
of the chapters, may be distilled into the question Nietzsche poses: “The deepest distinction: 
whether hunger or superabundance [Überfluß] becomes creative?”16 Ulrich sets Nietzsche’s 
formulation in a context that lets these alternatives come to light as posing the fundamental 
question of freedom: whether one will live out of the craving of a corrupt eros, or whether one 
will instead surrender this craving and live from the spirit of a gratuitous love—that same love 
which evinces its creativity in having given us to be.17 As the act of thanksgiving for the gift of 
one’s being, prayer turns inward only to give thanks for the gift that one has been given to be 
and to live from the “overflow” [Überfluß] of that gift. Whereas living out of a hunger would 
fragment oneself in an endless chase after external goods, prayer fosters the integral unity of the 
person. As this person, moreover, flourishes in love, prayer consolidates her integral unity not 
by storing up her wealth for oneself, but rather in a generous gift of oneself to others in the finite 
conditions of daily life. a gift one gives away: 
The one praying subverts the world that is focused by the division of labor and determined by what 
is advantageous and useful, because the source point of his self-emptying is that life whose self-
communication does not begin to move from without, but rather springs up absolutely freely out of 
himself. The one praying is nonreactive and therefore he always becomes present as a whole, from 
the core of his existence [Dasein], precisely where, standing in his place as one among many, he does 
not imagine himself in a corrupt universality, but rather is faithful in limitation. The unconditionality 
 
16 Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, Giorgio Colli, and Mazzino Montinari, Sämtliche Werke: Kritische 
Studienausgabe, vol. 12 (München: Berlin; New York: Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag ; De Gruyter, 1988), 122: 
“Tiefste Unterscheidung: ob der Hunger oder der Überfluß schöpferisch wird? Ersterer erzeugt die Ideale der 
Romantik;” quoted in Ulrich, Gebet, 102. 
17 Josef Pieper, Faith, Hope, Love (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1997), 239–45. While offering a defense of eros 
against Anders Nygren’s opposition of agape against eros, Pieper acknowledges the need for a “step from self-love 
to disinterested or ‘selfless’ love” (240). While he defends the complementarity of eros and agape, then, this 
complementarity is one that is only achieved with some struggle. “Were not those most unselfish moments, of 
which both the slyest and the meanest persons think, also the happiest moments in their lives because of being the 
most unselfish? If eros, self-love, is basically the desire for happiness, then the question must be: What does 
happiness truly mean?” He goes on to affirm, “if it is true that joy and happiness are our response to partaking of 
something we love; and if loving, simple approval, is something beloved in itself—then it must likewise be true that 
our desire for happiness can be satisfied precisely by such affirmation directed toward another, that is, by 
‘unselfish’ love. As Goethe puts it: ‘True happiness really consists only in sympathy’” (241). Ulrich’s account of 
being as a unity of wealth and poverty is consonant with Pieper’s own account of the “paradoxical structure” of the 
structure of love as a unity of joyful, receptive gratitude and generosity. Emphasizing the gratuity of the affirmation 
of love and opposing this as he does to “hunger”, Ulrich’s account might appear to echo Nygren’s; but Ulrich 
believes that this corrupt eros can be redeemed and his metaphysics of re-enactment is itself an attempt to redeem 
reason from its corruptly erotic hypostasization of being so that it might attain its fulfillment in unity with agape. 
Pieper’s account of a love that gives without calculating for itself and yet precisely thereby receives, paradoxically, 
its reward, offers a clear outline of Ulrich’s understanding of prayer as a unity of wealth and poverty. Compare with 
Ulrich, Gebet, 102. 
6

 
7 
of his beginning does not withdraw him from the particular (=from being broken), but rather binds 
him to the limit, whose poverty is the form of his present wealth.18  
To pray, then, is to choose to live out of this Überfluß of kenotic freedom, to receive oneself by 
offering oneself as a gift in all the concrete limitations of finite existence. Ulrich expresses this 
two-fold movement of turning from externals to live from the core of one’s existence, on the 
one hand, and of laying down one’s life for others, on the other hand, in the German phrase 
“Zu-grunde-gehen:” freedom is a matter of “going into the ground,” both in the sense of living 
from the roots of one’s being by receiving it as a gift from the Creator, and in the sense of 
offering oneself even unto death.19 
The decision of whether we will attempt to realize our freedom through a creativity born of 
“hunger,” or whether we will live from the Überfluß and undertake this prayerful “going into the 
ground” has extensive social implications. Toward the end of his book on prayer, Ulrich 
exclaims, “we stand before a global crisis;” he points to a decision we face, which parallels 
Nietzsche’s distinction: will we attempt to let science suffice for the carrying out of reason’s 
task, or will we acknowledge reason’s need to pray?20 Will we attempt to produce freedom by 
implementing a certain scientific formula we have developed, or will we live out of prayer? This 
decision ultimately concerns the meaning of being. It is “the decision, whether the wealth and 
poverty of being as love, whether speaking and silence, are mediated in a formal dialectic or are 
lived and thought out of the living essence of prayer.”21 If being arrives as a gift of love, a unity 
of wealth and poverty, then it also arrives as a task to be carried out. To the extent that thought 
attempts to let positive discursive reasoning suffice for its purposes, it threatens to obscure the 
meaning of being and frustrates its task. Wading into the current of modern metaphysics, Ulrich 
finds in the works of figures such as Marx and Nietzsche a partial disclosure of the meaning of 
being as a gift of love, as well as its obstruction. He engages their work by re-enacting the 
movement of being that appears within it in order to bring this movement to completion. In the 
process, the objection Marx raises against prayer comes to light as the partial disclosure of the 
objective meaning of being as a gift of love, and therefore, the identification and rejection of a 
 
18 Ulrich, Gebet, 59–60. 
19 Ulrich, 28–36. The German idiom, “zu Grunde gehen,” most commonly means “to perish.” By hyphenating the 
phrase and writing it as a substantive, “Zu-grunde-gehen,” Ulrich refers to a praying self-offering which at the same 
time involves a living from the core of one’s being. 
20 Ulrich, 101. 
21 Ulrich, 101. 

 
8 
temptation to pseudo-“prayer.”22 An absolute rejection of prayer, however, would in fact 
undermine the realization of being as a union of wealth and poverty at which Marx aims and 
perpetuate the very dialectical opposition of wealth against poverty that Marx is trying to 
overcome in his critique of religion. The absolute rejection of prayer, which Marx endorses, is 
thus unmasked as the continuation of that opposition of wealth against poverty which Marx set 
out to critique. The one who prays, meanwhile, discovers the very unity of wealth and poverty 
which Marx had sought, which alone is able to empower the poor to seek their rights and 
overcome the master-slave dialectic without falling themselves into a proletariat version of the 
capitalistic hunger they sought to reject.  
The very freedom that modern metaphysics sought, then, is realized as a unity of wealth and 
poverty in the activity of prayer. This chapter will argue for this conclusion in three sections. 
Ulrich develops his argument in Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt in conversation with Marx 
about the conditions for the possibility of freedom. Although Marx rejects prayer as a 
depersonalizing projection of one’s own unrealized potential, an activity that would only 
exacerbate the division of wealth against poverty proper to the master-slave dialectic, Ulrich 
shows that Marx does, however, recognize the value of some kind of poverty in a positive sense 
in order to overcome this dialectic. In the first section of this chapter, we will explore Ulrich’s 
engagement with Marx in order to appreciate the importance of a positive poverty. By attending 
to the necessity of positive poverty for attaining freedom, Ulrich raises up the exigency for 
prayer implicit within the tradition of modern metaphysics. He thus allows us to discover that 
we possess our wealth as a gift that we have received. This gift does not leave us in debt, but 
sets us free. For we receive this gift not from an external Creator who presides over against the 
creature; rather, it arrives within ourselves from the Giver who is Not-other. Prayer thus comes 
to light, not as depersonalizing, but as the realization of one’s freedom in the disposition of a 
kenotic receptivity. One comes to possess one’s wealth as received wealth; one becomes 
wealthy through a positive poverty.  
 
22 By pseudo-prayer is meant an activity that resembles prayer superficially but is not actual prayer. By reading 
Marx’s critique of religion in terms of the identification of a temptation to a certain type of pseudo-“prayer,” Ulrich 
can accompany Marx and appreciate the critique, while retrieving a context in which this critique does not spell the 
absolute rejection of prayer, but only of a certain kind. The retrieval of genuine prayer, in turn, allows for the 
preservation of Marx’s insight into the unity of wealth and poverty, which his absolute rejection of prayer would 
actually undermine. 

 
9 
If, then, the first section of this chapter recognizes the receptive aspect of the kenotic disposition 
of prayer, whereby one receives one’s wealth as a gift, coming before God in open-handed 
poverty, the second section of this chapter highlights another aspect of this kenotic disposition, 
namely, the gratuitous affirmation one ventures in prayer whereby one offers oneself as a wealth 
outpoured. Here, Ulrich brings Nietzsche into a delightful dialogue with St. Thérèse of Lisieux, 
to illustrate how the period of atheistic nihilism might be interpreted as a search for that freedom 
which can only be found in the gratuitous gift of love that offers itself “for nothing” (umsonst).  
These two sections thus elaborate what Ulrich describes as the “two-fold death of the one 
praying in receiving the gift,” the dying by which one receives the gift, and the dying by which 
one consents to let this gift give oneself away.23 This kenotic disposition of freedom in love we 
will view as a unity in the third and concluding section of the chapter. Ulrich sees these two 
aspects synthesized in the virgin-mother, the lived embodiment of prayer as the living unity of 
wealth and poverty. From this unity, we attain the perspective from which to better assess the 
resistance to prayer that had to be overcome in the dialogues with Marx and atheistic nihilism. 
Modern thought faces a temptation which will be seen in the third chapter of the thesis to 
underlie ideology, namely, the temptation to hypostasize and logicize being.24 Thus, while 
 
23 Ulrich, Gebet, 78. 
24 See Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 31–34. In the history of philosophy, Ulrich sees 
a development from an emphasis in Plato upon the opposition of form and matter to the recognition of 
superessential being that sublates the material and essential dimensions. If in Plato the idea (essential “form”) 
opposes nonessential matter, form’s transcendence already “provides the condition of possibility that begins to 
open up the intimacy of being to the finite; the finite is indeed ultimately affirmed as finite only by the positivity of 
the being that doesn’t cling to itself” (32). Eventually, even if not entirely achieved in Aristotle, the step is taken 
“into the superessentiality of being,” which sublates the material and essential dimensions of being, as “expressed 
in the statement that nothing more can be added to being that is extrinsic to it other than non being” (32). Only such 
a step can allow us to affirm the finite as finite. Ulrich refers to this step as the de-idealization or the 
dehypostasization of being. In the period following the event of Christian revelation, however, the attempt was 
made to make “supernatural revelation simply a theological a priori, fixing it, so to speak, as something that was 
unveiled, once and for all in its total significance,” to surpass definitively the perspective of the Greeks who were 
said to have been reasoning from the state of fallen nature (33). “This fossilized opening of being as being, which is 
made a thing of the past, however, led to a new substantialization of being in ideality…” (33).  Consequently, “The 
nonsubsistence of being got lost from the view of speculative reason. The ‘nothing’ (non subsistens) was then 
introduced in order to bring being out of this new, abstract identity” (34). Now, however, the non subsistens is 
“posited as a goad [Stachel] next to being and fused together with being in ideality. Being itself has not yet affirmed 
itself positively as itself. God comes to be affected by the nothingness of the possibilia in the divine intellect” (34–
35). Here, one supposes that reason must concretize being into a res so that it is not lost merely in being as being, 
which is nothing; reason must then, in turn, “crack open the res’s in-itselfness by means of the contradiction, in 
order thereby to bring the in-itselfness to life: by sublating the truth as substance in the subject!” (35). Here, we see 
the rise of that logicized being, “which Hegel inherited and, despite its convertibility with the ‘nothing’ that Hegel 
proclaimed in his Logic, was therefore unable to be experienced as fullness and thought in a speculatively concrete 
manner” (35). Being is said to be “logicized” because here logic substitutes for love as the meaning of being. 
Properly speaking, being and nonbeing mean the same, being’s nonsubsistence expressing the sense in which the 
fullness of being is given away. One is tempted, however, instead of experiencing this nonsubsistence as gift, to 

 
10 
Ulrich finds in his interlocutors elements that disclose the meaning of being as a unity of wealth 
and poverty, one also finds in their work elements that threaten to betray this meaning. The 
disposition to logicize being arises out of the fear that the source of being is untrustworthy and 
that one must therefore take matters into one’s own hands and control the mediation of being. 
The logicization of being is thus the fruit of the option to live from a corrupt eros, that is, from a 
“hunger,” rather than out of the Überfluß. The attempt to do this ultimately hardens into 
absolute systems or arbitrary methodological conditions, as chapter three will argue. Here, at the 
end of chapter one, we conclude with the loving, kenotic disposition of the virgin-mother, 
because it is only this disposition that preserves the concerns we will find in modern thinkers 
from falling back into the very opposition of wealth against poverty which they sought to 
overcome. If one neglects prayer, one might still recognize and reject certain effects of the 
logicization of being. Insofar, however, as one’s proposed solution excludes prayer, it will 
inevitably contribute to the very logicization of being one had sought to avoid.  
1. “Poverty in a Positive Sense:” Beginning to Pray in Gratitude 
Marx objects to prayer for the sake of liberating the human person from the exploitation of the 
master-slave dialectic. Marx fears that the practice of prayer only perpetuates the 
depersonalization of the one who prays. He understands prayer to involve the projection of all of 
one’s unrealized potential onto another, supposedly transcendent source. Supposing such a 
relationship of transcendence, whether in the practice of prayer or in theological theory, 
transfers all ontological wealth to the Creator as a cosmic capitalist, leaving the creature in the 
position of the impoverished dependent. Prayer arises as a symptom of the concrete, historical 
situation of exploitation and perpetuates the person’s alienation from herself.25 Thus, Marx 
writes that one will only attain freedom once one ceases to thank another for one’s own 
existence:  
A creature only passes itself off as self-sufficient once it stands on its own feet, and it only stands on 
its own feet once it owes its existence to itself. A man who lives at the mercy of another regards 
 
attempt to mediate being by one’s own rational power. Reason posits a contradiction between being and nothing in 
order by itself to dialectically mediate being. Thus, logic substitutes for love, and being is “logicized.” 
25 Summarizing Marx’s position, Ulrich writes: “Man’s exploitative dominion over man—that is, a set of quite 
precise, definable economic relations which can be overcome through revolutionary praxis—has led to the fantasy 
projection of the absolute other who receives our worship. For the ‘ex-propriation’ of freedom in the world causes 
the disintegration of all things: none of them is itself, each is something other than itself, because man is not 
‘himself.’ Everything has lost its concrete identity with itself. This inner cleavage, which man causes by his relation 
to his fellow man and to the world, is the soil from which ‘prayer’ rankly proliferates” (Ferdinand Ulrich, “A 
Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” trans. Adrian Walker, Communio: International 
Catholic Review 23, no. 1 [Spring 1996]: 41).  

 
11 
himself as a dependent creature. Yet I live completely at the mercy of another if I owe him not only 
the maintenance of my life, but if he furthermore created my life, if he is the source of my life—and 
my life necessarily has such a ground outside itself if it is not my creation.26 
Thanksgiving itself, according to Marx, must therefore be rejected as an alienating dependency.  
Marx seems to presuppose, however, that any relationship between the Creator and the creature 
is necessarily competitive. All otherness is considered hostile.27 Marx seems to neglect the way 
in which a relationship of transcendence could obtain through gift-giving, wherein the Giver 
would not merely exploit the recipient, as a pure wealth over against a pure poverty, but where 
both giver and recipient would be analogously characterized by a unity of wealth and poverty. 
From Marx’s perspective, a creature cannot be both autonomous and receive its autonomy as a 
gift. Yet such a perspective does not recognize how one might receive oneself from a Giver who 
is “more intimately present to me than my innermost being.”28 We will return to this point 
momentarily, when we consider Marx’s openness to a positive poverty.  
Marx’s opposition to prayer as a practice that would perpetuate a negative poverty 
constructively contributes, however, to the development of a philosophy of prayer. It identifies 
and rejects the broken structure of the gift that, as we will see, Ulrich understands prayer to 
overcome. Its depiction of prayer as an alienating dependency of a pure poverty upon God may 
be interpreted as outlining a structure of pseudo-“prayer.” Ulrich agrees with Marx that any 
activity ought to be rejected which would in fact treat the subject as a pure poverty over against 
a pure wealth. Marx’s critique of prayer thus affords a constructive philosophy of prayer a 
criterion for discerning between genuine prayer and its counterfeit. One who undertakes pseudo-
‘prayer’ would regard oneself as a pure poverty before God, the one who alone is wealthy. Such 
 
26 “Ein Wesen gibt sich erst als selbständiges, sobald es auf eigenen Füßen steht, und es steht erst auf eigenen 
Füßen, sobald es sein Dasein sich selbst verdankt. Ein Mensch, der von der Gnade eines anderen lebt, betrachtet 
sich als ein abhängiges Wesen. Ich lebe aber vollständig von der Gnade eines anderen, wenn ich ihm nicht nur die 
Unterhaltung meines Lebens verdanke, sondern wenn er noch außerdem mein Leben geschaffen hat; wenn er der 
Quell meines Lebens ist und mein Leben hat notwendig einen solchen Grund außer sich, wenn es nicht meine 
Schöpfung ist” (Karl Marx, „Nationalökonomie und Philosophie“ in Frühschriften, [Landshut, Stuttgart, 1953]; 
quoted in Ulrich, Gebet, 39–40). 
27 Ulrich quotes Marx, who argues that prayer must be rejected for allowing an “inhuman power” to dominate: “The 
phenomenon of alienation appears both in the fact that my means of survival belong to another—that what I desire 
is the property of another, and thus is inaccessible to me—as well as in the fact that each thing itself is other than 
itself, that my activity is other, and that (and this is true also of the capitalist) inhuman power reigns over all” (in 
Ulrich, “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” 41, footnote 4, citing Marx, 
“Nationalökonomie und Philosophie,” 226). 
28 Saint Augustine, The Confessions: Saint Augustine of Hippo, ed. David Vincent Meconi, trans. Maria Boulding 
(San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2012), 61. 

 
12 
prayer defers the gift, which does not arrive, but remains suspended above the would-be 
recipient, as though it were withheld by the giver.  
It is precisely such counterfeit prayer, however, that Ulrich finds characterizing a world in 
which the human person attempts to realize wealth by himself through labor: 
The more man uses techniques of production to enlarge his being—and enlargement here means 
objectively quantifiable self-reproduction and materialized growth—the more unshakable seems his 
conviction that he needs no authority (auctoritas, from augere: to make grow) to make decisions 
about his life. No, man himself is in charge of giving himself more being. The progressivist’s 
headlong rush into the future is the perverted “prayer” of that “freedom” which speaks with itself 
alone and in doing so intends the absolute reality which it had once wrongly placed in the beyond. 
But the man who ‘prays’ in this way punishes himself, since he is incapable of staying in his own 
company. Possessed by the mania of having to put the future pro-gressively behind him, he runs on 
out of the present, which, ironically, is just what he is looking for. The present permanently slips 
behind him, and in any case he cannot afford to spend time in it, or to enjoy the present fullness of 
his being (Da-sein); for to stand still would put a break on the action by which he has yet to make 
and establish the perfect ‘reign of freedom.’ Given this premise, would not a return to a state of 
autonomy and a serene acceptance of the given mean a renewed enslavement to the lifeless, dead 
being which liquefies and effervesces only in the fire of negativity, that is, in death experienced 
through work?29 
Marx thought the cause of the opposition of wealth against poverty, of which prayer was 
allegedly a symptom, lay in “a set of quite precise, definable economic relations which can be 
overcome through revolutionary praxis.”30 Yet, to the extent that one attempts to overcome the 
master-slave dialectic merely through human labor, one further undermines the structure of the 
gift. One now introduces into the life of the human person a division between an impoverished 
present and the pure wealth of a utopian future that never seems to arrive. Here, the very corrupt 
form of a pseudo-prayer that impoverishes man as a pure poverty over against an absolute 
wealth reappears. Now, however, it takes the form of the materialistic aspiration to achieve 
freedom through the efforts of labor alone. The striving to realize one’s freedom in an idealistic 
future in fact effects that self-alienation and depersonalization, which, as we saw above, Marx 
identified with prayer. Ulrich therefore characterizes this striving to realize oneself through 
labor alone as “the perverted ‘prayer’ of that ‘freedom’ which speaks with itself alone.”31 For 
just as “prayer” would collapse the structure of the gift by deferring the gift indefinitely to God, 
so this striving through labor collapses the structure of the gift by deferring the gift into a future 
that never arrives. In both cases, one lives not out of the superabundance of a gift received, but 
out of a hunger that strives to attain that which one is not. Both manifest the underlying dialectic 
 
29 Ferdinand Ulrich, “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” trans. Adrian Walker, 
Communio: International Catholic Review 23, no. 1 (Spring 1996): 41–42. 
30 Ulrich, 41. 
31 Ulrich, 41. 

 
13 
of the pure wealth against the pure poverty. Indeed, the attempt to overcome the dialectic by 
abolishing prayer is here revealed as but the attempt of the impoverished creature to overcome 
the oppressor by raising himself to the level of the pure wealth. The attempt “to produce fruit” 
[Frucht-machen] by one’s own means appears as but the inverse of “the desire to possess” 
[“Haben-wollen”]. These are but the two sides of the single dialectical logic of the pure wealth 
over against the pure poverty. Without prayer, one merely oscillates back and forth between two 
ways of destroying the structure of thanks: on the one hand, the pure poverty that indefinitely 
defers the gift and is exploited by the god who withholds his wealth, and on the other hand, the 
one who renounces prayer and takes credit for the gift himself, not depending on anyone else 
because he “is in charge of giving himself more being.”32 Such a one believes himself to have 
ascended to the place of the pure wealth that formerly presided over him, yet his belief is ill-
founded; it is not long before he finds himself once more in the position of pure poverty, 
alienated in his chase after an elusive future. 
The attempt to abolish prayer, then, cannot but lead to the self-punishment of the sickness unto 
death. Ulrich cites Kierkegaard’s The Sickness unto Death to highlight the futility of the 
creature’s misguided desire to attain freedom by itself. For Kierkegaard (or rather, Anti-
Climacus), the creature is a synthesis of finite and infinite being but cannot preside over either 
aspect so as to further realize his existence by his own means.33 Though already infinite, in some 
sense, the creature cannot “become” this infinity; nor can the creature, though already finite, 
“become” this finite life, because the Lord of his life lies “outside” finitude. The creature would 
like to resolve the tension by infinitizing the finite life and finitizing the infinite life, “but he 
cannot die in both directions. The agony of the contradiction tears him.” The only path to 
freedom from the despair brought on by the futile desire to control is that which would 
 
32 Ulrich, 41. 
33 Søren Kierkegaard, Howard V. Hong, and Edna H. Hong, The Sickness unto Death: A Christian Psychological 
Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening, Kierkegaard’s Writings 19 (Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 
1980), 13: “A human being is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the temporal and the eternal, of freedom 
and necessity, in short, a synthesis… A synthesis is a relation between two. Considered in this way, a human being 
is still not a self… The human self is such a derived, established relation, a relation that relates itself to itself and in 
relating itself to itself relates itself to another. This is why there can be two forms of despair in the strict sense. If a 
human self had itself established itself, then there could be only one form: not to will to be oneself, to will to do 
away with oneself, but there could not be the form: in despair to will to be oneself… Yes, this second form of 
despair (in despair to will to be oneself) is so far from designating merely a distinctive kind of despair that, on the 
contrary, all despair ultimately can be traced back to and be resolved in it.” 

 
14 
transcend the dialectic of finite life against infinite life through the creature’s fundamental act of 
prayer.34 
In short, the creature cannot realize his freedom by himself. Beneath each of the erroneous 
attempts to attain freedom that we have encountered—the corrupt form of the “prayer” of a pure 
poverty to a pure wealth, as much as the one who attempts to abolish that prayer and become 
fruitful by himself—there lies the foundation of an anthropology that would simply identify the 
self with the self alone, an anthropology which Ulrich abbreviates as “I=I.”35 It is the one who 
implicitly lives the anthropology of the I=I that oscillates back and forth between a desire to 
possess and the attempt to be fruitful by oneself in a dialectic of pure wealth against pure 
poverty. It is the I=I, in other words, that underlies both the disposition of the pure poverty and 
that of the pure wealth: that of the “prayer” by which one regards oneself as incapable of fruitful 
action (before God, who alone holds the power) and that which fears prayer will alienate me 
from myself and therefore makes man alone responsible for realizing his freedom. 
Ulrich sees the I=I, with all of the symptoms it causes—the fear of trusting the other, the attempt 
to control one’s destiny, the striving for an ideal refuge—personified in the person of Jonah. 
Jonah’s retreat “down into the inner part of the ship” (Jonah 1:5) symbolizes the withdrawal of 
one who does not entrust his life to another, who does not want to die in the release of a kenotic 
freedom and therefore attempts to take his “‘ground’ into his own hands.”36 As we saw above, 
with the one who attempts to abolish prayer so as to take the task of realizing freedom into his 
own hands, one is unable “to pull himself up by his own hair, ground-lessly,” as though he 
could save himself from “the ‘floods of finitude’ in which he now threatens to drown.”37  
 
34 Ulrich, Gebet, 56. 
35 Ulrich, 21: Ulrich recognizes that the temptation to a corrupt, pseudo-“prayer” could lead one to try to transcend 
one’s circumstances in order to escape them and attain a divine vantagepoint; such a one would undertake prayer as 
a kind of “hidden ‘will to power’” (20). In this situation, “man appears to stand as his own source beyond himself 
and anything whatsoever. But how precarious and brittle is this ‘heaven’ of his! That wherein he believes himself 
exalted becomes for him a devouring abyss, which, craving the light of the self-glorifying I=I, pulls the ‘Lord’ 
down into the gaping mouth of dark finitude. The one who has gotten lost in the Ground punishes himself. The 
repressed act of remaining-below, of patience (hypo-mone!) enforces itself in a perverted form” (21). In short, the 
one who “prays” thus, ends up collapsing the structure of the gift and destroying prayer by attempting to mediate 
the wealth of being by his own power, without receiving anything. Such a one ends up punishing himself just as 
much as the one who would explicitly abolish prayer. The attempt to establish a secure refuge in an ideal heaven 
undermines itself and “anarchistic chaos shreds the brittle idealistic order. Since man has taken the ‘ground’ into his 
own hands himself, he loses it as the sustaining base; he must constantly slide ‘himself’ (what else is left?) under 
his own feet for his foundation—and get nowhere for all the pure labor (and thought) of his critical self-
grounding!” (21). 
36 Ulrich, 21. 
37 Ulrich, 21. 

 
15 
Sinking, he can fashion no ship upon the waves of the sea of time. Only as one borne can he build. 
He does not want to die, to be swallowed by the fish; so he attempts, like Jonah, to hide himself away 
in the “belly of the ship,” in his I, which he has, so to speak, cleared out as a womb in which to hide. 
Sleeping, he appears to be completely by himself; he rests in his own reflection, analogous to the 
pure-wakefulness that struggles and is resolved upon its own will. He does not want to awaken in 
prayer and stand up to the question: from where do you come, who are you? He wants to hold fast to 
the ‘ground’ of himself and not concede any right to the lot cast upon him (which “falls” to him), not 
sacrifice himself to the storm that tears up his security. As the storm becomes stronger, however, the 
I cracks in all of its joints. One can no longer enclose himself narcissistically in the ghetto of the 
I=I.38 
Jonah tries to flee God’s call, turning inward, but the material conditions of reality, at the 
direction of providence, eventually prove too much for his own attempts to withdraw into 
himself. He can no longer hide from his true identity in God: “I am a Hebrew,” he confesses; 
“and I fear the LORD, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land” (Jonah 1:9). In 
time, life’s trials bring the one who attempts to avoid prayer to a breaking point. He must either 
perish or recognize that he is not an I=I, although he has tried to live as such; in truth, he must 
confess that his very self is constituted as an I-Thou! It is for this reason he can give thanks for 
having received himself as a gift to himself: “‘I’ can give thanks for having received ‘me.’” 
Jonah is a gift to himself from another; to be “a Hebrew”  means to be constituted, as it were, 
“from the other side,” which one cannot control: 
Prayer is constantly exposed to this temptation, threatened by the danger of the self-reflecting 
juxtaposition of I to I, without our being ready to accept the truth that the other side of this relationship 
(= “I” relate myself to “me”) is a “gift,” which means for me a given I (=Thou); that, in this 
fundamental relationship, something inserts itself that comes “from the other side” and cannot be fit 
into the forced efforts of “self-realization” or every attempted self-mediation. “Iwri anochi”: “I am 
one from the other side,” Jonah responds, as he awakes from sleep in the belly of the ship and is 
asked who he is. In this awakening begins the separation from oneself; that ground to which one 
relinquishes himself recedes—and that ground emerges, to which the person is relinquished. The one 
praying is thrown out of the I=I. He goes under, into the “ground”—but the fish awaits, the life in the 
water of time. This life receives him, and he is progressively ex-propriated: so long, until no hiding 
place in the I (and its world) remains anymore, but rather the bearing ground of the Dasein is fully 
transparent to God; before him there is no evasion: “I cannot escape you.” All mirrors are broken—
and now the one praying is flung onto firm land. The fish spews him out: and he obeys the mission.39 
Jonah receives the freedom to be himself the moment he ceases trying to control his destiny and 
lets himself be thrown overboard into the ocean. He receives his freedom the moment he begins 
to pray, that is, the moment he opens himself to the living Other from whom he arrives as a gift 
to himself. As this gift comes also as a task, the beginning of Jonah’s prayer coincides with his 
obedience to the mission on which God sends him.  
The one who begins to pray in this way, no longer tries to realize by himself the synthesis in 
which his being consists, but receives this synthesis from God, and is thereby delivered from 
 
38 Ulrich, 21. 
39 Ulrich, 21–22. 

 
16 
“the sickness unto death.” His action is no longer determined by the attempt to be fruitful by 
oneself and the desire to possess that drives the dialectic of pure wealth against pure poverty. 
Rather, in this prayer whereby one goes into one’s ground and receives oneself as a gift from the 
Thou, one overcomes the dialectic of master and slave for the first time. Here, in prayer to the 
God who is the Not-Other, one discovers the very activity of a positive poverty which Marx 
himself had sought.40 
 
As Ulrich observes, Marx himself grasps that the dialectic of master and slave is not 
overcome in the sublation of wealth alone. If it were, the very attempt to overcome the dialectic 
would only end up perpetuating it, as the proposed solution would merely extend the same 
desire to possess, the same spirit of fear and control which gave rise to the dialectic in the first 
place. We must ask: will the poor merely “displace the capitalistic desire to possess [Haben-
wollen] with a proletariat one?”41 Is there not rather a way for the poor to respond to injustice 
not out of “hunger” to supplant the oppressor, but out of the Überfluß that has already overcome 
the dialectic? 
How will the poor interpret their poverty no longer only from the perspective of wealth, that is, as its 
non-being and thereby only negatively,—but rather live it positively as a way of their being-wealthy 
that gives them a new, transformed right to protest, which, however, is internally calm and serene, 
because it sets itself upon the foundation of a positive being-free?42 
To overcome the dialectic of a pure wealth against pure poverty, of master against slave, and 
thereby realize one’s freedom, Marx recognizes that the poor one who presently experiences 
alienation must arrive at liberation without simply becoming the one who exploits. For this is no 
 
40 “[I]f God is ‘everything’, when we add the world to him we do not have any ‘more’: finite reality, even if it is free, 
cannot constitute any opposition to him, for the latter can only be conceived in connection with the existence of some 
limit. God is absolutely unity, and thus he cannot be designated as the ‘Other’ (or even as the ‘Wholly Other’) over 
against any finite thing; rather, we must agree with Nicholas Cusanus when he calls God the Non-aliud, the ‘Non-
Other’. We, for our part, with our finite freedom, must indeed designate ourselves as the ‘others’ when we think of 
our relation to God; but we cannot draw the conclusion that we are the ‘others’ as far as God himself is concerned. 
The question we ought rather to ask is this: Since we owe everything (including our freedom) to the ‘everything’ that 
God’s freedom represents, can we be the ‘others’ when seen from God’s vantage point? Does he not recognize and 
affirm us in him and not outside him?” (Hans Urs von Balthasar, Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory, Vol. 
2: Dramatis Personae: Man in God, trans. Graham Harrison [Ignatius Press, 1990], 193). “Since God gives 
everything in his word of being, the creature has nothing from herself; with respect to the divine Yes, through which 
she is called out of nothing, she brings along nothing from herself. Thus, nothing ‘other’ stands over against the 
Creator, nothing that would compel him from without to a self-communication. This means everything is owed to 
him. What he gives is created from nothing, not formed from a material lying next to him; much rather does it stream 
forth from his heart. In everything gifted, he always gives himself… Every gift that outgrows the heart of the giver is 
thence fully transparent to its origin, archetypally identical with it. Were it divided against it, an Other, the giver 
would not be able ultimately to give himself to it. Such a gift would only disclose the powerlessness of the giver; it 
would not be given; it would be no gift, but rather a foreign body” (Ulrich, Gebet, 58–59). 
41 Ulrich, Gebet, 44. 
42 Ferdinand Ulrich, Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt (Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 1973), 44. 

 
17 
way to enter into one’s freedom.43 One must rather overcome “the schizophrenia of the division 
of ‘pure-wealth against pure-poverty’—by sublating both sides.”44 One will not find freedom by 
merely negating “his transcendent Tyrant,” by deluding “himself into believing in an abstract 
self-affirmation through the death of God;” rather, beginning in the freedom that emerges within 
himself, one must let “the fullness of being spring up out of poverty.”45 
As Marx himself recognizes, freedom only comes from living out the unity of wealth and 
poverty. The work of truly liberating creativity arises not from a hunger to possess what one 
does not yet have, but by letting the wealth arise from within oneself, as always already given. 
As we have seen, Marx rejected “prayer” as the activity of a pure poverty alienated from the 
source of wealth. In such a context, “prayer” can also occur as the attempt to escape one’s 
finitude to attain the vantage point of the pure wealth. Such pseudo-“prayer” is understandably 
rejected as merely perpetuating the subject’s alienation. Marx’s absolute rejection of prayer and 
his attempt to realize this freedom through labor, however, ends up perpetuating the same 
dialectic, as man makes himself responsible for the augmentation of his own being. In light of 
being understood as a gift of love, a unity of wealth and poverty, Ulrich, recovers a relationship 
of transcendence according to which prayer appears as the activity whereby the dialectic is 
overcome. In positive poverty before the God who is Not-Other, who does not withhold absolute 
being for himself, but gives it away as a gift, one receives one’s wealth by letting it be given.  
We ask: how does a person come to know this freedom to which he must “surrender himself” 
[überlassen muß] living being-free in order to ascertain from the division of his creatureliness into 
being and beings the gift “and” the one receiving? Can he not only do this praying—and by praying 
in such a way that he breathes this freedom in and out because he is breathed by this freedom, which 
as the living form of “pure creatureliness” is his life and his hope? And if this freedom abandons 
[ver-läßt] itself praying, transcends itself, breaks open to the Giver who absolutely overtakes it—can 
one then still say that this freedom must, in order to be able to do so, understand itself in a negative 
sense as “non-being”, as “inessential” and purely “nothing”? Does it not turn itself toward its life, 
without seceding from the source, because it has found “its” freedom in the absolute love, which does 
not seek “its” own? Mine and yours are here absolutely interchangeable—and therein precisely are 
the uncreated and created life completely themselves. Only our form of thought, biased in the 
concrete, divides where everything is one in reciprocal “enabling” [Freigabe] with one another.46  
 
43 Ulrich, Gebet, 49: “how does man arrive at this being-free amid alienation? Not merely, Marx says, by sublating 
the private property of the earthly (and heavenly) capitalist, by drawing the gift of being down into the world that 
had previously been pushed into the beyond—this, as we have seen, would be a permanent declaration of one’s 
own unfree-being.” 
44 Ulrich, 49. 
45 Ulrich, 49. Ulrich continues: this unity of wealth and poverty “does not come about through the composition of 
the previously separated sides, ‘wealth and poverty’; finitude does not reveal the presence of freedom by 
consuming the supernatural wealth. The synthesis does not occur by merely filling up the empty stomach of the 
world, which hungers for fulfillment—but rather by beginning from the unity of wealth and poverty in the freed 
human-being in the middle of finitude!” (50). 
46 Ulrich, 51. 

 
18 
Where one recognizes being as a gift of love, prayer (and, for that matter, metaphysical 
abstraction) no longer depends upon an alienating transcendence. It no longer unfolds, therefore, 
as either a desperate grasp of one who is exploited at the master’s wealth, nor as the proud flight 
from the humble demands of daily life—both of which unfold the dialectic of wealth against 
poverty. To be sure, it still involves a dying, yet this is the death whereby one’s freedom is 
realized. In prayer, the creature lives the disposition of kenotic freedom, undertaking a “twofold 
death of the one praying in receiving the gift.” The “first fold” of this death, is that wherein the 
creature no longer insists on attempting to realize one’s autonomy by one’s own powers, as 
though one had to define one’s freedom against another: 
Receiving the gift, the one praying dies a twofold death: First: the death wherein sitting upon his 
wealth as also upon his poverty is made impossible for him. For he is poor in the measure of his 
having become wealthy and he is wealthy only in the measure of the poverty that has been broken 
open in him and given to him by God. In humility, he lets himself be endowed and, being affirmed 
beyond all measure, he breaks open beyond himself from the core of his gifted freedom and is thereby 
taken from himself.47 
One lives one’s freedom not by possessing one’s being as though one were alone responsible for 
one’s wealth, but rather, by receiving this wealth. This very receptivity of the gift, however, 
carries one out of oneself. The moment Jonah receives the gift that liberates him is the moment 
he lets himself be given away through service. Herein lies the reason why a prayer of 
thanksgiving is not, as Marx had supposed, antithetical to the realization of one’s autonomy: one 
experiences freedom in the measure one ceases trying to exercise control over the source of 
one’s being by oneself, and rather, by praying, begins to live one’s being as a gift of love. 
2. Venturing a Gratuitous Affirmation and Letting Oneself be Distributed  
If one is not an I=I, but rather, receives oneself as a gift to oneself “from the other side,” then 
there is ultimately a unity of freedom and that obedience whereby one actively receives who one 
is given to be.48 The second fold of the twofold death of the one praying emphasizes this 
obedience:  
 
47 Ulrich, 78. 
48 Marx, as we have seen, rejects prayer out of a concern that the subject not be depersonalized. In our 
contemporary context, a similar concern resists language of obedience, as we are sensitive to the ways in which 
authority can be abused. The valorization of obedience can serve as a pretext that enables exploitation. Being, 
however, does not cling to itself, and the gratuity with which it is given away reflects the generosity of God. The 
only deliverance from the cycle of exploitation lies, not in the absolute rejection of obedience, but in complete 
obedience to the one whose love alone liberates. Finite freedom can also raise concerns about the abuse of power so 
as to avoid having to obey. To imply that God himself were an untrustworthy authority, however—and to rule out 
absolutely the mediation of his authority—would be to enter into the contradiction of the fullness of being against 
its poverty and its dialectical, exploitative logic of master and slave, from which the only escape lies in the recovery 
of the unity of freedom and obedience. 

 
19 
Second: the death wherein melding with the gift out of a desire to possess it is made impossible for 
him. For his having-received lives from the obedience of the word of being to the Giver. It is only 
really in the “Spirit” (incarnatus de Spiritu Sancto), that the gift is transformed into the flesh of 
believing obedience. Thus, the one praying must die, through the creature’s fundamental act, that 
death that releases the gift from every false “reification” into the finite essential form that receives it; 
which does not weld together being with beings, but rather carries through the sacrifice of the 
offering, of the giving-oneself-away as the letting-oneself-be-distributed. The one praying brings no 
fruit other than in the eucharistia of love!49 
As the gift of being arrives gratuitously, so is it received by a response of similar gratuity. One 
gives thanks for the gift by making of oneself (through grace) a similarly gratuitous return 
offering.  
In prayer, as one becomes creative, not acting out of hunger, but out of gratitude, from the 
overflow (Überfluß) of the gift, one finds the courage and the strength to give of oneself even 
unto the experience of being superfluous (überflüssige). In other words, recognizing the gift of 
love one has received, one does not act according to a logic of utility, as action motivated by 
hunger would. Prayer obtains as an act of love that is undertaken “for nothing” (umsonst). It 
seems useless. It appears, in the face of the urgent demands of one’s life and the needs of the 
world to be the very least practical response: to do nothing! All the more does this seem to be so 
when one feels his prayers have not been heard. Yet this experience only reveals a characteristic 
which is essential to all prayer, whether it goes unanswered or not: prayer in itself is inherently 
“use-less” act. One is quite simply unable to “manage” it.50 It cannot be used as an instrument to 
obtain some desired outcome; prayer is necessarily undertaken “for nothing.” Yet, we undertake 
it, however, not out of hunger, but out of an over-flow (Überfluß). If it seems to be undertaken 
“for nothing” in the sense of futility (umsonst as frustra), this is only because it is actually 
undertaken in the other sense of “for nothing” (umsonst as gratis): the one who prays does so 
not to earn any pay, but out of a love that already exists; the one who prays does so gratuitously. 
It is precisely because, in prayer, one offers oneself as a gift [Gabe] of love that even spends 
itself futilely [vergeblich], that prayer is able to introduce a disposition of mercy, whose acts of 
forgiveness [Vergebung] end the cycle of exploitation.51 
 
49 Ulrich, Gebet, 78–79. 
50 Ulrich, 97: “‘I’ can never pray—this is true. ‘I’ can do it, if ‘I’ no longer live, but rather Christ in me… (cf. Gal. 
2:20).” 
51 Ulrich, 91: “Unanswered prayer is the lived provocation of the Umsonst of love, pure trusting in the death-
separation of Father and Son in the Spirit. Not a mere “being-put-to-the-test,” so that God sees what will thereby 
turn out, but rather to suffer the unity of the twofold Umsonst: love’s fullness of life, its superabundance [Überfluss] 
and its failure in the world, its futility [Vergeblichkeit]. A lived unity of life and death. Prayer abides, therefore, 
also in the Umsonst of the flesh, in the measureless disappointments, the destroyed expectations: everything 
continues to run as it did before with murder, lies, vanity—the emptiness remains impenetrable. Therein prays, 

 
20 
At this point Ulrich stands in dialogue with Nietzsche and the whole tradition of atheistic 
nihilism. Once the God of pure wealth has been unmasked as nothing and we are left with 
ourselves, the finite beings who were previously defined as the pure poverty, how are we to 
raise ourselves up to the sublated unity of wealth and poverty? “Who, bend double between the 
nothingness of the ‘dead God’ and the nothingness of the ‘now meaningless cosmos,’ will 
summon up the courage to risk the step of a gratuitous affirmation?”52 This risk is infinitely 
demanding, for one no longer has any other source of meaning from which to draw. Where, 
then, will man turn to draw the necessary strength? Will he turn entirely to himself and attempt 
to draw the necessary strength from his “will to power”? This cannot sustain the person, Ulrich 
suggests; the will to power “burns up in its own flame because it has nothing left to feed on but 
itself.” There is, however, another alternative. Will man, then, turn to draw  
from the risk born in confidence, the ‘yes’ spoken in prayer, to which love delivered itself over in 
becoming flesh? Shall man draw from the priority of love’s absolute ‘yes,’ which it speaks in the 
deep of night? From the priority of a source hidden in the dark soil of humility, which possesses an 
absolute initiative because the waters of life feed it, springing up in it (not next to it!) and as it to a 
life without limits?53 
Just as Ulrich had retrieved from Marx the disclosure of being as a unity of wealth and poverty, 
in order to save it from falling back into the dialectic of master and slave, which Marx could not 
escape because of his absolute rejection of prayer, so here Ulrich finds in atheistic nihilism a 
proposition that can be saved, and which must be, if it is not going to be undermined by the 
destruction of the gift that atheism ultimately entails. From the perspective of the person’s need 
to draw strength to venture “the step of a gratuitous affirmation” and the alternative one faces 
between “the will to power” and prayer, now 
the resolute turn to “pure finitude” in the period of atheistic nihilism becomes curiously transparent: 
might it not harbor love’s faint call to follow its path of self-emptying? Might it not contain the 
delicate enticement to learn the art of finitude, that humiliation to the “littleness” in which matters of 
absolute significance are decided? Is not the experience of the superfluity and “uselessness” of the 
foundation also a clue to hear and to do the true “super-fluity” of the origin?54 
Ulrich knows of one who, embracing this “littleness,” has borne the night of the “pure finitude” 
that atheistic nihilism raises up, and has done so while imbuing it with love. Ulrich turns to the 
writings of St. Thérèse of Lisieux to offer an example of one who illustrates how “the courage to 
 
however, the redeemed freedom in its Lord’s servant-form.” For the reference to Vergebung and its connection to 
Vergeblichkeit, see also Ulrich, 95. 
52 Ulrich, “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” 43. 
53 Ulrich, 43. 
54 Ulrich, 43–44. 

 
21 
risk the step of a gratuitous affirmation” may indeed be found in the prayer of love given “for 
nothing.” 
Thérèse exclaims, “What do I care about life? What do I care about death? My happiness is 
loving you.”55 She thus proves that prayer does not aim at obtaining an advantage for oneself; 
the one who prays, simply does so out of one’s love: “Beyond the choice of life and (or) death, 
the one praying offers himself to the love that offers itself to him.”56 Thus, Thérèse 
demonstrates what we observed about the uselessness of prayer above: one’s hope for an answer 
to one’s prayer “does not lie on the other side of futility, but rather lives in futility.”57 Whether 
or not one’s prayer will be answered, one prays in solidarity with all those who experience their 
prayers as unanswered.58 Thérèse writes that she often asks “the saints without being heard. But 
the more they appear to be deaf to my call, the more do I love them.”59 It is precisely when faced 
with a lack of a response that Thérèse’s love increases, for it is in the situation of futility that she 
can only venture her prayer as an act of love all the more gratuitously. Again, Therese writes, 
“Yesterday evening I asked the Mother of God that I might no longer have to cough so that 
Sister Genevieve can sleep. But I added: if you do not answer me, I will love you still more.”60 
In not being answered, Ulrich comments, the one praying is thrown back on herself in such a 
way that, because she is praying, she does not withdraw into herself, but is delivered over to 
“the silence of God”—she is not left alone, but finds there “the source of beginning in the ever-
greater love that does not cease: fruitfulness, God’s life itself as the life of the one praying.”61 
Here, the one praying abides in “the night of faith” and because one “lives from the wish” to 
abide in this night, one does not fall into the “dialectic of a failing reaching out into heaven” that 
could issue as one response to unanswered prayer, but rather one lives this “night” as a 
 
55 Ulrich, 92, n21. All quotations of Therese of Lisieux are my own translations of Ulrich’s quotations, which he 
draws from the German text: Therese von Lisieux, Novissima Verba (Lisieux, 1926), 109. 
56 Ulrich, 92. 
57 Ulrich, 92. 
58 Ulrich, Gebet, 90: “The one who really prays experiences himself in solidarity with every ‘prayer that goes 
unanswered;’ the need of the other is his own.” Ulrich suggests that we should be careful not to dismiss unanswered 
prayer as though it were merely apparently unanswered: “There are un-answered cries, requests, and supplications 
because God knows that the Umsonst of love is the one thing necessary. There is no trace of divine sadism in this; 
as one on the other hand should not mitigate the unanswered cry in a bourgeois manner, by seeing it merely 
superficially poured out into nothing, while ‘profoundly’ always already caught by God’s ear: it only ‘appears’ as 
though all of this were in vain! The Bible says to us urgently enough that God does not love such consolations, but 
the unconditionality of presuppositionless love, which he himself is. We are afraid of such nakedness, because it 
makes us poor unto the ground and we always try to measure the explanation by the form of the supplication.” 
59 Ulrich, 92, n21; cf. Novissima Verba, 136.  
60 Ulrich, 92, n21; cf. Novissima Verba, 140. 
61 Ulrich, 92, n21. 

 
22 
participation in “the death-separation of the Father (Giver) and the Son (Gift), in the discharge 
of the kenotic love.”62 It is by bearing this night that Therese becomes a source in the world of 
love umsonst, and precisely thereby  
suffers out Nietzsche’s ‘God is dead,’ the ‘holy saying-yes,’ the love that does not let itself grow 
embittered, the presuppositionless beginning of the absolute in the conditional, which no ‘will to 
power’ nor ‘positive humanism’ could replace because both founder on the ‘I-will,’ both devour 
themselves in the flames of meaning-giving.63 
In Thérèse, Ulrich finds a witness to the truth that prayer has its “deepest ground” in “the 
Umsonst of love,” that is, in the love that is given so gratuitously (“for nothing,” in the sense of 
gratis) that it pours itself out even if its love is in vain (“for nothing,” in the sense of frustra). 
She demonstrates the creativity that Nietzsche indicated lay hidden in a life lived from the 
Überfluß, rather than from hunger, because she does not decline to let herself become 
superfluous (überflüssig). Precisely as such a one willing to love in futility (Vergeblichkeit), 
does she become a conduit of forgiveness (Vergebung) for the world, of that mercy which has 
the power to undo the cycle of exploitation driven by the dialectic of wealth against poverty.64  
The healing of this cycle of exploitation lies in the resolution to accept, with Thérèse, the 
evangelical paradox that one finds oneself by offering oneself as a gratuitous gift. If a corrupt 
eros underlies the desire to possess and the temptation to be fruitful by oneself that fears 
obedience, the prayer of love umsonst rehabilitates this eros. As we observed at the outset of this 
chapter, Nietzsche submits that the “deepest distinction” is “whether hunger or Überfluß 
becomes creative.”65 Ulrich interprets this distinction to raise the issue of the redemption of 
eros, so that one finds the fulfillment of one’s desire in a freedom that rejoices to give itself 
away superabundantly. “Every creature hungers for love,” Ulrich recognizes, “but they will 
never satisfy this hunger if they operate, are ‘caused,’ or are creative merely because they desire 
to satisfy it. Freedom is only creative out of the poor superabundance [Überfluß] that does not 
 
62 Ulrich, 92, n21. 
63 Ulrich, 92, n21. Ulrich sees a special relationship between Thérèse and Nietzsche. Here, he states that Thérèse 
“suffers out Nietzsche’s ‘God is dead.’” He turns to her for examples of both the creativity that arises out of Überfluß, 
to which Nietzsche points (102), and for the love umsonst, an adjective which Ulrich associates with Nietzsche (94). 
Nietzsche often appears in Gebet alongside Thérèse (72), or her brother Carmelite, John of the Cross (95, 102). 
64 Ulrich, Gebet, 95: “Through our failure he calls us into the experience of his incarnate [fleischgewordenen] love. 
He makes us, in the flesh of futility [Vergeblichkeit], free for his forgiveness [Vergebung] and the never failing source 
of the living water that, by the power of his bodily existence [Daseins] as the Risen One, springs up in us and streams 
forth into unending life—although it is night (John of the Cross). He transforms our powerlessness by the weakness 
of his suffering in us because daily he dies and rises and we in him. Because he strengthens us, we are able to do 
everything in weakness. The speechless prayer of futility throws everything upon him in order to be infinitely fulfilled 
above and beyond every disappointed expectation through his ever-greater love.” 
65 Ulrich, “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature,” 102. 

 
23 
cling to itself.”66 The one who is “caused” merely by one’s own desire for satisfaction is the one 
who acts out of hunger, desiring to possess some wealth that is withheld externally to oneself. 
Such a one adopts the disposition of a pure poverty dependent upon and alienated by a pure 
wealth. By unmasking the pure wealth as nothing, the one who acts out of hunger attempts to 
realize one’s own being all by oneself. The attempt to realize one’s being through one’s own 
activity, however, leads to a kind of self-punishment, as we have seen, and thereby fosters the 
cycle of exploitation. To act out of hunger, ultimately denigrates eros. “Those who pray,” on the 
other hand,  
are superfluous [überflüssige] creatures because they do not plunge from desiring-to-possess [Haben-
wollen] into activity, but rather their activity follows being. Therefore, they are those who “let it be,” 
the site where created being as love flows into the world, the pores from which the superabundance 
[Überfluß] springs. In them, eros (as the child of superabundance [Überfluß]—‘poros’ and lack—
‘penia’) and agape are reconciled, because eros is fetched home into the mystery of the unity of 
wealth and poverty of love. The one praying does not exploit anyone. He is the artist who in 
transforming the world, which therein dies, begets life; he releases by reconfiguring and preserves 
the ecology not only of nature but of creation as such.67  
In prayer, eros reconciles with agape and comes home to itself in the unity of wealth and 
poverty. In the experience of such love, finite freedom is healed from its fear of obedience and 
discovers its freedom lies in offering itself as a gratuitous gift of love umsonst, in return for 
everything one has received, that is, for one’s very being.68 
One is freed to offer oneself in a return gift of obedience, therefore, because one has always 
already received a prior gift of love. The gratuity with which the creature makes her return gift 
in prayer, is never on the same level as the gratuity of the gift but arises as a response. Still, we 
must once more underscore the importance of the gratuitous love that characterizes the kenotic 
disposition of prayer. For, the temptation arises so to rely on the priority of God’s gift, on the 
“always already,” that we would take the gift for granted and neglect the Giver’s abiding 
freedom. We would begin to take the gift for granted, and in our complacency, get so lost in 
what is present, “at hand,” that we would forget the future and the way in which it can demand a 
reinterpretation of the past. In other words, if we do not persevere in an obedient disposition, we 
will fall back into the temptation to take credit for the gift ourselves, and thereby undermine its 
 
66 Ulrich, Gebet, 102. 
67 Ulrich, 102. 
68 Ulrich, 102. Thus, in the context of the immediately preceding quotation, Ulrich also quotes Thomas Aquinas: 
“Aquinas says that being-caused does not belong to the essential form of being (as being); otherwise, all being (that 
is, nothing!) would be caused (cf. ST I.5.2.2; SCG II.52). Being is known prior to all ‘causing,’ to every ‘cause’ 
(‘esse prae-intelligitur causae’); it shines forth as beauty, which does not exhaust itself in making and being made.” 
This quotation thus links Ulrich’s philosophy of prayer and his interpretation of Aquinas’ metaphysics. 

 
24 
very gift character. The moment we forget obedience out of an alleged prior gratitude, we 
undermine the very disposition by which we receive the gift in living relationship with the 
Giver. To illustrate this temptation, Ulrich invokes once more the figure of Jonah: 
Our position is like Jonah’s: obedient to the word of mission, he goes to Nineveh, preaches doom, 
“abandons” himself totally to the justice communicated to him by God—and then it unfolds 
otherwise. The mercy transforms justice, fulfills it: Nineveh perishes, but in the conversion to new 
life. And then we say: “I somehow already knew it; you cannot rely on anything; everything remains 
just as it was.” If we have received correctly, however, then the given gift that we receive and whose 
claim we trust absolutely (since it itself obeys the giver) will also open us to his will, which we cannot 
control. That which is new, which comes out of the past, will be familiar to us without our being able 
to anticipate it or disambiguate it from the perspective of the past. Having received, the one who 
prays always remembers forward.69 
Remembering “forward,” the one who prays is not merely dependent upon God to receive 
passively. Rather, God enables the one who prays to exercise his freedom in a creative role. It is 
precisely in the creature’s obedient return offering, that God enables the creature to be truly and 
freely creative: 
He is not one informed passively by God, but rather, in the Spirit of the Word made flesh, he too is 
the poet of the divine Word, of “good hope” lying in the breathing of love out-poured. Whoever kills 
the artistic Spirit of love that plays in prayer destroys the creative productivity of created freedom. 
The faith of the one praying neither agonizes over finishing, nor flees into immutable certainty, in 
whose cold structures he settles down in order no longer to have to “fly” (Thérèse of Lisieux!) and 
“dance” (Nietzsche!).70 
As we have seen, bearing the Umsonst of love involves a radical surrender: Thérèse cares not 
whether she lives or dies, but only that she loves the Lord. Such a radically gratuitous offering 
of oneself, however, even when it seems to be futile, does not stifle one’s freedom. Rather, in 
such love, one opens oneself to the highest degree of creativity. The one who prays does not 
“agonize” over the work, as though one had to carry out the task by oneself and it did not arrive 
as a gift. On the other hand, the one who prays also does not take the gift for granted, as though 
he could bring it all under his own system. Rather, the one who prays lives from the Spirit of 
creativity and is therefore able to remember “forward,” so as to recognize the fulfillment of past 
promises—“Nin’eveh shall be overthrown!” (Jonah 3:4)—in their creative unfolding from 
above: “Nineveh perishes, but in the conversion to new life.” 
In the figure of Jonah, we see that, although the “Yes” of the one praying might appear to lead 
one into disgrace, obedience is always fruitful. The “second fold” of the twofold death that the 
one praying dies, which we have been considering, involves a gratuitous self-offering “for 
nothing.” Yet, God guarantees the fruitfulness of this offering. In the “super-fluous” act of 
 
69 Ulrich, 72. 
70 Ulrich, 72. 

 
25 
prayer, one has renounced all possibility of exploiting others, and allowed oneself to be 
distributed for others out of love umsonst:  
Jonah heads toward Nineveh with the justice [Recht] of the Divine Word: “Forty days more, then 
you are finished.” Justice stands against injustice, which must die. The situation is “unequivocal.” 
Yes, but, on the side of injustice stands God’s mercy, which kills the egoism of the heart and gives 
Nineveh conversion—and it lasts! God’s representative is the Disgraced One. It was all “for 
nothing”—but: “Shall I not have mercy on Nineveh?” God asks Jonah, and the latter prays his Yes. 
East of Nineveh, completely following the source, almost “at home.” Was it all done for this? What 
now, since all has been suffered and the task has been fulfilled? Was not everything in vain? Does 
not everything spin along thus as before? Jonah prays his Yes and reconciles within himself the river 
of time that flows forth horizontally with the vertical breakthrough of love’s necessity—and “there 
is more than Jonah here”!71 
The one who prays allows himself to become the finite site of the breakthrough of the infinite 
freedom of love. At times it can appear to the finite creature that less has come than he prayed 
for; one can wonder whether God is withholding the gift from him. In fact, this less “becomes 
more.”72 The whole of the gift does not arrive all at once, as though we could then have finished 
with it and bring it behind us. Rather, prayer fosters the disposition of patience, which is 
properly oriented toward the whole and mysteriously “gives ‘time’ to the world that has no 
time.”73 In prayer, one hands over this apparent “less” “to God, who lets it grow and precisely 
thereby lets men progress in time. Otherwise envy takes hold of what one does not yet have and 
life fades away in substance-less hecticness.”74  
The envy that mistrusts God and the fear of dying in a gratuitous offering are definitively 
overcome by the prayer of love umsonst. It is in the gratuitous offering of oneself, the one 
praying lets God defeat the spirit of desiring to possess and the attempt to be fruitful by oneself 
that drive the dialectic of wealth against poverty. In this prayer, one no longer attempts to 
mediate these poles by oneself, but receives the gift of God’s own fruitful activity in the unity of 
wealth and poverty:  
 
71 Ulrich, 104. 
72 Ulrich, 80–81: “Everything is given; often, however, it is so given that ‘less’ comes than we asked for so that we 
do not fix our gaze on the interior space of having received, are freed from concern for our requests, and hope for 
His blessing, which lets the little we have received bring forth infinite fruit: taking the bread, thanking, saying the 
blessing… Hope is fulfilled unexpectedly, so to speak, in the second looking up and away from oneself, wherein 
the first looking away establishes itself in receiving, where we do not ossify in pride at our own production, on the 
line that begins in our own ego, stubbornly plunging forward, but rather pausing, stopping, waiting, learning the 
patience that gains the victory. Only thus are we fruitful in prayer, without reckoning up prayer and gift.” Ulrich 
seems to have in mind here the Offertory of the Mass, where the priest “looks up” twice: first, thanking for the 
bread and water one has received, and a second time, to offer the elements to be consecrated. Were everything to 
arrive in a single moment, we could absorb the gift of grace into nature and take credit for the gift ourselves, 
thereby undermining the structure of the gift and with it, the possibility of hope.  
73 Ulrich, 81. 
74 Ulrich, Gebet, 81. 

 
26 
There is also un-answered prayer as a pure testimony to the absolute being-answered of all cries and 
of every supplication in the death-cry of the Son, that is, as testimony to the truth that man cannot 
ransom himself from that dominion to which he was delivered in vain [umsonst], because everything 
lives from the gift of love. Only in this prayer does the creature admit God is right [Recht gibt], 
because it is justified [gerecht-fertigt, “made right”] by his mercy and thereby is in the right [im Recht 
ist]. Only the prayer in the Umsonst frees the creature from the insanity of creating justification [das 
Rechtsein] by one’s own means, with the apparatus (with the pieces) of her broken, decaying 
freedom, through the arbitrary divorce and composition of the elements of wealth “and” poverty, life 
“and” death, being “and” nothing, good “and” evil. Prayer is the unity!75 
The attempt to create the synthesis of wealth and poverty, being and nothing, by oneself, which 
gives rise to the dialectic of wealth against poverty, is undone by prayer which is that unity 
already achieved. 
3. The Virgin-Mother: Prayer as the Unity of Wealth and Poverty 
The one praying dies, therefore, a twofold death in receiving the gift: first, he receives the unity 
of wealth and poverty as a gift, letting himself be affirmed by God as the Other who is also Not-
Other; second, he does not take credit for this gift or come to rest in it, but lets himself be given 
away for others. The one praying preserves in this twofold death the unity of two dimensions of 
the structure of the gift. On the one hand, the Giver does not cling to the gift, but really gives the 
gift away across a “death-separation,”76 endowing the creature with her own autonomy, 
liberating her in herself; this gift has, in a sense, always already arrived.77 On the other hand, the 
gift abides in “archetypal unity” with the origin.78 Prayer obtains as the lived synthesis of these 
two dimensions.79  
 
75 Ulrich, 91. 
76 On the Thomistic and Freudian pedigrees of these terms, archetypal identity (and sometimes, archetypal unity) and 
death-separation, see D.C. Schindler, “Homo viator, puer in patria: On Ferdinand Ulrich’s Philosophical 
Anthropology of Childhood,” in Communio: International Catholic Review 45, no.3 (Fall-Winter 2018): 530–52, 
539ff. 
77 Ulrich, 72: “There is also a praying death-separation of the gift from the giver in which one testifies by his trust 
to the complete arrival of the gift, that is, to its being-received: my praying has not caused the delivery, but rather 
God has always already richly endowed me, prior to my praying. He has always ‘beat me to it.’ I may abandon 
myself absolutely to the presence of his initiative in me.” Here, Ulrich observes that the temptation arises, however, 
to fix this gift, and considers, as we saw above, how Jonah had to learn to remember “forward.” In itself, however, 
the death-separation does not foster an egoism. Rather, the better one appreciates it, the more it pulls one out of 
one’s ego: “The death-separation of the gift from the giver throws him out of his ego. It does so precisely where he 
grounds himself in having-received, where he is no lightheaded, happy-go-lucky sort of fellow [Luftikus], but rather 
is assigned himself in a state (!) and accepts his absolutely affirmed self. Thus and not otherwise is he playing 
freedom, the artist of love (Nietzsche learned and grasped more of this than some theologians these days)” (72). 
78 Ulrich, 59: “Prayer receives its origin from the depths of the archetypal unity [urbildlichen Einheit] of giver and 
gift. It rises up out of a crystal-clear transparency of the Word to the speaking Origin. There, it is home.” 
79 Ulrich, 68–69: “The power of the giver becomes apparent in his unity with the gift in which he declares himself, 
has declared himself as love that is eternally in itself given away. But in this archetypal identity, in which the gift is 
entirely due to the origin, it is released in itself (the Father communicates to the Son the whole divine nature), 
separated from the giver: as the other ‘of one essence with him’ in the we-form of the Spirit, the personal intimacy 

 
27 
The one praying can err in ways that distort each of these aspects. One can absolutize the 
archetypal identity in pure poverty.80 Alternatively, one can “absorb… the archetypal identity of 
gift and giver… in the separation of both,” praying as though one became oneself a pure 
wealth.81 The temptation to absolutize the archetypal unity of the gift with the giver entails 
regarding oneself as a pure poverty from whom the gift is withheld. Such a one would 
exaggerate the univocity of being and lose oneself in the false transcendence that Marx 
critiqued. The temptation to absolutize the separation of giver from gift entails regarding oneself 
as a pure wealth. Here, one exaggerates the equivocity of being and enters a world of pure 
immanence.  
In contrast to these distortions of the structure of the gift, Ulrich brings to light the synthesis of 
the archetypal unity and death separation as the unity of wealth and poverty. Drawing from the 
sermons of Meister Eckhart,82 Ulrich describes the temptation to a pure poverty as that of the 
“mere virgin” and the temptation to a pure wealth as that of the “mere mother.” The one who 
 
of the Removed One, unto the death-separation of the cross and of the descent into hell. ¶ Prayer lives this mystery, 
in which it is revealed that the gift of created being is indeed archetypally identical with the giver, but is ‘not the 
origin itself:’ ‘being is not God’ (Thomas Aquinas). Creaturely metaphysics stumbles there a bit, certainly in view 
of created being, of the mystery of that obedience, in which the word of the Father is eternally poured out into the 
speaking origin, from which it receives itself absolutely, that is, in absolute being-itself: the ‘Thou’ of the Father, 
who is ‘other’ to him.” 
80 Ulrich, 63: Here, out of a false modesty, one does not pray in the name of Christ. Rather, one “speaks in his own 
name, even if he stammers, lying on the ground, ‘God alone suffices.’ It is a prayer that has become absorbed in the 
archetypal identity of giver and gift and holds the two clamped together. It is an infantile prayer, which does not 
dare the separation of the gift from the giver, does not want to be set upon its own feet—and therefore needs no 
other, who, taking its side, stands up for it, one together with whom the return is carried out. One wanders alone—
and ultimately God is of no concern.” 
81 Ulrich, 70–71: “Here there appears a new temptation: if the giver gives himself in the gift completely, if no 
remainder of a love not surrendered remains behind, is he then not lost in the being received (together with the gift) 
into the world? ‘Whoever sees me (the ‘son of man’), he sees the Father.’ Does this not mean: one no longer needs 
at all to look up? God has fallen completely into the mother-womb of finitude and is henceforth born only still as 
the ‘human man’ freed for himself. ¶ The one praying is tempted to absorb the wealth of the gifted being as love, 
the archetypal identity of gift and giver, the fullness of the granted life in the separation of both. She sucks God 
down into the finitude and, as ‘mother of her own child,’ makes him available herself. She aligns the received 
Being with the multiplicity of beings; she impatiently absorbs it without letting herself be reconfigured, 
transformed into ever-greater love. She desires to assimilate the bread of life to her corpse, but not to be integrated 
into the body of love. Thus, is she compelled to strike the fire of love out of the flint of her petrified heart. The 
sparks of prayer spray about, but no flame catches. For the one who prays thus receives only in her own name, 
desiring to possess.” 
82 Eckhart and Josef Quint, Deutsche Predigten Und Traktate (München: C. Hanser, 1978), 159; Eckhart et al., 
Meister Eckhart: The Essential Sermons, Commentaries, Treatises, and Defense, Classics of Western Spirituality 
28 (New York ; Toronto: Paulist Press, 1981), 177. In his second sermon, Eckhart offers an account of the 
disposition of “the person by whom Jesus was received,” from which Ulrich draws in Gebet to interpret the 
disposition by which the gift of being is received. As for Eckhart, Jesus is received by the one who is neither 
merely virgin nor merely mother, but the unity of both, so for Ulrich the one who receives the gift of being as love 
is the one who prays as the Virgin Mother. 

 
28 
prays and thereby withstands both temptations is the Virgin-Mother, the personification of the 
unity of wealth and poverty: 
Both figures, the self-humiliating “mere virgin” (the finite posited as the sterile non-being) and the 
“mere mother” (who supplies the seed-word by herself: a self-created unity of being and becoming: 
a divine-humanity, produced out of finitude, in which the man “becomes the highest entity for 
man”)—both are forms of the broken creatureliness of being as love. They are two sides of the one 
and the same refusal: no to being as a gift of love in the unity of wealth and poverty, life and death; 
the killing of trinitarian love; a revolt against its folly in the foolishness of the cross, in which the one 
praying has his beginning, where, in the fundamental act, he is born the creature (Mary) “again” and 
“back.” 
In both structures of broken prayer, however, thanks is destroyed: how is he supposed to thank, to 
whom the gift remains external, holding out in the archetypal identity with the giver? And how is he 
supposed to thank, who assimilates the gift in such a way that he represses its being-given, 
extinguishes it, in order to view what he has received only as the function of himself, that is, of his 
now apparently “completed” self-identity, which does not need to open up beyond its own 
presence?83 
In prayer, then, we find the dynamic basis of the life of finite freedom. One experiences two 
ways in which this structure of freedom breaks down. On the one hand, out of a false humility 
and pretense to honor God, the “mere virgin” defers the arrival of the gift; she does not allow 
the word to be received in her life in a way that would become effective. Such seems to be the 
temptation to exaggerate the univocity of being84 and to reduce the Word of God to a tame, 
ineffectual logic.85 On the other hand, the “mere mother” receives the gift in such a way that she 
would forget the giver and take credit for the gift herself. Such is the temptation to exaggerate 
the equivocity of being, running hectically about and presuming to bring God down into 
complete immanence.86 This temptation requires careful discernment, because it takes the form 
of a false intimacy with God; one fancies that he and God are “partners.”87 Each of these 
 
83 Ulrich, Gebet, 76. 
84 Ulrich, 64: “Such prayer lives from the corruption of the truth that, where the Only One reveals himself, there is 
no intermediary (mediator unius non est); that the Word can be nothing ‘other’ than the One Speaking himself, who 
gives it; that gift and giver are “essentially one” and only the pure poverty of the creature corresponds to this truth 
revealed to it. Precisely on this point, the ‘nothingness’ of the praying creature becomes her pitfall.” 
85 Ulrich, 63: “The whole life is apparently given over to the eternal law, which it governs from transcendence—
and yet this pseudo-faith cannot await anything patiently. It does not risk its self-security and desires not to let God 
dispose of itself. The Word of the Father becomes a thoroughly developed rule, a transparent concept, that 
apparently includes everything ‘Christ-shaped,’ but reveals no further surprises. It lacks the breath of the love that 
plays, from which the one who prays receives his youthful freshness and elasticity.” 
86 Ulrich, 71: “Though she may also still ‘pray’ as much, she builds only ephemeral, lusterless bridges into a 
beyond that has ultimately become empty, trivial. Prayer becomes disjointed, fleeting; one has no time; one wants 
to anticipate everything, to compel God downward, to bring him behind one, to be ‘finished’ with him. One cannot 
wait, cannot hope for the unity in dialogue; the ‘game of love’ (in the Spirit) falls out, everything becomes hectic 
and tormented.” 
87 Ulrich, 71: “Ultimately one is on good terms with God as a ‘partner’ in immanence. He runs everywhere with 
him, has ultimately become ‘God with us,’ but already: muzzled! Precisely here the one who prays will have to 
discern the spirits forcefully. And he does it only by being ‘there.’” 

 
29 
temptations, however, are “two sides of the one and the same refusal: no to being as a gift of 
love.”88  
The one who prays lives the unity of wealth and poverty whereby the dialectic of master and 
slave is finally overcome. In prayer, one is freed from the exploitation of this dialectic by 
receiving being as a gift of love. The virgin-mother lives the prayer of the two-fold death we 
have presented in this chapter, receiving the gift of freedom in a gratuitous return offering of 
oneself for others. The virgin-mother thus constitutes “the objective site of prayer.”89 The one 
who prays in her, realizing the unity of wealth and poverty, becomes the site of “the epiphany of 
the conversation of the Father and the Son in the middle of the world.”90 It is in her that all the 
contributions of the modern philosophers we have surveyed in this chapter are preserved, 
corrected, and fulfilled, for in her, the meaning of being is fully disclosed even as in her the 
movement of being’s finitization into subsistence comes to fulfillment: 
She is the truly ‘positive humanism’ (Marx) and the meaning-giving, ‘holy yes-saying’ (Nietzsche), 
the ‘pure finitude’, around which philosophy circles, and for whom she calls. ‘The’ person of whom 
thinking speaks when it experiences itself as ‘thanking’ (Heidegger). Yet—and this too we may not 
forget—she is in no way a collective as the sum of individuals or the world-body as a whole. She is 
no hypostasis of ‘authenticity’, offset against the flesh of history! Not an imaginary subject in which 
we, so to speak, in a super-worldly, abstract manner, universalize our desire for liberation in order to 
be able to imagine it as fulfilled and satisfied. No: she is the real Da-Sein in the smallest thing; she 
is worthy of inquiry in the form of the finite being as finite, for which God is neither merely pending 
future nor merely has-been, as would render the question of being superfluous. 
If we thus speak about prayer and in the realm of the so-called ontological difference of the created 
being (Gift) to beings (recipients) and experience prayer itself as the sole way in which, beyond every 
 
88 Ulrich, Gebet, 76. 
89 Ulrich, 77: “The living fundamental form of prayer, which carries the creation-rhythm of being as gift to full 
term, is called the Virgin-Mother and fulfills itself in the Church as ‘pure finitude.’ She is the objective site of 
prayer because she is the objective site of the Eucharist, in which she lives. She is the presence of freed freedom, 
around which this inquiry circles. From her we receive the power of prayer, because she is herself the created, pure 
praying: in every actuality at work. […] She is the finite presence of the absolute Yes of God in the world and in 
history, the sym-bol of ontological thanksgiving. She is, admittedly, only experienceable in faith, perceptible by the 
power of her believing presence, but as believed she is the concrete universality (‘catholicity’) of freedom.” 
90 Ulrich, 69–70: “Virginal prayer, naked contemplative silence, (in light of the unity of giver and gift), unveils itself 
thus in its essence as one that receives, for it can affirm the wealth of the fullness of what has been given, which it 
does not command, only in the measure that it consents to the poverty of this wealth, to its “separation from the 
origin”, that is, actually: to the obedience of the Son to the Father; only in the measure that it lets the wealth happen 
through poverty, and poverty through wealth, and thus brings fruit. ¶ Prayer lives from the unity of life and death, in 
which the life of love transfers itself to man. Where prayer does not swing into the kenosis of the word of being and 
with this into the world, where it does not come to the world, there it will precisely not hear the word, although eyes 
and ears appear to be completely open. Losing oneself in the kenosis of being as love thus means: obeying the 
momentum of the mission of the giver, to which the gift is given over, out of which [mission] [the gift] lives. It means 
not making God into a monologized dweller of heaven, but rather answering him by the power of his finitized word. 
¶ This answer is in no way reactive; it is not subjected to the law of pressure and impact, but rather remains embedded 
in the difference in the unity (!) of Father and Son. From there, it covers an infinite distance, in which the whole 
wealth of the one (!), common life of the divine essence breaks open. The one praying speaks by replying always out 
of the boundless life-wealth of God, because his prayer is the epiphany of the conversation of the Father and the Son: 
in the middle of the world!” (The parenthetical exclamations in the preceding quotation are Ulrich’s.) 

 
30 
abstract reification, the theme of creation can in this dimension be expressed, so we speak ultimately 
of ‘her’, the personal form of the ontological difference, the layout of creation as a ‘who’ (not as a 
‘what’), to which ‘whom’ the discharge of Being as Gift is to be questioned (at which also 
Heidegger’s thinking aims.91 
In the lived experience of prayer, the finite creature receives being as the gift of love that it is, in 
a unity of wealth and poverty. From this experience of being as love, in which the finite creature 
finds her freedom, Ulrich develops a phenomenological approach to the analogy of being as a 
gift of love.  
The foundation of Ulrich’s metaphysical anthropology lies in the discernment between the 
overflowing (über-flüssig) love of the unity of wealth and poverty and the spirit of “hunger” that 
rejects this love. Whoever prays, receives the gift of being. On the other hand, “Whoever does 
not pray, does not love; whoever does not love, ‘is’ not. ‘If you do not believe, you are not.’”92 
Ulrich continues, however, with a caveat: “This is easily said; the truth of these words lies with 
God alone.” In other words, while it may be true that whoever does not pray ‘is not,’ it is one 
thing to grasp this, another thing to judge who in fact does pray and who does not. This ability 
ultimately belongs to God alone. Prayer remains our task, however, and whether or not we pray 
will come to light in the fruits of our thought and action. To the extent one does pray, one can 
live from the Überfluß of love of the unity of wealth and poverty. To the extent one does not 
pray, however, one does not receive the gift and acts out of the anxiety born of refusing the gift 
of love.  
From this foundational discernment between Überfluß and hunger, Ulrich unfolds his account of 
the structure of being as a gift of love. In the next chapter, we turn to see how Ulrich unfolds 
from this discernment a metaphysics of the analogy of being and the various temptations to 
ideology thought faces, which would shatter analogy and destroy the structure of the gift. The 
choice between living out of Überfluß or hunger is thus inflected in the choice between a 
grateful thinking according the logic of the gift or according to the dialectics of wealth against 
poverty. The former begins in prayer and proceeds in obedience to the meaning of being as a 
gift of love. A thinking out of hunger anxiously doubts that being will be given as a gift and 
attempts to mediate it by its own rational powers in a dialectic of wealth against poverty. As we 
shall see, this is the origin from which ideologies develop. Caught in the dialectic of wealth 
against poverty, one fears being exploited and attempts to bring being under one’s own 
 
91 Ulrich, 77–78. 
92 Ulrich, 70.  

 
31 
comprehension. Thought that issues from such a disposition results in ideologies, which only 
perpetuate the cycle of exploitation. Such thought results from those who either do not pray or 
undertake forms of “broken prayer,” such as those we have surveyed above. “The one praying,” 
however, precisely as the one who receives the gift of love, “does not exploit anyone.”93 By 
persevering in prayer, she is able to think from the unity of wealth and poverty according to 
being’s meaning as a gift of love. In the next chapter, we will consider the anthropological 
metaphysics that Ulrich elaborates. By thinking prayerfully, one can remain faithful to the gift 
of being as a unity of wealth and poverty and resist the temptations to ideology. 
 
93 Ulrich, 102. 

 
32 
Chapter Two: 
The Movement of Being’s Finitization into Subsistence 
 
In the preceding chapter, we have discerned two contrasting dispositions, that of the hunger 
which foments “the sickness unto death,” and that of the overflowing freedom of a gratuitous 
gift of love. In this chapter, we endeavor to examine the effects of these dispositions on 
rationality and upon the ontological task that is given to the human person. As we have already 
begun to see, the disposition of a corrupt eros gives rise to the dialectic of wealth against 
poverty. Ulrich identifies the underlying cause of this dialectic as a “logicized spirit” for the way 
it lets dialectical logic substitute for love, implying the intellect has usurped the role of the will. 
This spirit thinks according to a “pneumatic reason,” that is, a reason which would replace the 
role of love in the Holy Spirit.  
The first part of this chapter will examine the process by which this logicized spirit gives rise to 
dialectical, pneumatic reason. Outside of prayer, in the disposition of hunger, one is tempted to 
fix being and mediate it through a dialectical logic. Closed to “the necessary meaning of being” 
as a gift of love, one attempts to replace love with logic. As we shall see in our final chapter, 
this inevitably obscures the light of superessential being and thereby gives rise to ideology. 
The second section of this chapter, turns to examine how thought proceeds as a grateful 
response to the gift of being. Thinking as thanking, reason remains faithful to the necessary 
sense (Sinn) of being, following the direction (Sinn) of being’s finitization movement into 
subsistence.94 This “movement,” which Ulrich unfolds in terms of the three “ontological 
moments” of reality, ideality, and bonicity, is a dynamic interpretation of Aquinas’ account of 
the structure of participation.95 
 
94 The German Sinn carries the meanings of “sense” and “meaning” but also of “inclination,” “tendency,” and 
“direction.” 
95 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 42. As the act of creation is not a change but an 
event ex nihilo, Ulrich speaks of being’s “movement” only “for lack of a better term” to describe the structure of 
God’s gift of being to beings and their free reception of this gift in their self-enactment (Ulrich, 42). Ulrich explains 
further, “to speak of being’s movement into subsistence is never to suggest that an ens in-completum follows a path 
into its subsistence, because esse is no ens, but rather a non-subsistens; however, esse also indicates a completum et 
simplex, and therefore not an in-completum, since nothing can be added to it that would be external to it. We would 
grasp the movement into subsistence as a motus only if to be as the highest sublation of the ens takes on the 
character of the fact of existing [Seiendheit] and therefore is no longer conceived strictly as actus quasi primus…” 
(Ulrich, 46). 
32

 
33 
1. Logicized Spirit and Pneumatic Reason 
“In order to be sure of itself and truly master its object, reason can feel responsible for 
reconstructing the totality of reality in a speculative process.”96 Driven by the hunger of a 
corrupt eros impatient with the indetermination of being, reason attempts to interpret all of 
reality as pure facticity, rendering it empty of meaning in itself. In the pursuit of knowledge, 
reason thus proceeds with an initial negation: it posits being over against this empty, factical 
reality, in order to recover the logos that would give reality its intelligible unity. Reason thereby 
fixes being as a hypostasis in ideality.97 This initial negation, however, neglects the subsistence 
of concrete reality. To compensate for this neglect, reason proceeds to negate the hypostasized 
being (in the negation of the negation). It now declares the being it posited to be nothing. Thus, 
reason makes itself “the executor of the contradiction.”98 Reason sets itself up as the agent of the 
ontological difference and interprets being qua being as being nothing. While Ulrich also 
affirms the proposition that “being is nothing,” he does so in the sense of affirming the 
nonsubsistence of being qua being, insisting that this “convertibility” of being and nothing is not 
at all a contradiction. Pneumatic reason, on the other hand, relies upon the force of the 
contradiction to unfold its mediation of being dialectically. This paradoxical proposition thus 
brings reason to a crossroads, a point of decision, a “crisis:”99 will reason interpret the 
proposition that “being is nothing” as a contradiction or in terms of convertibility?100 To 
interpret this proposition as a paradoxical statement of convertibility is to recognize that being 
does not subsist; it is nothing because it means love: it is always already given away to 
 
96 de la Tour, “The Light of the Gift in Homo Abyssus,” 32. For much of my presentation of the alternative between 
dialectics and the logic of the gift in this section I depend upon Professor de la Tour’s treatment. 
97 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 100. 
98 Ulrich, 35–36. 
99 Concerning this decision, see subsection B of the following section, “Ideality and the ‘Crisis’ of Being.” 
100 Thomas Prufer identifies this contradiction as a characteristic of “the logic of modernity” and indicates the 
alternative kind of otherness that Christian theology offers and which Heidegger invites. “In orthodox theology of 
the Trinity… otherness is not necessarily loss or contradiction. In orthodox theology of creation… the Creator 
[does not] lose or contradict Himself in the being of creatures… In orthodox theology of the Incarnation… Christ is 
wholly divine, wholly human… in the oneness of person of the Son, other to the Father without loss or 
contradiction, the Word in whom creatures are created without loss or contradiction” (68). “Heidegger… has taught 
us that the otherness of hiddenness and truth to each other is not an otherness of loss or contradiction: they rest in 
each other… Perhaps Heidegger indicates a way… to a rediscovery of Christian theology” (69). This otherness that 
is not that of contradiction is necessary for an understanding of being as a gift of love. Prufer thus implies that no 
dialectical sublation that would involve overcoming a contradiction could account for creation as a gift of love: “A 
giver who lacks self-sufficiency and therefore gains for himself and thus changes by giving a gift to another does 
not give with a generosity unmixed with something other than generosity, namely, a change toward self-
completion.” See “The Logic of Modernity,” in Thomas Prufer, Recapitulations (CUA Press, 2018), 68–70. 

 
34 
beings.101 To think along these lines is to admit the superessential light of being, while not 
coming to rest in being; it is to think among finite beings in grateful receptivity to the gift of 
being. Pneumatic reason, on the other hand, interprets this proposition as a contradiction, 
because it relies upon the force of negation to carry out its project of mediating being 
dialectically. The thinking that recognizes the convertibility of being and nothing admits the 
mystery of being indicated in this paradox, without fixing being; rather than trying to mediate 
knowledge itself, it allows the goodness of being to relieve the stress of this paradox and draw 
thought along the way of particular, concrete beings. The thinking that holds to the contradiction 
and proceeds dialectically thereby substitutes its logic for a recognition of the goodness of 
being. Reason thereby usurps the function of the will and is for this reason called “pneumatic.” 
Correlatively, the spirit driving this enterprise is said to be “logicized.” The foundation of 
ideology lies in the eclipse of the goodness of being by a rationalism that has forgotten love 
because it has forgotten to pray (and to think from prayer).102 To save thought from ideology, 
Ulrich endeavors to recover an appreciation of the role goodness plays in being’s movement into 
finitization so as to repair thought’s efforts to carry out its task of following this movement.  
To recognize the logicization of being in modern metaphysics, therefore, is to diagnose it as 
having neglected the role of the bonum in its convertibility with the other transcendentals. This 
temptation appears most explicitly in Hegel’s logic, where reason proceeds dialectically from 
the contradiction of being and nothing.103 Symptoms of this form of thought include the 
attempts to comprehend being as concept or unfold an absolute system.104 Here, thought has 
ceased to proceed in the superessential light of being. It no longer lets itself be led by being’s 
goodness, but neglects being’s necessary sense as a gift of love, replacing this love with its own 
logic. From this culmination of the logicization of being in Hegel, Ulrich traces the history of 
these temptations back to their roots in late scholasticism. He finds in Scotus a certain construal 
of the relationship of beings that obscures the meaning of being as a gift of love.105 By 
 
101 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 29. Ulrich draws the phrase, “the convertibility 
[selbige Verwendung] of being and nothing,” from Heidegger, On the Question of Being, 317. Ulrich interprets the 
phrase differently, in light of Aquinas’ non subsistens of De pot. 1.1. 
102 See the glossary entries on “logicized spirit” and “pneumatic reason” in Ulrich, 500, 503. 
103 La Tour, Gabe Im Anfang, 31–58; de la Tour, “The Light of the Gift in Homo Abyssus,” 32–36; William 
Desmond, “Being as Image of Divine Love: Between Ferdinand Ulrich and G. W. F. Hegel,” Communio: 
International Catholic Review 46 (Spring 2019): 103–108. 
104 Ulrich, Gebet, 73, 87–90, 102. 
105 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 39, 79, 105–107, 136–140, 179–180; D. C. 
Schindler, A Companion to Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus (Washington, DC: Humanum Academic Press, 
2019), 14–15. Ulrich developed his engagement with Scotus extensively in his doctoral dissertation, “To What 

 
35 
conceiving of created essences to exist as potencies within God, as an otherness within God, 
which God creates by negating that otherness, Scotus introduces into the history of philosophy 
that reasoning from the contradiction that will give rise to the history of modern metaphysics, 
culminating with Hegel’s dialectics.  
2. The Ontological Moments: Reality, Ideality, Bonicity 
Prayerful reason recovers a sense of the gift of being. This requires preserving the ontological 
difference between being and beings. Ulrich offers an account of how reason preserves this 
difference by enacting the movement of being in three ontological moments, which open up the 
existential import of certain concepts of scholastic metaphysics.106 Reality, which concerns the 
res, that is, the concrete being with respect to the essence, indicates that which has always 
already received the gift of being. As we shall see, thinking is always already reaching forth into 
reality, while simultaneously reaching back into the depths of being as such (esse) in the 
moment of ideality. Thinking enacts the movement of being through these moments, preserving 
 
Extent Is the Construction of the Constitution of Substance Decisive for the Construction of the Concept of Matter 
in Suarez, Duns Scotus, and Thomas?” (“Inwiefern ist die Konstruktion der Substanzkonstitution massgebend für 
die Konstruktion des Materiebegriffes bei Suarez, Duns Scotus und Thomas?,” private printing [doctoral diss., 
Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, 1955], 135 pp).  The element of Scotus’ thought that Ulrich identifies as 
developing into a logicization of being in the history of modern metaphysics is “an otherness that continued to 
determine God from the outside” (Ulrich, Homo Abyssus, 39). In response to Henry of Ghent’s doctrine of analogy, 
which posited “a split between God and the finite being,” Scotus emphasized the wealth of being in the form of the 
univocatio entis in such a way as to call forth “the radicalized unveiling of the esse completum et simplex (against 
the transnihilation)” (Ulrich, 138–39). Here, Ulrich sees the introduction of the contradiction into the history of 
metaphysics, which will unfold into dialectics in modernity as it is “elevated into an energizing element of reason in 
the development of modern metaphysics, even though this was not at all made evident in Scotus the theologian” 
(139). Ulrich is concerned that Scotus thinks out of “an anxiety about protecting divine freedom and the gratuity of 
grace, which expresses itself in an identification of nature with the pre-Christian sense of being. But this return to 
pagan philosophy seems to imply that being is interpreted first over-against God. This takes the specific form in 
Scotus of ‘pre-existing’ divine ideas (connected with what Ulrich will call ‘ideality’), as a sort of store of 
possibilities, out of which God creates the world. Suarez represents the flip side of the same coin, according to 
Ulrich. In his metaphysics, one finds an absolutizing of the res (‘reality’) of the world over-against ideality. What is 
common to both is the marginalizing of the moment Ulrich calls ‘bonicity,’ which he associates with the mystery of 
being in the concretely existing entity (ens). The modern world grows as it were out of the absence of this mystery, 
the goodness of the world as the final destination of God’s act of creation.” (Schindler, Companion, 14). Ulrich thus 
insists upon the teaching of Aquinas that created essences, as they exist in God, are not some potential otherness 
that God would need to overcome by actualizing them, forcing his hand to create, as it were, through dialectical 
negation of this otherness in order to fully actualize himself. In God, there is no such opposition; in God, the 
created thing “is not a creature in God but creatrix essentia, that is, God himself” (Ulrich, 136–37; cf., De pot. 
3.5.2). 
106 Marine de la Tour recalls the experience of her professor, a student of Ulrich’s, for whom scholastic concepts 
had been “rather abstract. Being and essence, the real distinction, substance and accidents—he learned all of that 
the way one learns about ‘the rivers of Africa from a geography map,’ as he told me: strange names in an unknown 
territory, which one learns without any impact or clarity on one’s life and experience. Then he attended Ferdinand 
Ulrich’s classes. All of a sudden, these very same concepts became charged with life and meaning, even charged 
with existential stakes,” de la Tour, “The Light of the Gift in Homo Abyssus,” 28. 

 
36 
them in their difference in unity, by remaining obedient to the necessary sense of being, 
according to which it does not cling to itself, but gives itself away to beings as a gift of love. 
This moment of self-diffusive goodness, Ulrich refers to as bonicity. Pneumatic reason, by 
positing being itself, usurps the role of the will that would give thanks; it thereby collapses the 
differences between the intellect and the will, and analogously, the true and the good, the Divine 
Logos and the Holy Spirit, the ontological moments of ideality and bonicity.107 On the contrary, 
the thinking that remains faithful to the necessary sense of being in the moment of bonicity 
perseveres in enacting being as a gift of love and thereby preserves the ontological difference. 
From the foregoing chapter, we have come to see how being comes to light in grateful prayer as 
a unity of wealth and poverty. We can thus appreciate that the reception of the gift of being 
involves the task of avoiding two temptations. First, “the concrete entity can never make 
absolute perfection its aim in actu; it therefore never achieves itself in an absolutely ‘single’ 
step.”108 One never attains perfection all at once, as though one could “be through with it.” One 
cannot bring being behind oneself and relegate it to a past event.109 Second, reason must not 
conclude from this that the finite entity’s act of being perpetually begins anew, as though it were 
“at the same time a constant giving and a constant withdrawal of being.”110 In this case, one 
could never realize oneself at all and all efforts to do so would be futile. Considering these two 
temptations, we can bring to light the existential import of the moments of ideality and reality.  
The first temptation implies that being (esse) is never so poured out into the concrete thing (res) 
as though the res exhausted it. This is thus a temptation to sacrifice ideality to reality. If being as 
such were so absorbed into reality, the futural dimension of the ontological difference, the “not 
yet” of hope, all of which pertain to the moment of ideality, would be eliminated. In this case, 
the creature would not be able to receive itself or to give itself away in its activity, for its 
accidents would not really be a communication of its substance. For, if being were entirely 
absorbed in the essence, “the substance would be nothing more than the essence ‘posited 
 
107 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 155: These “ontological moments” are “the three 
moments of the concrete substance’s self-enactment,” but they ought not be misinterpreted as “three separate 
phases” (155). It may be helpful to consider them in relation to these analogous triads: the transcendentals res, 
verum, bonum; sensibility, intellect, will; past, future, present; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. These 
analogies are not merely patterns among triads that remain independent of each other. Rather, an error within one 
triad will be reflected in an interpretation of the others. 
108 Ulrich, 151–52. 
109 Ulrich, 151–52. 
110 Ulrich, 152. 

 
37 
outwardly’; the ‘appearance,’ the entity’s ‘manifestation,’ would be nothing but an outward, 
linear extension of the essence that can be conceptualized univocally with reference to that 
essence.”111 The creature would cease to be in via. One would withdraw into a self-enclosed 
substance. Under the second temptation, thought would have “overlooked the positively 
persisting reality, the moment in which the substance ‘always already’ abides [west] in actuality 
and perdures, prior to any movement into subsistence.”112 Now, the reverse problem occurs: 
reality is sacrificed to ideality. In contradistinction to these temptations, being comes to 
fulfillment only insofar as the creature pours itself out and affirms itself “in [its accidents] and 
with them or ‘beyond itself.’”113 
To reformulate these insights positively, we could say that thinking must undertake “the twofold 
beginning.”114 In short, thinking begins in reality, that is, with the res, the concrete entity as 
viewed with respect its essence: “the beginning of thinking results from attention to the always 
already given things of the world as they blossom forth in appearance, because being results as 
actus entis.”115 Being does not thereby get trapped in reality, however, because thinking also 
begins in ideality. The “resultation” of being that comes forth from the essence “is nothing 
without the crisis of being in ideality, from which it draws its entire metaphysical weight as 
positing, prior to any speculative explication of reality.”116 The beginning in reality is possible 
because being is constituted by the principles of essence.117 The simultaneous beginning in 
ideality is possible, however, because the essence also proceeds from being (outside of which 
nothing is).118 Thinking thus makes a twofold beginning, departing from attention to the 
concrete particular in reality and yet always already with being in ideality: 
Thought’s beginning in attention to the given is therefore the beginning of reason, which receives its 
beginning from its always already “having-been-with-being.” The beginning of finite spirit’s self-
enactment thus stretches out in its intentionality into the kenotic attention to the beings that lie before 
it and back into the depths of the superessential “to be” in the crisis of its ideality. The embodied 
 
111 Ulrich, 152. 
112 Ulrich, 152. 
113 Ulrich, 152. 
114 Ulrich, 149. 
115 Ulrich, 149. 
116 Ulrich, 149. 
117 Ulrich, 147: “Thomas therefore says, ‘“to be” is in the thing, and is the act of the existing thing, which results 
from the principles of the thing, just as “to shine” is the act of the luminescent object’ [cf. Aquinas, 3 Sent. 6.2.2]. 
‘“To be” is in the thing’; therein lies the danger that being will be circumscribed within the res, that is, within the 
essence. Being is not a superadditum to the essence, ‘but is constituted, as it were, through the principles of the 
essence’ [Met. 4.2.556 and 558]” (emphasis Ulrich’s).  
118 Ulrich, 72. Ulrich cites De pot 7.2.9: “for nothing can be added to being as extraneous to it, because there is 
nothing extraneous to being other than non-being, which can be neither form nor matter.”  

 
38 
spirit itself, however, is the theme of the mediation of this “single beginning,” which bifurcates itself 
into the “twofold beginning” in the speculative unfolding.119 
This twofold beginning, with its simultaneous kenotic attention to the particular reality and its 
openness to superessential being in ideality, comes to light, as we had begun to see above, in the 
moment wherein the substance externalizes and internalizes itself in its accidents, the moment of 
subsistence.  
This moment in which the substance comes to itself and gives itself to others in and through its 
accidents is the moment of bonicity. Here, the moments of reality and ideality find their 
integration. On the one hand, the substance “becomes what it always already was.”120 The 
original substance is not negated. Yet neither does it absorb being into itself as though it could 
bring the gift behind itself: “its ‘essential past’ [Ge-wesen] irrupts into the superessential 
dimension of the ad-vent; being is not trapped in the essence, the essence is not set over against 
the ‘appearance’ as a closed in se or ‘X.’”121 In the moment of bonicity, the future is not posited 
over against the past, but emerges from it, as the substance realizes and communicates itself in 
its accidents. Gratitude for the past and openness to the future find their synthesis in the moment 
of a loving being present:  
But the entity has its ‘being present’ [‘Gegen-wart’= ‘turning toward’] on the basis of both moments 
(past or has-been and future or coming-toward); it does not suffer a loss of itself [enteigenlicht], 
either by being closed up in itself as res or by being ‘driven forward’ toward itself in the imprisonment 
of an absolutized ‘future’ (a rejection of the always already abiding reality). The bonum breaks open 
this closure. By virtue of the bonum, the substance is open to the ‘other,’ whom or which it goes out 
to meet [‘entgegenwartend’]; in other words, the substance is a self-giving, self-preserving reality 
able to be sought (appetibile-bonum). In the bonum itself, the moment of the entity’s being present 
displays itself, which as bonum is a diffusivum sui. By contrast, the factical res can only be violated, 
because, by itself, it does not pour itself out—the hypostasized being as verum can only be ‘used’ in 
the will to power.122 
By attending to the good in the present, then, one is able to preserve what one has received and 
offer oneself to the other in the present.123 The moment of bonicity brings to light the creature’s 
ontological structure as a unity of wealth and poverty, the substance pouring itself out into its 
accidents and thereby both coming to itself and giving itself away.124  
 
119 Ulrich, 149. 
120 Ulrich, 153. 
121 Ulrich, 153. 
122 Ulrich, 153. 
123 Ulrich, 153: This comes to light most clearly in Aquinas’ distinction between goodness secundum quid and 
simpliciter: whereas an entity is only good secundum quid in virtue of its substantial act of being, it is good 
simpliciter “according to the actualizing activities that occur in the dimension of the accidents.” 
124 Ulrich, 154: “The unity of possibility and actuality comes to light, however, from the perspective of the 
necessary sense of being, so that what becomes actual is what always already actually is, without it being a matter 

 
39 
Thinking out of the experience of being as a gift of love will therefore grasp the entity’s 
“development as a ‘whole.’”125 Grasping the entity’s wholeness does not preclude 
development,126 because the unity of the substance in the moment of subsistence is a unity that 
obtains in the mediation of its accidents:  
It is precisely in this mediation that the essence is taken seriously as concretely existing, so that its 
externalization [Entäußerung, kenosis!] in the non-necessity [superfluity!] of the appearance 
‘presents’ the proof of its being sublated in the concrete subsistere of the superessential act of 
being!127  
The difference of the accidents from the substance allows the substance to grow through 
receptivity to superessential being, preserving both ideality’s openness to the future and the 
persistence of the already existing reality. The moments of ideality and reality are thus not left 
behind in the moment of bonicity, even as being does not cling “to these two moments in 
themselves as ‘sublated’ or as ‘needing to be sublated.’ In the bonum, being opens up its very 
heart.”128 These moments, then, remain distinct, and yet are integrated from this center of 
bonicity.  
The temptation thus arises to attempt to fix bonicity as the end of the movement that one must 
enact in order to bring the task to completion. One tries, in this case, to approach the three 
moments as though they were three separate phases through which thinking must pass, which is 
not the case. The temptation here is to try to identify bonicity as “the act of the mediation of 
ideality and reality through finite reason,” and thereby fall once more into the logicization of 
being.129 Having once identified the centrality of the good, one is tempted once more to bring it 
under one’s control and carry it out by oneself, through one’s own intellectual powers. Finite 
reason, however, is not capable of mediating ideality and reality alone. 
In being’s enactment of the movement of finitization, there is no “end” in the sense that thinking so 
to speak would be able to “terminate” in bonicity. If thinking were to fix the midpoint of bonicity as 
 
of the mere repetition of a fixed entity or of all possibilities being always already actualized…” It is this unity, 
Ulrich observes, that makes the concept of an actus imperfectus possible. 
125 Ulrich, 153. 
126 Ulrich, 155: “This wholeness, however, does not mean that the essence is able to posit itself over against the 
concrete enactments ‘in each moment’ in a univocal manner or to sustain itself as a permanent structure that is 
univocally closed in on itself.” 
127 Ulrich, 155. The parenthetical statements are my own insertions to bring out the unity of wealth and poverty that 
Ulrich sees at play in the moment of subsistence, as the substance pours itself out in its accidents. 
128 Ulrich, 151: “Therefore being’s movement into subsistence is sealed in the moment that is determined on the 
basis of the ontological moments of reality and ideality, but that is the decisively distinguished [entscheidend-
unterschiedene] center, out of which the positing of reality as the beginning of ideality and ideality as revealed 
reality can be illuminated.” 
129 Ulrich, 156: “A final temptation therefore confronts us at the end of this development of the movement into 
subsistence, namely, the temptation to remain inside the speculative field of interpretation and, at the ‘end’ of the 
movement into subsistence, to transpose the substance’s concrete act of self-enactment into the finite subject and to 
depotentiate the moment of bonicity into the absolute reflection of self-consciousness.” 

 
40 
the ‘end’ and determine it as the destination of reflective mediation, then it would fall prey to the 
factical res and the logicizing of the good.130  
The discovery of bonicity as the center of being means that being is a gift of love. The excess in 
the origin of this gift defies comprehension. The gift is received not in the achievement of an 
absolute system, but in a further offering of oneself in the present moment. The recognition of 
the centrality of bonicity thus draws one’s attention to the good act of love in the present 
moment: “The ‘end,’ here, is therefore to be understood only as the ontological seal of the 
‘now,’ of the ‘present.’ The bonum has always already opened the positive res into its ground, 
so that thinking is led precisely by the bonum into the poverty of the crisis of being.”131 
Attending to the good, one avoids the temptation to possess being all at once, comprehensively, 
under the form of an absolute system. The good directs one to attend not to some 
comprehensible system but to concrete, particular beings—ultimately, to love in the present 
moment, in the community of limited creatures among whom one finds oneself. Thus does 
maintaining this attention lead to de-ideologization. This movement of finitization, however, 
does not render intellection futile. For 
this does not occur in such a way that the movement into subsistence would come to naught, and 
finite reason, forced back into the “beginning,” would have to make its way once again from this 
beginning into the futility of the path. This futility has always already been negated by virtue of 
being’s transnihilation through to the positive res, though, on the other hand, exaggerating the 
exinanitio would inevitably fix being in the res and condemn the self-actualization of this res in turn 
to the futility of a mere going through the motions of something that has essentially always already 
been (in persistence). The bonum cannot liberate thinking into the crisis of being in a way that would 
keep thinking from always already aiming at the positive reality in response to the pull of being itself. 
In other words, thinking cannot be kept from experiencing the metaphysical weight of the always 
already enacted positing of the res. In this sense, the good is end and beginning: as ontological 
“present” [Gegen-wart]. Rest in thinking’s movement has its seal in the good, and so too does the 
historicity of Dasein and its always already achieved sublation in and liberation through the positivity 
of being. Only the ‘absolute system,’ which claims to gather up bonitas for itself, through an absolute 
reflection of the essentialized moments (mere reality and ideality), in the constitution of the 
ontological hypostasis, believes that it will no longer have to keep itself slavishly [hörig] open ‘in 
the end’ (which means in the “hodie”).132 
As the good liberates thought from getting stuck in an absolute system by drawing it back into 
the concrete community of beings, it draws thinking into fresh discovery. Thus is the good not 
only the “end” of thinking but also its “beginning.” It is the culmination of the past from which 
thought emerges and the opening of possibilities for the future. It is able to be both of these, 
because in the “present,” that is, the Gegen-wart (literally, a “turning toward” the other), it is 
love. In the present moment of love, thinking receives the ontological wealth of the gift of being 
 
130 Ulrich, 156. 
131 Ulrich, 157. 
132 Ulrich, 156–57. 

 
41 
poured out into the res with all its “metaphysical weight.”133 Nevertheless, it does not thereby 
fall to the temptation of isolating reality:  “If reality is isolated… then reason would have no 
alternative but immediately to open reality up by its own strength, that is, to take the ‘ultimate 
step, namely the opening of the innermost heart of being’s bonicity by means of the ‘subject’s’ 
self-achievement in absolute reflection.”134 Attention to the good in the moment of bonicity 
preserves reason from the temptation to mediate being itself by its own powers of reflection, 
drawing it instead along the kenotic path of being’s finitization in the act of love. 
Thinking, then, does not lead to an ultimate achievement of reflection, but has “its seal in the 
good,” where it receives the ontological wealth of being by following the path of its poverty.135 
Here, then, it becomes apparent that thinking has its seal in prayer, that kenotic freedom which 
we considered in the last chapter as the unity of wealth and poverty. In such prayer, as a unity of 
gratitude and generosity, the Holy Spirit draws one to receive oneself by giving oneself away to 
the other. Just so does attention to the good in the moment of bonicity draw thought to shirk the 
“absolute system,” refuse the temptation to possess being through reflection, and instead 
persevere in a listening obedience (horchender Gehorsam) to the gift of being. In prayer, 
thinking does not fear to remain “open ‘in the end.’”136 Rather, praying, it makes its end a 
beginning: having its end in the present moment in which one lovingly turns to the other, one 
opens up in this end to a new beginning. “The speculative interpretation of being’s movement of 
finitization,” because it directs thought’s attention to the good, “is therefore anything but the 
construction of an ‘absolute system.’”137 Much rather does it direct one to a contemplative 
abiding in the present that turns toward the other, toward both God and neighbor. By drawing 
one toward such a contemplative disposition, the exigencies of speculation—attention to the 
necessary (not-wendig) sense of being—foster a disposition of loving openness to the ongoing 
disclosure of being in a spirit of generosity. In the moment of bonicity, the reception of what is 
always already given in reality is integrated with a generous openness to the superessential 
depths of ideality in the act of prayer as a unity of wealth and poverty.  
 
133 Ulrich, 157. 
134 Ulrich, 157. 
135 Ulrich, 157. 
136 Ulrich, 157. 
137 Ulrich, 157. 

 
42 
This disposition of prayer thus experiences and brings to light the true meaning of being as 
“God’s supreme gift,” a meaning which is only obscured outside of this prayerful disposition.138 
From the perspective of this present moment of prayer in the “turn to the other” (Gegen-wart) 
that is the moment of bonicity, being’s movement brings to light the way the Triune God creates 
us and draws us into the life of his triune love.139 In the light of the faith that perfects reason,140 
the gift of being always already given in the moment of reality discloses the ever-prior gift of 
the Father; the superessential light of being in ideality reveals the call of the Son; and the love of 
the other in the present moment discloses the sanctification by the Holy Spirit. Thus, 
the glory of grace disclosed itself to us along the path of being through the Father’s preparation of 
the receptive ground (the obedient, essentiell dimension of persisting reality), into which the Son, in 
obedience to the Father, speaks his Word and calls, just as the Father calls us in his Word as those 
prepared by him; in terms of the ontological difference, this means: being as God’s supreme gift 
releases the essence from itself, hands itself over to the essence, even though the essence is posited 
and ‘prepared’ for being, and mediates itself through the essence to concrete subsistence. 
This “movement,” however, culminates in the bonum, which, as Thomas says, does not add any 
negation to the ens. In this interiority of being, the entity is united with itself, it is resolved 
[entschieden] in the ontological present [Gegenwart] and distinguished [unterschieden] from others 
there […]. Therefore the Holy Spirit sets apart. He separates the received Word of God out from its 
otherness, insofar as he “sublates” the otherness in the Word of God in the course of his history. The 
path of this “separation” as the self-unification of the man who has come to himself in the Word of 
God is the history of the Holy Spirit. The yes or no to Christ is sorted out in the ever more profound 
reception of God’s Word through the Advocate that is the Holy Spirit, in whose love God calls, and 
 
138 Ulrich, 159. 
139 Ulrich, 157–58: “But because the movement into subsistence is not realized only ‘on the side of the finite’ but is 
necessarily determined on the basis of God’s absolute self-enactment—insofar as being is never participated in as a 
substantial thing next to God—we are able to say ‘speculatively’—that is, in a ‘mirror and likeness’—that the 
transcendental unfolding of being out of the subsistence-movement into the moments of ‘reality, ideality, and 
bonicity,’ insofar as these stand in the ‘judgment’ of the real distinction of the principles (being and essence), can 
be experienced and understood not merely as a deficient expression of the originally complete being itself, but as a 
positive breakthrough and creative revelation of God’s inner self-enactment” (157–58, emphasis original). Ulrich 
draws on Aquinas to explain that, while the act of creation belongs to each of the Persons of the Trinity, there is 
nevertheless a discernible order according to which it belongs to them, so that each Person can be understood to 
play a distinct role in creating. On the one hand, the act of creation “belongs to God according to His being, that is, 
His essence, which is common to the three Persons,” (ST 1.45.6, as quoted with Ulrich’s emphasis in Ulrich, 158). 
On the other, “the divine nature, although common to the three Persons, still belongs to them in a kind of order, 
inasmuch as the Son receives the divine nature from the Father, and the Holy Spirit from both: so also likewise the 
power of creation, while common to the three Persons, belongs to them in a kind of order” (ST 1.45.6.2, as quoted 
with Ulrich’s emphasis in Ulrich, 158). 
140 Ulrich, 261: “The crisis of being, however, can be successfully undergone only on the basis of the revelation of 
the triune God, which is received in faith. The closure to this supernatural dimension of God’s revelation that has 
come to pass in history [geschichtlich ereigneten] leads inescapably to a substantializing of being, insofar as its 
superessentiality is always already sealed in the exinanitio into the positively subsisting res. The substantializing of 
being in turn implies the dissolution of the potential oboedientialits, which gets absorbed into being qua 
substantialized and therefore bound in a radical way to simple natura. The thinking of being is thus not 
emancipated, but rather it degenerates into pseudo-theology through a metaphysical decay. The ontological 
difference is closed, and grace is made to coincide with nature. ¶ But in Mary of Nazareth, this difference is closed 
in a true sense, insofar as she is the first of the redeemed. She reveals in a profoundly mysterious way how the finite 
as finite can be a mirror of the triune act of love in God, without falling prey to the absolute closing of the 
difference. In this woman, it becomes evident how the finite becomes the obedient space of being’s 
superessentiality, without this latter being imprisoned inside of finite nature.”  

 
43 
has always already called, all men. The Word of God does not draw man’s heart to himself by some 
“magic,” just as being does not extend itself into beings, and just as every reception of being is always 
already superseded by the “prepared” dimension of the positively subsisting reality.141  
The movement of being that culminates in the moment of bonicity is in fact the drama of the 
opening of one’s heart to the love of God.142 By faith, one is able to pray “the ‘Yes’ to divine 
love and thus to the triune God himself,” and thereby carry out man’s ontological “task of 
speculatively determining the ‘nothing’ in the locus of ideality.”143 For, in the love of the Holy 
Spirit, one does not experience oneself as merely a pure poverty, as though God manipulated 
him magically and as though being extended itself into beings, so that they could not stand on 
their own. Rather, in the love of the Holy Spirit, one is “set apart,” that is, brought to share in 
the relationship with the Father that the Son has shared with us. Just as the essence has been 
posited really distinctly from being, so the Father has prepared a place for us; just as being 
hands itself over to the essence (which thus proceeds from being), so the Son has handed 
himself over to us, calling us. The movement of being into subsistence thus culminates in the act 
of prayer, in which, as a unity of wealth and poverty, one receives the gift of being—“God’s 
supreme gift”144—in the moment one gives oneself away in love. 
As we considered in the previous chapter, the gift of being originates in a gratuitous love, that is, 
one behind which thought cannot reach. For this reason, thinking cannot begin by fixing being 
and unfolding its own system. Such a path, which proceeds from the fear that the gift will be 
withheld and arises out of a craving to possess and control this gift, fosters ideology, as we will 
see in the next chapter. The task of thinking is to enact the movement of being as God’s gift of 
love. It must therefore proceed in a disposition of gratitude, that is, prayerfully. To assure his 
 
141 Ulrich, 159. As Schindler observes, the fact that grace travels “along the path of being” echoes as a refrain 
throughout Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus (cf. Schindler, A Companion, 101, n.23). Schindler counts nine occurrences: 
Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 91, 107, 109, 159, 165, 173, 242, 315, 489.  
142 After presenting the creative activity of the Divine Persons in terms analogous to the ontological moments, 
Ulrich makes an observation that underscores the significance of approaching this mystery of being as God’s gift of 
love in philosophical, phenomenological terms: how we experience being and how we reflect upon this experience 
will affect our interpretation of revelation. This seems to justify the need for work such as Ulrich’s, which 
philosophizes in faith—that is, which “looks the innermost mysteries of Christian revelation in the face and opens 
them without abandoning the strictly-philosophical realm” (an excerpt from a letter of Hans Urs von Balthasar to 
Ulrich, which appears on the back cover of the German edition of Homo abyssus; translation mine). “Powerful lines 
of reflection open up from this point for theology, though it also becomes apparent that the experience of being is 
always decisive in every case for the interpretation of revelation and the event of redemption, insofar as it is always 
already bound up in the rhythm of the event of redemption by the triune God” Ulrich, 160. 
143 Ulrich, 260: “Along with the enactment of being’s movement of finitization, man has at the same time been 
given the task of speculatively determining the ‘nothing’ in the locus of ideality, that is, the ‘Yes’ to divine love and 
thus to the triune God himself. God reveals himself in the speculative enactment of the movement of finitization in 
the unfolding of subsistent being as its self-exhibition in reality, ideality, and bonicity through the likeness of his 
goodness: being as being.” 
144 Ulrich, 159. 

 
44 
creature of his love, God has always already given the gift of being. It is such assurance that 
man needs to recover in order to avoid falling into the temptation of ideology. This “always 
already” character comes to light in the moment of reality and in the place the Father has 
prepared for his creature, that is, in the Church:  
In man’s being prepared by the Father, the incalculable nature of the positing of reality is unveiled 
in its ultimate depth, which precisely cannot be achieved or deduced through discussions about the 
truth or through a merely formal agreement with it. This is something that urgently needs to be kept 
in mind today, inasmuch as the unity of Christianity has entered into a new crisis! The ‘one Church’ 
is and remains—“over against” the necessary dialogue with the truth that has been unveiled to us in 
her—a “factum” in the Holy Spirit.145 
Theological disagreement can give rise to uncertainty, which in turn feeds the anxiety to base 
our belief upon what we have reasonably established. Our own powers of reflection, however, 
do not suffice to ground the gift of love we have been given. To the extent that we would 
attempt to begin by first establishing the gift of being by our powers of reflection, we would in 
fact undermine it. The only adequate response to this gift is that of the prayer of thanksgiving 
for the gift that has always already been given. Only thus do we enter into the love of God, not 
conditionally, according to the measure of calculating reason, but gratuitously, “for nothing” 
(umsonst). Recognizing the gift always already given in reality and in the Church strengthens 
the one who offers the prayer of thanksgiving in certainty of the love of God, enabling her, in 
turn, to enter into dialogue with greater freedom and generosity. For it is only by beginning with 
such loving prayer, and not with our own powers of reflection, that we receive being according 
to its proper gratuity and thereby remain open to its superessentiality. It is upon such openness 
to the superessentiality of being that the whole experience of God—and likewise the question of 
whether we will withstand the temptation to ideology—depends.146  
The faith-filled prayer of thanksgiving for the gift of God’s love liberates the person to remain 
open to being’s superessentiality. It is “the unfathomable unity and differentiation of Person and 
Nature in God that is experienced in faith” that is the “ultimate condition of possibility for the 
proper undergoing of the phases of being’s movement of finitization.”147 For in the prayer of 
faith, one experiences the gratuitous love of the Father, whose superessential Person is the 
ground that preserves the difference between Person and essence in the Trinity, which is in turn, 
 
145 Ulrich, 159–160. 
146 Where we do not remain open to being’s superessentiality, we cease to experience God’s goodness and fall into 
suspecting him of withholding the gift: “The experience of God stands and falls with the proper enactment of 
being’s superessentiality; otherwise, the Father remains trapped in the divine nature, the Logos is entangled in not-
yet-negated otherness (finitude) and being is substantialized” (Ulrich, 160). 
147 Ulrich, 161. 

 
45 
the uncreated a priori archetype of the ontological difference between superessential being and 
the concrete substance.148 Only by experiencing the gratuitous love of the Father—in the always 
already given gift of being and in the Church that is always already prepared as “a ‘factum’ in 
the Holy Spirit”—through the prayer of faith, can one preserve thought’s openness to the 
superessentiality of being. 
 
148 Ulrich, 160: “The superessentiality of being in relation to concrete substance has, so to speak, its a priori crisis in 
the ‘difference’ of the superessential Person of the Father from the divine nature; only on this basis, the Persons—
the Father and Son—avoid collapsing back into the absolute essence or turning into moments of the divine nature, 
which, univocally closed in on itself, first enacts the negation of the otherness that limits God through the ‘Spirit’ 
and thus raises itself to the level of superessentiality.” 

 
46 
Chapter Three:  
The Fruitfulness of Prayer for the Critique of Ideology 
 
In his essay, “The Philosophical Act as a Critique of Ideology,” Ulrich argues that the 
philosophical act can help thinking avoid ideology. By following being’s movement into 
subsistence, the philosophical act lets thinking begin and end in love. It finds its beginning in the 
fullness of being it has always already received as a gratuitous gift and it ends in the moment of 
subsistence, in which a being gives itself away to others, opening itself up to the further 
disclosure of being. The philosophical act thus preserves the ontological difference. Yet, thought 
is tempted to close this difference in ideology. In his article, Ulrich observes that, in the history 
of modern critiques of ideology, even these critiques have often ended by falling into the very 
ideological tendencies they initially unmasked and aimed to reject. Insofar as the critique of 
ideology tries to resolve the problem of ideology by resorting to a theoretical solution produced 
by its own reflection, it fixes one more theoretical standpoint, one more ideological a priori. 
Ulrich argues that it is rather by beginning in a loving thinking as thanking for the gift of being, 
a thinking which lovingly seeks to think in order to release the other to be more itself, that 
thought escapes ideology. In short, the solution lies in recovering the philosophical act as a unity 
of wealth and poverty, which recognizes it possesses its wealth of being precisely in its poverty 
of receptivity, and which possesses its wealth as given away to the others it knows. Although 
Ulrich does not explicitly raise the subject of prayer in his essay on ideology, there is a clear 
link between his account of prayer as the unity of wealth and poverty we discovered in Gebet 
als geschöpflicher Grundakt, and the way he understands the philosophical act to deliver 
thought from ideology. In this final chapter of the thesis, then, I argue for the importance of 
prayer for the philosophical act. I will primarily present an interpretation of Ulrich’s essay on 
the critique of ideology. Our chapter will follow its three parts, with the first treating the 
philosophical act, the second addressing the way in which ideology distorts that act, and the 
third explaining why the critique of ideology often falls back into ideology and how the 
philosophical act could enable a genuine critique. Once it becomes clear how Ulrich understands 
the philosophical act to contribute to the critique of ideology, the central importance of prayer 
for carrying out the task of thinking and avoiding ideology, although not explicitly stated in the 
essay on ideology, becomes obvious. Prayer preserves the unity of wealth and poverty, of 
gratitude and generosity, of obedience and freedom, of receiving oneself as a gift to be given 
away. It keeps thought open to the superessential light of being while enabling it to affirm the 
46

 
47 
finite realities through which this light radiates. It enables one to abide in the moment of 
bonicity and thereby integrate the moments of ideality and reality in a way ideology fails to do. 
By giving thanks for the gift of being as the likeness of God’s goodness, one opens one’s mind 
in prayer to the superessential light of being and what it elucidates of the concrete reality, 
without thereby absolutizing that finite reality. Prayer guides the one who knows to love the 
object of knowledge and thereby preserves the knower from pledging his mind to an arbitrarily 
fixed system, guiding him to persevere in thinking through the ontological difference of being 
and beings.  
1. The Structure of the Philosophical Act as the Fundamental Form of 
Human Self-Realization 
Ulrich opens his article on ideology with the question of whether avoiding ideology is possible. 
Can philosophy find a de-ideologized beginning from which to begin? A beginning is either 
posited by or presupposed for philosophical reflection. If it is posited by philosophical 
reflection, what could warrant reflection positing this beginning? An a priori that could warrant 
the act of positing could not itself be posited. It would determine our inquiry in advance, 
seeming to slant the inquiry ideologically from the outset. On the other hand, if the beginning 
were not posited but presupposed as already given, we must ask how it is not ideologically 
fixed. A presupposition behind which thought cannot reach would seem to be arbitrarily 
accepted. Are we not thus left with a “plural fabric of ideologies contradicting one another?”149 
The demand to understand every a priori belongs to a suspicion that refuses to accept that which 
would simply be given. Such a disposition cannot recognize the Unvordenklichkeit of love, that 
is, the fact that love is so original, thought cannot, as it were, get behind it to explain it.150 This 
suspicion refuses anything that might be given until thought has reached behind it to secure it. It 
supposes the given to be a poverty, behind which must lie the wealth that clings to itself in the 
beginning. Such a disposition corresponds to the dialectic of opposites, which attempts to 
mediate the original wealth of the beginning through the negation of the negation. Simply to 
receive what is given would be to accept the position of the slave in the dialectic, this 
disposition supposes, and so it attempts to overcome the dialectic by attaining through rational 
 
149 Ferdinand Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt als Ideologiekritik,” Atti Del XXI Convegnó Del Centro Di Studi 
Filosofici Tra Professori Universitari, Gallarate, 1966: Ideologia e Filosofia 21 (1967): 329. All translations from 
“Der Philosophische Akt als Ideologiekritik” are my own. 
150 Hans Urs von Balthasar, Theo-Logic, Vol. 2: Truth of God (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2004), 135, 176. 

 
48 
reflection the sublated unity of the beginning and its negation. Insofar as it sets out along this 
path, however, it remains unable to avoid the dilemma with which Ulrich observes and 
inevitably begins ideologically, allowing reflection to hypostasize being in the beginning.  
There is, however, a de-ideologized beginning, Ulrich submits, but it requires recognizing being 
as a gift of love in the beginning. The recognition of being as a gift of love overcomes suspicion. 
Recognizing the original generosity of the gift of being, reflection admits an original, non-
contradictory otherness. This otherness, most clearly visible in the doctrine of the Trinity, is 
reflected in the act of creation, in which the creature is not a mere poverty over against the 
Creator’s pure wealth. As we have seen, Aquinas preserves this non-competitive otherness in his 
distinction between being and essence: the essence comes forth from being, outside of which 
nothing is; and yet, in another sense, being comes forth from its principles, which are posited as 
really distinct from it, otherwise it could not be given away. As an original unity of wealth and 
poverty, being offers a beginning in obedience to which one discovers one’s most authentically 
creative and spontaneous freedom.  
One thus faces the decision of whether to use one’s freedom to fix being in itself and to attempt 
to mediate its wealth by means of one’s own reflection, or to begin prayerfully, receiving in 
poverty the wealth of being as a given unity of wealth and poverty. In order to carry out his task 
to love freely, the human person must accept the kenosis of being. One must, in other words, let 
the gift be given without determining it ahead of time; one must remain open to all its rich 
ambiguity, and yet, one must give one’s assent in the particular concrete form it gives one to 
take, again, without letting this form foreclose one’s openness to the ongoing arrival of the gift. 
Whenever reason fixes unity in the moment of ideality, this hypostasization of being precipitates 
a fall into dissociated finitude. “Reason… cannot ever fix and substantiate [being] in itself 
without falling short of it.”151 One would thus set the univocity of being over against equivocity, 
disintegrating the analogy of being that is the reflection of one’s task to know and to love. 
By shattering the center of the analogy of being, which overcomes the two ideological extremes of 
the ideal univocity of the beginning (as the ontological bridge between God and the world) and the 
equivocally fragmented, transcendenceless finite reality, man destroys himself.152 
To carry out his task of knowing and loving, one cannot grasp being as a substance knowable in 
itself, but only as given away kenotically to beings; one must, in other words, accept the 
 
151 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 332. 
152 Ulrich, 334. 

 
49 
creaturely poverty of the little way of discursive inquiry and love in the particular situation. He 
must persevere in employing his freedom in service of the other’s good. For man’s freedom is 
other-focused; the I is an I-thou:  
freedom is only able to be with itself through the other to itself. It must carry itself out in this other… 
willingly (…lovingly)… through the abyss of the difference, it must expose itself in the world and to 
the thou, affirm it in itself and accept it as the personal presupposition of its self-determination. 
Freedom must pour itself out together with the finitization of the given beginning, must let the 
medium of sensibility come forth from itself as finite spirit, must risk the a-posteriori of the historical 
being-in-the-world and show through commitment to the thou that it lives from the gift of being as 
love, over which one has no command [unverfügbar]. The inability to overtake [Uneinholbarkeit] 
the thou whom one encounters personally testifies to freedom of the inability to overtake being. 
Freedom possesses itself only insofar as it gives itself to the other and thereby “becomes” the other 
(since love, as Aquinas says, transforms the one who loves into the beloved).153 
To accept the poverty of “the little way” of discursive thought and the concrete love of one’s 
neighbor, shows that one “lives from the gift of being as love over which one has no 
command.”154 Carrying out this task evinces that one lives from the gift of being, as love, which 
one cannot overtake (Uneinholbarkeit) and thus over which one has no command (unverfügbar). 
This priority of love, the gratuity of the gift of being, which the recipient cannot overtake, elicits 
the gratitude of prayerful thinking, which alone can avoid ideology. It is, however, also this 
priority of Unvordenklichkeit that makes the obedience of ontological thinking appear 
ideological. As we shall see later, Ulrich acknowledges that a certain kind of ontotheological 
thinking does indeed fall into ideology. Such thinking, however, would only be pseudo-
philosophy, that is, it would posit its beginning by itself, only apparently living from the light of 
being. Freedom, indeed, “can ‘do’ and posit its beginning. This is its wealth […];” this wealth, 
however, “only discloses itself and transfers itself to freedom where freedom receives it in its 
not-holding-onto-itself.”155 Freedom can ‘do’ and posit its beginning and this is its wealth, but it 
can do this in the disposition of loving, kenotic receptivity to the other from whom being arrives 
as a gift—in other words, it only obtains as a unity of wealth and poverty.156 One recognizes the 
 
153 Ulrich, 333. 
154 Ulrich, 333. 
155 Ulrich, 333. 
156 As we have seen repeatedly in chapters 1 and 2, Ulrich understands freedom and indeed being itself to have an I-
thou structure. This otherness comes to light in the ontological difference and is implicit in the distinction between 
essence and existence: being comes into its own in beings through its essential-material enabling conditions, even 
as the substance comes into its own as it externalizes itself in its accidents for others. The fact that the other is a 
condition for the possibility of freedom thus also refers to the importance of sensibility, discursive ratiocination, 
and most of all, love, as other-directed operations of the human person, even as it refers more generally to the 
distinction of being and essence and the movement of being into subsistence, that is, into that communion with the 
other in the moment of bonicity in which freedom consists. Prayer is the fundamental act that sets a creature free 
because by praying one receives one’s freedom from the other who is also not-other, God the giver of being. In this 
chapter, we focus on the importance of this act for preserving openness to the other whom one cannot comprehend 
and thereby avoiding the fall into ideology. 

 
50 
gift of love by assenting to the prior gift and showing that it “lives from the gift… over which 
one has no command.”157  
Freedom, however, is tempted to refuse the kenosis of being and to attempt to control this 
wealth by itself. Where it falls to this temptation, where it does not receive being as a gift, but 
“renders this wealth disposable by itself,” it does not reason in the light of superessential being, 
does not recognize the wealth of being as poured out kenotically in beings, and so feels it must 
fix being in ideality according to its own logic.158 It logicizes being. From here there unfolds the 
structure of ideology: having refused to recognize the fullness of being as mediated in reality, 
reason hypostasizes being “next to” God; then, reason unmasks this being in ideality as the 
“nothing” it is, and proceeds to drive the pseudo-kenosis of “empty” and “logicized being” into 
material, historical reality by the arbitrary force of will.159 Freedom is destroyed because love is 
annulled in favor of an ideologically fixed system, which will draw its support from arbitrary 
power and remain ultimately meaningless. 
Here, then, lies the central decision that freedom faces: whether to attempt to dispose of this 
wealth by oneself, and thereby oppose being as a wealth against its kenosis in poverty, or to 
consent to receive this wealth that arrives as a gift from a prior source over which one has no 
command. As we will see, the former alternative leads freedom down the path of logicized 
being, giving rise to ideology. The importance of prayer consists in its being, as we saw in the 
first chapter, the unity of wealth and poverty by which one receives being as a gift of love 
precisely by giving oneself away. As such, prayer enables one to recover that disposition of 
positive receptivity to the gift of being, which was lost at the origin of ideology and which is 
precisely that which it is necessary to retrieve in order to overcome ideology. In the next section, 
we will see that it is precisely this disposition of loving receptivity to the superessential light of 
 
157 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 333. 
158 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 333–34: “In the moment when freedom renders this 
wealth disposable by itself, it has fixed this wealth concretely and logicized it as a transparent beginning. Freedom 
thereby negates its finitization so that reflection absorbs the loving self-mediation of freedom into the medium of a 
consciousness circling within itself. The mediation of apriority and aposteriority of human self-actualization is 
broken; the beginning is overtaken in knowledge and is refused as a gift-of-which-one-cannot-dispose” (333–34). 
Here, Ulrich identifies the disposition that underlies ideology and which gives rise to the logicization of being: it is 
the disposition of a corrupt finite freedom which attempts to take control of its own course independently of God: 
“…in this disposition of freedom, the gift of being has made itself ‘autonomous’ with respect to the origin”; 
therefore, “it no longer lets the origin appear. Freedom has foreclosed obedience to God” (334)! 
159 Ulrich, 334: “Thus the univocity of the suspended abeyance of being ruptures in the equivocal pluralism of 
immanence.” The unity of being (fixed in ideality) “administered conceptually by the reason that refuses being as 
love” now “disappears in the silent anonymity of dissociated finitude.” 

 
51 
being that distinguishes the philosophical act from ideology’s logicization of being. In the third 
section, we will see how every attempt to critique ideology will fail to the extent that it does not 
retrieve this act of prayer as the unity of wealth and poverty, this positive receptivity to being as 
a gift of love.  
2. The Pseudo-Philosophical Structure of Ideology 
2.1 The Logicization of Being Underlying Both Ideology and Its Critique 
The refusal of the kenosis of being catalyzes the development of ideology. Having fixed an 
“ideological a priori,” reason reconfigures “the mystery of being into a fundamentally soluble 
‘problem.’”160 By overtaking superessential being, self-determining finite freedom “has 
apparently acquired for itself in the body of the disponible suspension of being [Seinsschwebe] 
this wealth by its own power.”161 Finite freedom thereby “grasps at the heart of the absolute and 
appropriates its treasures for itself.”162 Reason thereby shirks its task to follow the humble way 
of discursive thought among finite beings, and has “ideologically inappropriately bound the 
finite entity to the ‘God’ apprehended in the logicized beginning.”163 Concrete entities are no 
longer allowed to disclose themselves in the light of being and the absolute is reduced to “an 
extreme generality… a universal pseudo-finitude.” From this disposition of self-determining 
freedom there arises a “dogmatic metaphysics” that binds God to being, his highest gift, so that 
being loses its freedom in itself, even as God loses  
the power to communicate himself freely to the other, revealing himself. Thus he remains powerless, 
tied up with a condition delimiting him and if he can be thought at all, then only in the form of the 
summum ens, as the culmination of things. He is therefore… bound onto-theologically in his base 
upon the suspension of being.164 
Because the realm of finitude “is actually always given in a plurality,” the abstraction to God as 
the summum ens inevitably absolutizes only some realm of finite being.165 The act of logicizing 
being thus gives rise to so many ideologies of immanence:  
racism, materialism, ‘blood and soil;’ the fascist ideologies; those absolutes that lack transcendence, 
namely, those of the ‘worldly world’ and of the ‘human person,’ the ‘pure finitude;’ the ideological 
salvation-claim of one people for every other, whereby it identifies God’s way with its own national 
interests; ‘intersubjectivity without God,’ and so forth.166 
 
160 Ulrich, 335. 
161 Ulrich, 335. 
162 Ulrich, 335. 
163 Ulrich, 33. 
164 Ulrich, 336. 
165 Ulrich, 336. 
166 Ulrich, 336. 

 
52 
These ideologies of immanence begin to reveal how the initial fixing of being in the logicized 
beginning “must necessarily degenerate into a closed finitude and absolutize this finitude as 
such or in certain sections.”167 Yet, ideology endorses this fall into finitude as a pseudo-kenosis, 
an ersatz movement into finitization. Finite freedom presupposes that being is withheld from it 
in the origin and that it must therefore seize this wealth by its own reflective powers. It aims to 
unmask this God which clings to its own wealth as nothing.168 It now subjects that hypostasized 
being, which reason initially fixed as the negation of being’s kenosis, to a further negation. In a 
dialectical negation of the negation, it aims to mediate ontological wealth to itself. Reflection is 
now relieved of its role of disclosing the meaning of being “and philosophy becomes relevant as 
a form of politically immanent, social praxis.”169  
If the aforementioned ideologies of immanence arose out of the failure to carry out the 
ontological difference because they fixed being as such in consciousness above the concrete 
entity, now reason attempts to mediate being as “love” from within concrete finitude. Yet, this 
attempt to critique ideology by turning to praxis continues to depend upon the logicization of 
being. In order to affirm being as love as really belonging to finite freedom, it persists in the 
assumption that “being as ‘love’… may no longer be presupposed as gift. It must become fluid 
kenotically in immanent praxis.”170 From this disposition, self-determining freedom continues to 
reject receptivity to any gift from above. It assumes that enabling the difference of the absolute 
from the finite would dissociate ontological wealth, as though it were capital, over against 
poverty, the ontological proletariat. Reason thus looks to mediate the sublated unity of wealth 
and poverty from its existence in concrete history where “de-ideologized” praxis has emerged. 
Marx finds this sublation in the dialectic of communism while Freud looks to the subject who 
has retrieved freedom from the heteronomous law of the super-ego “and is ‘kenotically’ become 
an ‘ought’ that itself gives freedom.”171  
Ideologies thus come to light as failed attempts to carry out the ontological difference, which fix 
the difference to one side, while the critique of ideology arises as “the attempt to set free the 
one-sidedly fixed ontological difference in its complete form and as the theme of human self-
 
167 Ulrich, 336. 
168 Ulrich, 336–37. 
169 Ulrich, 337. 
170 Ulrich, 337. 
171 Ulrich, 338. 

 
53 
enactment.”172 Thus, Marx attempts to release the difference from a master-slave dialectic of 
capital over against the proletariat, wherein being has been hypostasized in ideality over against 
the ontologically poor entity in concrete reality, by turning to the lived sublation of this 
opposition in communist praxis. Freud, likewise, sees the super-ego as “a function of the 
ideologized suspension of being,” so that its de-ideologization “is transformed into the 
immanent release of the kenosis of being.”173 Both Marx and Freud attempt to offer critiques of 
ideology by de-ideologizing the hypostasized being in its suspension in ideality by emphasizing 
the other side of the ontological difference, namely, its kenosis into concrete, historical, material 
reality. In this respect, they exemplify the way in which modern critiques of ideology tend to 
emphasize the ontological moment of reality in contrast to the ideologies they critique, which 
initially hypostasized being in ideality. Despite this contrast, insofar as these critiques of 
ideology remain dependent upon and driven by the logicization of being, they degenerate into 
that which they would critique. For while critiques of ideology aim to release the full form of 
the ontological difference from its one-sided fixing, they would in fact only perpetuate this 
fixing insofar as they would continue to remain closed to the superessential light of being. 
Closed to this light, they would attempt to carry out the ontological difference under the aegis of 
the logicization of being in the very disposition of self-determining freedom that gave rise to 
ideology in the first place, preserving its effects. 
2.2 Only Love Pursues the Superessential Light of Being  
The ontological moment of reality does indeed tell us that being does not subsist in any 
ideological hypostasis above or beyond finite reality. God does not withhold the gift of being 
from the recipient in some ontological suspension but has always already given it entirely away 
to the recipient; it belongs to the receiving other. Nevertheless, ideologies of immanence 
exaggerate this moment, absolutizing it. These ideologies sacrifice “the fullness of the beginning 
to its poverty, the wealth to its non-subsistence and kenosis, reason’s being-with-oneself to the 
will’s practical self-transcendence, reflection to sense experience…”174 By attending to the 
concrete moment of reality, Marx and Freud attempted to critique ideologies that fixed being in 
ideality, yet, insofar as they continue to operate under the logicization of being, their critiques 
degenerate into ideologies absolutizing the moment of reality. In response to such ideologies, 
 
172 Ulrich, 338. 
173 Ulrich, 338. 
174 Ulrich, 339. 

 
54 
however, there arise critiques that attempt to recover something of the openness of the 
superessential beginning to theoretical reflection. Where ideologies have prioritized praxis, 
critiques aim to raise up the importance of theory in order to gain distance from presuppositions 
deemed “sensuously emotional” and “socially fixated.”175 These critiques will only succeed to 
the extent that they persevere in inquiring after “superessential being, which alone is able to 
hold open the difference from the moment of the posited ‘reality.’”176 To the extent they fall 
short of pursuing superessential being, they remain “tied to a foundation that cannot at all 
release theoretical reflection’s authentic distance from the implications of socio-economic praxis 
and its conditions.”177 In other words, to the extent the critique does not persevere in inquiring 
after superessential being, it fails to gain the theoretical distance it sought from the essential, 
material conditions of reality. Its attempt to recover theory leads it back into “the idealistic 
ideology of the refused kenosis of being.”178  
Since the ideological superstructure of the suspension of being… is necessarily held as concretely 
available fullness, as a wealth posited against its poverty and thereby once more stamped and 
determined by the now reflexively sublimated structure of factual reality, the critique of ideology 
falls once more into the dimension of positivistically impoverished reality and founders, ideologized 
in it.179  
Having failed to open itself adequately to the light of superessential being, the critique also fails 
to open itself to the wealth as it would be disclosed in finite being. As the critique returns to the 
moment of reality, it is only able to perceive it as “positivistically impoverished.”180 
Thus, while ideologies emphasize one pole of the ontological difference (e.g., absolutizing 
concrete reality), critiques arise in response to them, striving to liberate the full ontological 
 
175 Ulrich, 339. 
176 Ulrich, 339. 
177 Ulrich, 339. 
178 Ulrich, 339. 
179 Ulrich, 339–40. 
180 Ulrich, 340: Ulrich lists specific examples of those ideologies that attempt to recover everything in ideality, 
which fail to actually inquire after superessential being and so end up hypostasizing being in ideality: “the 
proclamation of ‘heaven on earth’; the ideology of absolute progress; the utopia of humanity bringing itself to 
completion; the uniform, distance-less merging of I and Thou; absolutely univocal ‘freedom, equality, 
brotherhood;’ the presumptuous, basically hopeless preempting of the future; the absolute option for reflexive 
taking-into-possession of everything still outstanding, unavailable, whether given now in worldly spatio-
temporality or in the horizon of a still not yet entirely collectivized society”. Each of these refuse the kenosis of 
being and fix theory in ideality, yielding an idealistic ideology. They are inevitably destabilized and “shatter into 
the unstable simultaneity and succession of dissociated reality,” yielding a new set of forms: “positivism, 
pragmatism, the absolute option for what is transitory which is now finalized as such; ideologized skepticism; the 
identification of being and becoming as the ‘perpetuation’ of the becoming world, precisely where the nothing of 
‘eternal value’ (Nietzsche) became visible; the degeneration of intuitive, attentive reason to the perspectivity of 
technical ratio; the relativizing dissolution of every essential form into ‘process’; the atomization of the world; the 
ideology of a social, cultural, economic pluralism absolving itself from every mediation, and so forth.” 

 
55 
difference. These critiques, however, insofar as they continue interpreting the poles as opposed 
to one another and continue to think from the logicization of being, merely attempt to 
compensate by emphasizing the opposing pole (e.g., being as a wealth over against its kenosis, 
ideality against reality). They do not succeed in releasing thought into the ontological 
difference, but merely degenerate back into ideologies.181  
The same holds true, Ulrich observes, for a critique of religion as ideology. This critique 
resembles that of Marx we examined in the first chapter. It endeavors to unmask the wealth 
withheld from the creature in God as “nothing,” so that the human person can realize himself 
through his “will to power.” This critique, however, presupposes the ideological structure of 
religion, fixing an experience of God “as substance withdrawn into itself.”182 This critique, 
therefore, attempts to accomplish that which the philosophical act achieves in the ontological 
difference, namely, to liberate the person in the finitization of being as love. It aims to reclaim 
for the finite creature the ability to realize oneself in a free gift of self. Yet it would attempt to 
achieve this by means of its own powers of reflection and by handing the person over to an 
arbitrary freedom. For this critique retains a twofold ideological presupposition. On the one 
hand, it absolutizes the freedom of the finite being, detaching it from God and releasing it into 
“pure finitude.” The concrete, finite reality has so absorbed the gift of being that it shatters its 
unity with the Creator. On the other hand, the critique has logicized a difference between God 
and being as wealth against poverty, binding the two ontotheologically in a relation of 
codependency: “The origin enjoys himself in the gift that does not get loose from him, since he 
is powerless. Precisely his ‘nothingness’ impoverishes the world. God has therefore ceased to be 
‘God.’ He determines himself for his part through the nothingness of his other.”183 God is held 
to be a pure wealth who needs the other’s nothingness in order to enjoy his own wealth and 
who, at the same time, therefore impoverishes the creature into the dependency of an addict, 
unable to attain the freedom of self-possession. Such a relation implies that the creature must 
break free from its bond of addiction in order to realize its own freedom in absolute finitude. 
The critique of “religion as ideology” presupposes this twofold ideologization of the absolute in 
 
181 Ulrich, 340: “Wherever the philosophical act of carrying out the critique of ideology does not meet the discharge 
of the ontological difference as the fundamental form of finite freedom, the critique of ideology degenerates once 
more, even if hiddenly, into an ideology.” 
182 Ulrich, 340. 
183 Ulrich, 341. 

 
56 
order to carry out the very “finitization of being as love” at which the philosophical act aims. 
The critique of ideology thus falls back once again into ideology. 
The philosophical act, however, does not absolutize either the moment of reality or that of 
ideality, either the difference between the creature and God, or their unity. It does not fix either 
the creative positing in the superessential light of being or the attentive receptivity that 
presupposes according to the material, essential conditions. In this refusal to absolutize either 
pole of the ontological difference, we can say that the philosophical act “remains in 
suspension,”184 not in the suspension of logicized being in ideality,  
but rather in the ontological difference of being as love. It is not able to objectivize itself once more 
and raise itself to the absolute system. It does not allow itself to be made intelligible and knowable 
as the absolute measure of every critique of ideology. This is its wealth and at the same time its 
poverty [Not]. It remains in a sense defenselessly exposed to every accusation of ideology and yet 
can only “justify,” itself, if at all, by letting itself be freed by the finitization of being as love into its 
actual de-ideologized freedom.185 
While those critiques of ideology which continue to operate from the logicization of being 
merely succeed in releasing ideologies into new ideologies, the philosophical act intrinsically 
resists the logicization of being. It is the nature of this act to begin in such a way that it remains 
receptively open to “the light of being of truth” without fixing what it receives.186 It remains 
open to this superessential light because it begins not from the fear of having to seize some 
being that has been withheld, but in the poverty that has received everything. It thus opens itself 
to an infinite horizon and remains open. This act thus resists proposing another absolute (and 
therefore ideologized) system that would foreclose openness to the superessential light of being. 
Yet for this very reason it does not yield a definitive critique of ideology, a theory which would 
finally unmask the errors of every other ideology. Instead, it offers a kind of criterion of 
discernment by which to recognize ideological tendencies, calling reason back to a prayerful 
disposition that welcomes the disclosure of being in beings. It prompts gratitude for that which 
has been given and a generous hope for that which is to come united in a loving affirmation of 
 
184 “The Spiritual Exercises,” in Ignatius of Loyola, Personal Writings, ed. Joseph A. Munitiz and Philip Endean, 
(New York: Penguin Classics, 1997), 298, SpEx §1. This “suspension” proper to the ontological difference of being 
as love, I suggest, corresponds to the disposition of Ignatian indifference, which cultivates an active readiness to 
respond to the will of God. St. Ignatius recommends spiritual exercises as ways “of preparing and disposing one’s 
soul to rid herself of all disordered attachments, so that once rid of them one might seek and find the divine will in 
regard to the disposition of one’s life for the good of the soul.” As the philosophical act does not absolutize either 
the moment of reality or that of ideality but remains in suspension, ready to follow the movement of being into 
bonicity, so too, in the act of prayer one prepares oneself to hear and act according to God’s will for one’s life. 
185 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 341. 
186 Ulrich, 333: “Awakened by the light of being of truth, freedom can ‘do’ and posit its beginning. This is its 
wealth, which, however, only discloses itself and transfers itself to freedom where freedom receives it in its not-
holding-onto-itself.” 

 
57 
the other in the present. Where the gift is presupposed as withheld in ideality and where the 
finite entity must assert its freedom absolutely, taking credit for the gift itself, love is 
impossible. A critique of ideology can become fruitful by learning from the philosophical act 
how to persevere in the ontological difference of being as love. 
3. Realigning the Critique of Ideology with Its Authentically Philosophical 
Trajectory 
While the logicization of being that underlies the process of an ideology’s development draws 
those critiques that do not escape it back into ideology, thought is freed from ideology where it 
is guided by love. Wherever one allows one’s fixed theory of being to become the standard by 
which one measures everything else, one replaces the superessential horizon of truth necessary 
for freedom with an idol of hypostasized being. In practice, because inquiry always takes place 
in dialogue, ideology thus constitutes an act of violence against one’s dialogue partner, 
foreclosing the possibility of genuine dialogue. To the extent one lets one’s hypostasized being 
determine the discourse, one imposes the arbitrarily fixed measure upon one’s dialogue partner, 
limiting the other’s freedom as well as one’s own. The only kind of discourse able to overcome 
ideology is that which is a unity of love and reflection, of praxis and theory.  
Ulrich considers a few ways in which the critique of ideology can fail by misconstruing the 
relationship of praxis and theory, intellect and will.187 Modern critiques of ideology, such as that 
which we find in Marx, see the danger of hypostasizing being in ideality. Where the true is 
identified with the good, the intellect is allowed to absorb the role of the will; being is logicized 
and a certain system is fixed as absolute. Yet, “the decay of reflection into willing (the 
identification of bonum and res)” is equally a danger.188 On the one hand, then, Marx’s 
insistence upon praxis is necessary. It will only prove helpful, however, to the extent we practice 
the lived unity of wealth and poverty. How can we realize this except by recognizing and 
receiving it as already given? The modern critique of a rational ideology, however, turns into an 
 
187 Ulrich, 343: I can err as much by “depotentiating my volition once more to the function of my reflection,” as 
much as by dynamizing the will “against the reason.” “The truth of the light of being is sacrificed to the primacy of 
the will. Theory and practice are split…” 
188 Ulrich, 351: “As much by absorbing the will into reflection (the identification of verum and bonum in logicized 
being) as also by the decay of reflection into willing (the identification of bonum and res in atheoretical praxis), the 
critique of ideology is once more ideologized. These two extremes, which fundamentally belong together, can then 
be once more subjected to a critique.” 

 
58 
irrational ideology.189 Insofar as the critique of ideology prioritizes praxis over against theory, 
continues to think of “the abstract identity of being (A=A)… against its material mediation and 
kenosis,”190 continues to posit being “against the poverty of its nonsubsistence,”191 continues 
thinking of being “as clinging-to-itself, then freedom must fall to the undertow of the material 
and social otherness, which, by consuming ‘being’ in itself, negates [aufhebt] theory in favor of 
praxis.”192 There is a truth here; “the new ideology is in a certain sense justified.”193 For Marx, 
theory remains falsified so long as it merely thinks the unity of wealth and poverty. “The 
critique of ideology thus consists of showing how hopelessly the speculative mediation of empty 
being in the beginning passes by the positive positing of reality—indeed, that from this 
beginning the factual history of freedom realizing itself cannot be reached at all; the beginning 
is thus still substantialized.”194 The wealth of being is revealed only in its kenosis. Marx shows 
us that de-ideologization means that the beginning “must simply cease to be a form beyond 
praxis! Only where it is, in its always specific form, the expression of certain prevailing material 
and social relationships (as the truth of consciousness) does it become radically open to critique, 
since, under this condition, it has already become ‘de-logicizedly’ comprehensible.”195 The 
moment the spirit proceeds to carry out the kenosis itself, from its own reflection, it once more 
binds itself to “a beginning that still lies outside of the historically concrete praxis, beyond its 
corporealization” and attempts to de-ideologize the suspension of being “by once more binding 
itself to it.”196 “The exclusive beginning of theory in the medium of socio-economic reality, 
however, is again only the reverse side of the powerless sinking of the logicized truth of being 
into finitude, so that Marx ultimately falls once more to the criticism in his critique of ideology 
 
189 Ulrich, 344. “The process of the de-ideologization of the beginning is thus here itself only the function of an 
ideology. Thus the ‘rational ideology’ of the reason fixed in logicized being changes itself into the evolutive 
‘irrational ideology’ which criticizes the first, but itself follows as the necessary consequence of what it has 
criticized.” Finite freedom presupposes the meaning of being as an “empty concept,” and while this empties the 
initial ideology of its content, it only solidifies a new ideological successor: “The presupposition of the empty 
concept of being first made possible the reversal of the formerly theoretically relevant ‘truth of the spirit’ into the 
‘economy,’ the ‘spirit of the people,’ the ‘soul of the culture,’ the ‘race,’ the ‘social relationships of power.’ The 
process of the de-ideologization of the beginning is thus here itself only the function of an ideology.” Here, we have 
a transformation from the “rational ideology” that is the target of the critique and is attempted to be overcome—
into an “irrational ideology.” The former was fixed in logicized being (e.g., “the truth of the spirit”); the latter fixes 
the meaning of praxis (the spirit of the people, the economy, etc.). 
190 Ulrich, 344. 
191 Ulrich, 344. 
192 Ulrich, 344. Here, I translate aufhebt as “negates” (rather than “sublates”) because it seems that the critique of 
ideology so prioritizes praxis over against theory that it does not allow for a taking up and preservation of theory in 
praxis but the ultimate and exclusion and lack of necessary theoretical affordances. 
193 Ulrich, 345. 
194 Ulrich, 346. 
195 Ulrich, 346. 
196 Ulrich, 347. 

 
59 
even if he does so in another form.”197 Marx places theoretical constraints upon what qualifies 
as praxis because he is still presupposing and responding to the “empty” being withdrawn into 
itself in the beginning—the very empty being presupposed by the ideologues he sought to 
critique. In response to such empty being, “the true theory, which has been freed for the 
‘superessential’ light of being, cannot become manifest.”198 Here, reflection develops its own 
limited theory such as that which conditions Marx’s exclusive beginning in socio-economic 
praxis.  
Only the listening theoria of the superessential wealth of being is able to carry out the emptying of 
the beginning in its ultimate poignancy and to reveal the inaccessible gift from above as the ‘task 
from below,’ to reveal its fullness as the poverty of love, without once more alienating the historical 
Dasein ideologically and degrading praxis to an abstract function of consciousness circling in itself. 
Thought lives from concrete reality because of the finitization of being, together with which it 
originally belongs; the finitization’s positivity, however, is missed precisely where it is purchased 
against the wealth of the received beginning and is thereby carried out as the exclusive basis of every 
de-ideologization.199 
The positivity of thought cannot be derived from praxis over against theory without 
undermining itself, even as Marx cannot derive theory from a praxis he has posited against 
theory without undermining the theoretical disclosure of the light of being. Every opposition of 
being against its kenosis, against its essential enabling conditions, forecloses the love that only 
obtains in a unity of wealth and poverty. 
Marx’s critique is especially helpful for the way it brings to light the actual problem of the 
critique of ideology. The critique recognizes the errors of ideologically fixing being in ideality. 
Thus, Marx recognizes the need to arrive at a praxis of the unity of wealth and poverty, from 
which could issue a unity of praxis and theory. Nevertheless, the critique of ideology fails “to 
push forward to its entire form, that is, to the mediated unity of fullness and poverty of being or 
to the liberated integrity of the doing and receiving of finite freedom. It remains caught in the 
presupposition that it negates.”200 Insofar as the critique retains the presupposition of a self-
withholding being over against its kenosis, it inevitably responds to ideology merely by 
emphasizing an opposing pole, and the ideology that absolutizes one pole corresponds to the 
 
197 Ulrich, 347. 
198 Ulrich, 347. 
199 Ulrich, 347. 
200 Ulrich, 348. 

 
60 
ideology that absolutizes the other.201 Thus, while the critique of ideology initially diagnoses a 
problem, it catalyzes a one-sided dialectical reversal that lets it fall back into ideology.  
In the attempt to overcome ideology, modern critiques such as Marx’s define and critique 
ideology while retaining the ideological presupposition of the logicization of being. This 
compromises the fruitfulness of critiques in advance, destining them for one-sided dialectical 
reversals back into ideology. After certain critiques absolutize the essential enabling conditions 
characteristic of the moment of reality, ideology comes to be defined as thought that remains 
tied to a particular social setting.202 While Marx’s critique turned to praxis, the new critique will 
seek “the point of being that is relieved of every determination falsified by social otherness… 
and to eliminate the socially conditioned deviation from the ‘objective truth.’”203 Afraid of the 
ideological potential of such a claim to objectivity, however, the critique seeks to distance itself 
from the absolute by opening a distinction of “the ‘absolute’ against the ‘scientific truth.’”204 
Yet this still preserves the “metaphysical a priori of the gift of being abstractly posited against 
its origin (as beginning).”205 Scientific thought falls back into the social conditions and 
contingencies of the moment of reality. Once again, the critique is ideologized.  
The same one-sided dialectical reversal occurs once more as the critique targets what it believes 
to be the “value-normative” structure of ideology. Here, the critique attempts to de-ideologize 
thought by purifying it of all “emotional and voluntative elements,” supposed to underly 
ideological bias.206 Such an attempt, however, holds the verum over against the bonum, once 
more opposing being’s kenosis to a conceptualized being that withholds itself in a state purified 
of attachment to value: 
This, however, is a fallacy! For the positive positing of the given reality of finite being lives from the 
kenosis of the beginning, that is, from its non-subsistence, because of which the gift, because it is 
totally given, is always already, through pluralistic mediation, factually there. Every ‘objectivity’ 
lives from the discharge of the finitization of being. If, however, the “thing” is cut away from this 
transcendental relation to the kenosis of being and thereby from the center of the ontological 
difference, then every mediation of reflection and actuality is destroyed.207 
 
201 Ulrich, 347–48: “The ideology that is bound to the sphere of reality [Realitätsphäre] of being that is posited in 
itself and immanently withdrawn and the ideology that is based in the horizon of the hypostasized suspension of 
being of the logicized beginning, correspond to one another.” 
202 Ulrich, 348: Ulrich cites K. Mannheim and E. Topitsch as representatives of the critique of ideology that defines 
ideology in this way. 
203 Ulrich, 348–49. 
204 Ulrich, 349. 
205 Ulrich, 349. 
206 Ulrich, 350. 
207 Ulrich, 351. 

 
61 
As soon as one attempts to interpret the verum against the bonum, as though one could, 
forgetting their unity in the given reality, extract the one from the other and keep it intact, one 
falsifies once more the unity of praxis and theory.  
The critique of ideology cannot succeed by abstracting thought from value as though 
“voluntative-emotional” elements falsified theory in and of themselves. Rather, the voluntative-
emotional elements must themselves be purified so that they are those of love. “Only where the 
philosophical act carries out the unity of reflection and love as the ontological difference of the 
finitization of being is the de-ideologization of the false ‘evaluating’—that is, authentic 
objectivity and precisely thereby true critical theory—possible.”208 Love alone helps reason 
remain objective, perceiving the entity in light of the gift of being it has received, while 
preserving the difference from being as such. 
Yet, according to Theodor Geiger, a leading German sociologist in the early twentieth century, 
it is precisely such a commitment to de-ideologization as the purification of theory from love 
that characterizes the critique of ideology. Here, the decision that gave rise to ideology, namely, 
the decision to begin by logicizing being rather than by receiving being as a gift in loving 
gratitude, surfaces as the defining characteristic of a program of the critique of ideology. 
According to Geiger, ideology arises when an atheoretical, emotional bond between the speaker 
and the object is theoretized. The process of de-ideologization, then, is a purely intellectual 
affair, which involves purifying theory of any atheoretical elements. The process of developing 
“formalized ‘theoretical reflection’” will bring us the distance from our concrete situations and 
from the concrete-material bond to otherness, to our essential-material enabling conditions, that 
is necessary for avoiding ideology.209 In addition to the formalization that purifies theory from 
all atheoretical bonds, this process accounts for particularities in a way that maintains the 
requisite distance through theoretical specialization. Through this dual process of formalization 
and specialization, then, thought is believed to achieve “the fulfilled beginning of the (corruptly 
recurring) ‘superessential being,’” apparently supplanting the role of receptive contemplation of 
the gift of being.210 
 
208 Ulrich, 352. 
209 Ulrich, 353. 
210 Ulrich, 353. 

 
62 
Formalization and specialization aim at reducing to maximal univocity “the positive 
‘equivocity’ of the word” (which “corresponds to reason’s superessential light of being”).211 The 
critique of ideology thus “negates the superessential scope of silence, which is opened up in the 
ground of the light of being.” Here, the trajectory of the critique seems it requires the correction 
of contemplative prayer that would open thought to “the positive ‘equivocity,’” a superabundant 
wealth of meaning, access to which the process of formalization and specialization threatens to 
foreclose. Feeling threatened by the exposure of a word that admits of meanings beyond the 
measure of its logicized being, the critique attempts to resolve the ‘indeterminacy’ of 
interpersonal discourse. It aims to determine a univocal meaning against the horizon of logicized 
being as part of its endeavor to purify theory from elements that do not cohere with its absolute 
system. By exerting such control over the meaning of terms, the critique believes it is preserving 
theory from those atheoretical elements that would lead to ideology. 
By removing language from the superessential light of being, however, the process of 
formalization and specialization, simply fixes univocal senses arbitrarily. They thus exchange 
“the positive ‘equivocity’ of the word” for a “negative ambiguity [Vieldeutigkeit]”, and in an 
effort to escape the ‘indeterminacy’ of discourse, they flee into the “pure indeterminacy” that 
constitutes the arbitrary reduction of the superessential scope of meaning.212 They are, however, 
praised for their “useful ‘clarity’ [Eindeutigkeit]” as the critique of ideology gains the support of 
political power.213 Yet, insofar as it departs from the arbitrary logicization of being, this process 
cannot actually claim to bring about the “precision” it claims to produce.214 Its efforts to control 
meaning undermine its ability to do just that.  
Appealing to the horizon of superessential being, the metaphysical act questions this process. 
When it makes such an appeal, however, ontological thought is accused of being itself 
 
211 Ulrich, 354. 
212 Ulrich, 354–55: in German, eindeutig and vieldeutig carry the common meanings of “clear” and “ambiguous” as 
well as the more technical senses of “univocal” and “equivocal,” respectively. Ulrich seems to have both senses in 
mind. In the process of formalization, clarity is often sought at the price of reducing a positive equivocity to an 
arbitrarily flattened univocity. Genuine precision, however, cannot be attained by logicizing being. “In the eyes of 
the critique of ideology, the silent relation of speech to the abyss of the superessential truth of being, from whose 
kenosis speech receives its actual clarity [Klarheit] and rigor, can yet be nothing other than a decline of freedom 
into an “arbitrary indeterminacy” that ideologically alienates it from the outside. This “arbitrary indeterminacy” 
robs the word of its “clarity” [Eindeutigkeit]. One therefore accuses metaphysics of reducing the essence of speech 
and of speaking inadequately to a sphere hovering over finitude and thereby deforming it ideologically; that is, one 
believes it to entail the substantiating of being in the beginning.” 
213 Ulrich, 355. 
214 Ulrich, 354–55. 

 
63 
ideological and of merely seeking to lend its own interests metaphysical support. Indeed, a 
certain kind of metaphysics does fall into ideology, namely, that which “begins in logicized 
being,” confines “the will in the medium of consciousness,” and negates freedom, identifying 
verum and bonum, interpreting the “poverty of being” as “empty abstractness,” which invites 
and requires reflection to fix its own theory.215 Philosophy thus becomes “an ‘empty formula’ 
(Topitsch)”; it is no longer “free theory,” open to superessential being but is driven by values, 
goals, and political interests.216 Thus does philosophy fall into ideology, interpreting “existence 
[Dasein] according to certain models of value… external to and inadequate to reality.”217 Thus 
we find the “absolute system, which lets itself develop out of logicized being and overtakes all 
reality unilaterally into self-aware consciousness, has, however, missed precisely the unity of 
fullness and poverty of the beginning of freedom in being.”218 
The philosophical act avoids falling into ideology precisely where it is carried out in union with 
the love that recognizes and affirms the gift of being as a unity of wealth and poverty, that is, 
where it lets itself unfold out of the act of prayer. As we saw in chapter one, prayer is this unity 
of wealth and poverty. It is the act which enables one to persevere in “the ontological difference 
of love” and thus to develop theory as a liberating service to the other.219 “Theory is really 
‘pure’” not where it is driven by the arbitrary logicization of being, still less when this is 
reinforced by political interests; rather it “is really ‘pure’ only by the loving carrying out of the 
kenosis [Entäusserung] of being, insofar as reflection enables the given actuality in itself, by 
opening it up through the ontological difference into the superessential abyss of the inaccessible 
being and persists in thinking it from the mediated beginning.”220 Here, where reflection begins 
by recognizing the goodness of the other and seeks to liberate that goodness, it avoids 
degenerating into ideology. 
Only where theory proceeds from love as a unity of wealth and poverty does it not detach itself 
from being’s movement into subsistence and thereby retain its authentic objectivity, attending to 
the other in light of the ontological difference and the other’s free response to the gift and call of 
 
215 Ulrich, 355. 
216 Ulrich, 355. 
217 Ulrich, 356. 
218 Ulrich, 356. 
219 Ulrich, 334. 
220 Ulrich, 356. The “kenosis” of being referred to here is the self-emptying of love that constitutes the task of every 
person. The ontological unity of wealth and poverty finds its fullest expression in this anthropological disposition, 
which in turn is most perfectly realized in Christ’s kenosis. 

 
64 
God. “Only in this transcending suspension of freedom, do the factual reality and the person 
have ‘objective’ existence and self-possession.”221 Only in the light of being as a superessential 
gift of love is reflection capable of avoiding ideology and achieving objectivity. Only then is it 
capable of respecting the other’s freedom. For, when it is liberated by love, reflection does not 
arise from the arbitrary assertion of the will. It is no longer motivated by external interests to fix 
being. Rather, receiving its own being as a gratuitous gift, it now loves the other it comes to 
know. It aims only to let it be, to let it receive itself, as likewise a gift given to itself. It does not 
approach the other as a fixed being, as though it had already finished with the gift and brought 
its being behind itself. Rather, reflection that is born of love seeks, by understanding the other as 
it comes to receive itself from its superessential source, to help the other continue to receive 
itself, even as its source is disclosed as the ever greater.  
Love alone enables an objective view of the other’s existence and self-possession because only 
in love is the other not measured against some ideology but rather affirmed in the ontological 
difference from superessential being, the reception of which constitutes the person’s 
fundamental task. To allow love to inform reflection and to interact with others not only insofar 
as they fit one’s own agenda—in short, to avoid exploiting the other and being exploited by the 
“God” of self-withholding hypostasized being—one needs to cultivate “the superessential scope 
of silence.”222 Contemplative prayer opens the mind so that it does not merely trade in the 
univocal terms of a fixed discourse, but remains open to the rich plurivocity of the word in the 
superessential light of being.223  
By closing off the horizon of superessential being, the logicization of being subjects thought and 
freedom to the determination of arbitrary limits. Ideology arises through the more or less 
coherent systematization of thought from this logicization of the beginning. As this 
systematization is inevitably destabilized, the critique attempts to release the ontological 
difference by driving the kenosis of being in concrete reality. Insofar as the critique fails to 
 
221 Ulrich, 356. 
222 Ulrich, 354. 
223 Ulrich, 342: An authentic critique of ideology will identify the biases that threaten to close the ontological 
difference, in order to reopen this difference through the philosophical act. This act is dialogical. It requires 
accompanying the other as a partner in dialogue, discerning which aspects of the discourse foster the openness of 
the ontological difference, and which threaten its closure. Rational inquiry requires lovingly accompanying the 
other toward the horizon of truth. To love another, one cannot merely impose upon the other a system one has 
derived from hypostasizing being. Ideology ends the discourse. One must endeavor to seek the truth together with 
the other. The Thou is both the concrete particular other and the inaccessible one; in this dialogue of love, one must 
remain open to the other and focused on the particular being. 

 
65 
retrieve the openness of the philosophical act to the superessential horizon, however, it falls 
once more into ideology. The logicization of being is only overcome in the discovery of the 
ontological difference of being as a gift of love, whereby being is not opposed to its kenosis, but 
rather being and nothing appear in their convertibility, because being is always already given 
away to beings. Precisely this is what contemplative prayer, as a unity of poverty and wealth, 
enables the one who prays to experience. Here, one need not respond as an impoverished addict 
opposite a miserly God, withholding being. For one has received everything, including oneself, 
as a gift of love. One finds oneself in an archetypal unity with God through the gift that 
traverses the death separation, enduring it for the redemption of the manipulation of the other. 
Prayer opens one to the light of superessential being for dialogue with the other in charity. 
Herein lies one of the differences between the critique of ideology that merely collapses back 
into the ideology it meant to critique, and that which succeeds in releasing the ontological 
difference to its full form: the critique that succeeds does so out of love for the other, coming to 
know the other in a way that helps the other receive herself more fully as the gift she is given to 
be.224  
 
224 Ulrich, 358: In addition to the process of theorizing, specializing, and formalizing, Ulrich critiques Geiger’s 
proposals of self-diagnosing and self-analyzing. These are all so many ways of attempting to critique ideology that 
are destined, by extending the logicization of being, merely to collapse back into ideology. Ulrich singles out a 
practice Geiger seems especially to recommend, namely, that of changing one’s social position. Ulrich argues that 
this practice illustrates how a technique, in the name of freedom, can deprive a person of that freedom by which one 
would alone be able to overcome ideology. “The ‘changing of social place’ cannot anticipate determinatively the 
center of the free disposal of the person if one does not want to take from it precisely thereby its poignancy and 
provocative force.” The changing of social position as an attempt of the critique of ideology remains ideological, 
because it would sacrifice “the fullness of being… to its poverty”… “anticipate in a determinative manner the 
center of the free self-disposal of the person…” negating its “force.” 

 
66 
Conclusion 
 
In a pluralistic age, the question of ideology becomes acute. Avoiding ideology is a condition 
for the possibility of the dialogue that fosters peace. Where we do not avoid ideology, we 
inevitably subject our dialogue partner to a system of our own making, which we then impose 
by force. It might seem that hospitality to the other’s difference requires a disposition of 
indifference toward one’s own values. We can be tempted to suppose that de-ideologizing our 
discourse means purifying it of its valuative elements. In fact, as we have seen, it is the loss of 
attention to the moment of bonicity that encouraged the hypostasization of being in the history 
of modern metaphysics. The temptation to sacrifice love for truth, to hold to the transcendental 
verum at the price of the bonum, and let the intellect usurp the role of the will, only fosters that 
pneumatic reason that produces ideological systems. The loss of attention to the good, to the 
necessary sense of being as a gift of love, keeps us from the freedom that only lies in the kenotic 
act of offering ourselves. The creature most hospitable to the other’s difference is the Virgin-
Mother, the finite one who “becomes the obedient space of being’s superessentiality, without 
this latter being imprisoned inside a finite nature.”225 Only the one who follows her in praying in 
the unity of wealth and poverty will be able to engage in dialogue out of love for the other. For 
only the love that lives from the freedom of the Überfluß, will be sufficiently free from the 
desire to possess, and the temptation to exploit, to accompany the other and creatively discover 
new forms of unity along “the little way.” Only the humility that confesses one’s own finitude 
vis-à-vis superessential being is ready to appreciate the other.  
All discourse is interpersonal and as such it requires love. Only the philosophical act that 
preserves the “ontological difference of love” is capable of seeking the good of one’s 
interlocutor:226 
The philosophical carrying out of the ontological difference of being as the fundamental form of 
human freedom releases, however, the partner in himself. He does not sacrifice the Thou to the 
“known truth” and is thereby compelled to affirm together with him the truth (encompassing them 
both) in the form of liberating love, from which a dialogue becomes possible. The truth cannot—
ideologically hypostasized—be engaged, as it were, by one of the two dialogue partners, only utilized 
by this one alone for himself. It is the light to which also the Thou is subjected and the space wherein 
I can for the first time adequately encounter the other. For the sake of actual dialogue, I am bound 
solely by the unconditional call to truth. To the extent that it’s a matter of the truth in the form of 
being as love, the freedom of the Thou, presupposed by the self, is precisely not sacrificed to the 
system or relativized to it, since, in that case, I would not have accepted my own finitude, but rather 
 
225 Ulrich, Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, 261. 
226 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 334. 
66

 
67 
would have sought refuge in the dimension of the being as gift that I denied. The assumption of the 
Thou is already the discharge of the finitization of being and a radical Yes to the absolute source.227 
The one who undertakes dialogue out of love for one’s dialogue partner implicitly recognizes 
one’s own finitude and opens himself to the absolute source beyond both parties: “the truth 
(encompassing them both) in the form of liberating love.”228 The one who genuinely undertakes 
such dialogue is thus already involved in a kind of kenotic love, and thus, of prayer. Yet, in 
dialogue, one constantly faces the temptation to depart once again from the hypostasized 
beginning of a fixed system. In this way, the attempt to deconstruct ideology falls once again, as 
we have seen, back into ideology. To persevere in the true critique of ideology, so necessary for 
dialogue, one must persevere in prayer, in openness to God, the giver of the gift of being. For to 
persevere in such openness requires that one overcome the fear of an untrustworthy Giver; it 
requires the trust that accepts being as a gift so that one does not try to mediate it by one’s own 
powers. It requires the willingness to give of oneself “for nothing,” because one must give 
oneself to that which one cannot control. For 
the true critique of ideology remains the partner of that which is not under our control [der 
Unverfügbare], that which is never completely transparent, that with which I therefore am never 
“finished.” Only by getting so involved with it, by not depotentiating my volition once more to the 
function of my reflection that gives birth to itself absolutely and thereby making the other into a 
moment within my consciousness (conscious of itself!)—only then am I able, out of the difference 
of reflection and love, to criticize it from the view of the ontological difference of the truth of being. 
Only so is the Thou not ideologically alienated; only thus is the critique of ideology authentic.229 
To attempt to neutralize theory by removing valuative elements and thereby sacrifice the will to 
the intellect, is ultimately a refusal of the love in which one’s freedom consists and which is 
necessary for dialogue to be anything more than the imposition of one more ideology upon 
one’s dialogue partner. One’s volitional response to being as a gift of love is necessary for one 
to offer a critique that arises out of one’s own freedom and which also respects the freedom of 
the other. Only so can one keep from subjecting the other to another ideology. 
To remain free from ideology, then, we must foster that knowledge which Paul commends to the 
Ephesians, namely, the knowledge “of the love of Christ, which surpasses knowledge” (Eph 
3:19). This is not the “absolute knowledge” that emerges in the history of modern metaphysics; 
it is not a science purified of valuative elements, a system produced by the logicization of being. 
It is a knowledge obtained not by marginalizing the transcendental of the good, but by attending 
to it: a knowledge obtained in obedience to the necessary meaning of being as a gift of love. 
 
227 Ulrich, 342. 
228 Ulrich, 342. 
229 Ulrich, 342–43. 

 
68 
This is a knowledge we gain by giving ourselves away in the prayer of gratitude for the gift of 
being: 
“Know the love of Christ that lies beyond all knowledge, so that you may be filled to the whole 
fullness of God” (Eph. 3:19). The love of Christ transcends all knowledge, which is never able to 
fence the gift of the Father into ‘absolute knowledge.’ But its beyond is supposed to be known in 
prayer as knowledge. Here we experience the failure of all knowledge that begins with us and at the 
same time we know that the breath of the love that breathes through us is not situated beyond the 
light of the truth, but rather Logos and Pneuma circumambulate as neighbors in inseparable 
perichoresis; they belong together: praying, you shall ‘know’ the love of Christ, without extending 
your knowledge into transcendence! You can only know in sacrifice, in giving-up the knowledge. Is 
this a sliding into the irrational, the mythical, the immediate, which unable to form any concept, balks 
at ratiocination? No, you shall know: not by assimilating what is known; not by configuring it in the 
reflective return in your essence to the spaces of your human comprehension—but rather on the 
grounds of the poverty, to which you attain especially through the cognition and knowledge of the 
love of Christ: so that you may be fulfilled! Prayerful knowing opens itself into the ever-greater 
fulfillment, remains knowingly on the way, makes what is known not into a dead has-been, but rather 
directs the future to the whole fullness of God! The wealth of that which is grasped does not create 
itself but rather by accepting that which is known into the space of the one knowing, the being-
fulfilled springs open, the hearing widens: ‘not as though I had already attained it.’ The fulfillment 
does not lie in the knowledge as such, but rather in the midst of the fulfilling initiative of God, who 
fulfills.230 
Ideology arises when we hypostasize being in an attempt to cling to its wealth. In prayer, we 
learn to adopt the mind of Christ (Phil 2:5) and receive from God the grace of a kenotic 
freedom. Set free by the love of God, we learn to live our wealth in the poverty of serving the 
other whom we accompany. The one who prays “remembers forward,”231 as Jonah had learned 
to do, and lets the future he seeks to create with his interlocutor arrive from “the whole fullness 
of God” (Eph. 3:19). Since the goal of such dialogue is met, not in the achievement of an 
absolute system, but in accompanying one another while preserving “the ontological difference 
of love.”232  
The forgetting of the bonum in the history of modern metaphysics has coincided with the loss of 
a philosophy of prayer, which Ulrich proposes anew.233 In the ongoing effort to foster a genuine, 
grateful remembering of the bonum, prayer and a prayerful philosophy have essential roles to 
play. Recent contributions to a prayerful philosophy have also been made by those 
 
230 Ulrich, Gebet, 88–89. The emphases in Ulrich’s quotation of scripture are his. 
231 Ulrich, 72. 
232 Ulrich, “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik,” 334. 
233 Hans Urs von Balthasar, Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory, Vol. 4: The Action (Ignatius Press, 1994), 
159; Cyril O’Regan, The Anatomy of Misremembering: Von Balthasar’s Response to Philosophical Modernity 
(Chestnut Ridge, NY: Crossroad Pub, 2014). “We can go beyond Heidegger’s formulations and assert that all the 
philosophy of the scope of human power and reason that is based on Descartes lacks the complement and correction 
of a philosophy of prayer. This fundamental act does not emerge as a specific topic again until we come to the 
thought of Blondel and Ulrich. Since this fundamental act is missing, power grows and distorts until it becomes a 
tyranny over the earth, exploiting it and heedlessly laying it waste” (Balthasar, Theo-Drama IV, 159). See O’Regan 
for an interpretation of the rationality proper to the Enlightenment as a forgetting, Hegel as mis-remembering that 
which has been forgotten, and Balthasar as attempting to foster a genuine remembering.  

 
69 
phenomenologists continuing along the theological path pioneered by Levinas and Ricoeur.234 
William Desmond continues to develop his original, and more metaphysical, “metaxological” 
thought.235 It is into conversation with such authors that scholarship is now beginning to bring 
Ulrich’s work.236 At once phenomenological and metaphysical, Ulrich’s work centers, as we 
have seen, upon being as a gift of love that is given “for nothing.”237 Ulrich’s work promises to 
contribute to the discourse attention to the primary phenomenon that ought to lie at the 
foundation of philosophical anthropology, namely, attention to the experience of being as a gift 
of love. Remembering the gratuitous love at the origin of being enables one to recognize 
 
234 Dominique Janicaud, ed., Phenomenology and the “Theological Turn”: The French Debate, 1st ed, Perspectives 
in Continental Philosophy, no. 15 (New York: Fordham University Press, 2000); Michel Henry, Words of Christ, 
Interventions (Grand Rapids, Mich: William B. Eerdmans Pub, 2012); Jean-Luc Marion, David Tracy, and Thomas 
A. Carlson, God without Being: Hors-Texte, 2nd edition, Religion and Postmodernism (Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 2012); Jean-Louis Chrétien and Anne Ashley Davenport, Spacious Joy: An Essay in 
Phenomenology and Literature (London ; New York: Rowman & Littlefield International, 2019); Jean-Yves 
Lacoste and Oliver O’Donovan, The Appearing of God, electronic resource (Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford 
University Press, 2018); Emmanuel Falque, Crossing the Rubicon: The Borderlands of Philosophy and Theology, 
1st edition, Perspectives in Continental Philosophy (New York: Fordham University Press, 2016). 
235 As John Caputo explains, “the metaxological can be thought of as a different way to relate the same and the 
different, in contrast to the Hegelian way of ‘dialectical’ mediation, which unites them in a higher unity. For the 
upshot of Hegelian mediation, he [Desmond] argues, is to close the circle between the same and the different and 
thereby to subordinate everything to the rule of a higher integration and sameness. The ‘between’ means to keep 
this circle open and in that way to preserve difference” (Caputo, “Forward,” The William Desmond Reader, vii). 
We may compare this with Prufer’s analysis of a non-contradictory otherness in footnote 100 above. Desmond’s 
metaxological thought thus seems to complement Ulrich’s call for a thinking in response to the gift of being as a 
unity of wealth and poverty. Both authors, in contradistinction to Hegel’s dialectics, offer an approach to otherness 
as non-contradictory. They both, therefore, allow thought to remain open to being as it arrives from a source which 
thought cannot control. A comparison and evaluation of the complementarity of Desmond and Ulrich’s approaches 
remains to be written. The analogical thinking Ulrich develops in Homo Abyssus seems to accord with Desmond’s 
“metaxological” thinking “in the between:” “And now the metaxological way? It lives between peril and crux. As a 
figuring of the primal ethos, it divines the nature of the togetherness, the absolved relativity, with heed to the 
difference, and without forgetting the transcendence of the divine and its reserves. We need a finessed, 
transdialectical logos of the metaxu. The community of God and the between concerns us, but as not exhausted by 
any dialectical self-mediation of the same, nor any whole claiming absoluteness by its immanent closure on itself” 
(William Desmond, God and the Between [Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2008]). For an account of his metaphysical 
approach, see: William Desmond, The Voiding of Being: The Doing and Undoing of Metaphysics in Modernity, 
Studies in Philosophy and the History of Philosophy, Volume 61 (Washington, D.C: The Catholic University of 
America Press, 2020); Caputo, John, “Forward,” in The William Desmond Reader, by William Desmond, ed. 
Christopher Ben Simpson (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2012). 
236 See, for example, Desmond’s own initial engagement with Ulrich, Stefan Oster’s endeavors to bring Ulrich into 
dialogue with Habermas on language and Derrida on the gift, and D.C. Schindler’s critique of Marion: Desmond, 
“Being as Image of Divine Love: Between Ferdinand Ulrich and G. W. F. Hegel”; Ferdinand Ulrich, Logo-Tokos: 
Der Mensch Und Das Wort (Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 2003), xxx–xlviii; Stefan Oster, Mit-Mensch-Sein: 
Phänomenologie Und Ontologie Der Gabe Bei Ferdinand Ulrich, Originalausg, Scientia & Religio, Bd. 2 
(Freiburg: Alber, 2004), 145–208; DC Schindler, “The Grace of Being: Ferdinand Ulrich and the Task of a Faithful 
Metaphysics,” in Christian Wisdom Meets Modernity, ed. Kenneth Oakes, Illuminating Modernity (London: 
Bloomsbury T & T Clark, 2016), 153–55. 
237 In an interview, Ulrich’s student Stefan Oster recalls, “I once asked him [Ulrich]: is there an early or a late 
Ulrich? And he said, ‘No; I have actually always written only about this experience: being is love ‘for nothing’ 
[Sein ist Liebe umsonst]” (Bischof Stefan Oster and Peter Seewald, Gott ohne Volk?: Die Kirche und die Krise des 
Glaubens (München: Droemer TB, 2016), 370). 

 
70 
temptations so as to reject them and live rather from the freedom of the gift. Ulrich’s thought 
promises to inform, if not so much a philosophical account of the process of discernment, as 
though it were one more technique to be learned, a discerning, prayerful philosophy that 
recognizes and responds to the gift that we have always already been given and which calls us 
onward. The implications of this grateful and hopeful thinking for such a philosophy of 
discernment thus remain to be developed for the fructification of the discourse. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
71 
Bibliography 
 
 
 
Aquinas, Thomas. Questiones Disputatae de Potentia. 
 
————. Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate. 
 
————. Summa Contra Gentiles. 
 
————. Summa Theologiae. 
 
Augustine, Saint. The Confessions: Saint Augustine of Hippo. Edited by David Vincent Meconi. 
Translated by Maria Boulding. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2012. 
 
Balthasar, Hans Urs von. A Theology of History. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1994. 
 
———. Epilogue. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2004 
 
———. Mysterium Paschale: The Mystery of Easter. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2000. 
 
———. My Work in Retrospect. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1993. 
 
———. Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory, Vol. 2: Dramatis Personae: Man in God. 
Translated by Graham Harrison. Ignatius Press, 1990. 
 
———. Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory, Vol. 4: The Action. Ignatius Press, 1994. 
 
———. Theo-Logic, Vol. 2: Truth of God. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2004. 
 
———. Truth is Symphonic. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1987. 
 
Betz, John. "The Analogia Entis in Erich Przywara and Ferdinand Ulrich: Toward a More 
Catholic Metaphysics,” Communio: International Catholic Review 46, no. 1 (Spring 
2019): 109–33. 
 
Bieler, Martin. “Analogia Entis as an Expression of Love According to Ferdinand Ulrich.” In 
The Analogy of Being: Invention of the Antichrist or the Wisdom of God?, edited by 
Thomas Joseph White. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2011. 
 
———. “Introduction.” In Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being, translated by 
DC Schindler, xv–lv. Washington, DC: Humanum Academic Press, 2018 
 
———. “Ferdinand Ulrich’s ‘Metaphysics as Reenactment.” Communio: International Catholic 
Review. 46, 1 (Spring 2019), 41–72. 
 
71

 
72 
Burrell, David B., and Mary Budde Ragan. Aquinas: God and Action. Third edition. Eugene, 
OR: Wipf & Stock, 2016. 
 
Caputo, John. “Forward.” In The William Desmond Reader, by William Desmond, edited by 
Christopher Ben Simpson. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2012. 
 
Coleman, Rachel M. “Thinking the ‘Nothing’ of Being: Ferdinand Ulrich on Transnihilation.” 
Communio: International Catholic Review XLVI, no. 1 (Spring 2019): 182–98. 
 
Chrétien, Jean-Louis, and Anne Ashley Davenport. Spacious Joy: An Essay in Phenomenology 
and Literature. London ; New York: Rowman & Littlefield International, 2019. 
 
Desmond, William. “Being as Image of Divine Love: Between Ferdinand Ulrich and G. W. F. 
Hegel.” Communio: International Catholic Review 46 (Spring 2019): 86–108. 
 
———. God and the Between. Illuminations, Theory and Religion. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Pub, 2008. 
 
———. The Voiding of Being: The Doing and Undoing of Metaphysics in Modernity. Studies in 
Philosophy and the History of Philosophy, Volume 61. Washington, D.C: The Catholic 
University of America Press, 2020. 
 
Eckhart, Edmund Colledge, Bernard McGinn, and Northrop Frye. Meister Eckhart: The 
Essential Sermons, Commentaries, Treatises, and Defense. Classics of Western 
Spirituality 28. New York ; Toronto: Paulist Press, 1981. 
 
Eckhart, and Josef Quint. Deutsche Predigten Und Traktate. München: C. Hanser, 1978. 
 
Falque, Emmanuel. Crossing the Rubicon: The Borderlands of Philosophy and Theology. 1st 
edition. Perspectives in Continental Philosophy. New York: Fordham University Press, 
2016. 
 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Fredrich. The Science of Logic. Translated by George di Giovanni. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
 
Heidegger, Martin. Identity and Difference. Translated by Joan Stambaugh. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2002. 
 
———. What Is Called Thinking? Translated by Fred Wieck and J. Glenn Gray. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1968. 
 
Henry, Michel. Words of Christ. Interventions. Grand Rapids, Mich: William B. Eerdmans Pub, 
2012. 
 
Janicaud, Dominique, ed. Phenomenology and the “Theological Turn”: The French Debate. 1st 
ed. Perspectives in Continental Philosophy, no. 15. New York: Fordham University 
Press, 2000. 
 

 
73 
Kerr, Fergus. “Balthasar and metaphysics” in The Cambridge Companion to Hans Urs von 
Balthasar. Edited by Edward T. Oakes and David Moss. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 224–240. 
 
Kierkegaard, Søren, Howard V. Hong, and Edna H. Hong. The Sickness unto Death: A Christian 
Psychological Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening. Kierkegaard’s Writings 19. 
Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1980. 
 
Kirn, Arthur. An Interpretation of Thomistic Freedom according to Gustav Siewerth. Doctoral 
Thesis. Toronto: University of Toronto, 1967. 
 
La Tour, Marine de. Gabe Im Anfang: Grundzüge Des Metaphysischen Denkens von Ferdinand 
Ulrich. 1. Aufl. 2016. Münchener Philosophische Studien, neue Folge, Band 32. 
Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer, 2016. 
 
Lacoste, Jean-Yves, and Oliver O’Donovan. The Appearing of God. Electronic resource. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 2018. 
http://myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/login?url=https://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/
10.1093/oso/9780198827146.001.0001/oso-9780198827146. 
 
Lochbrunner, Manfred. Hans Urs von Balthasar und seine Theologenkollegen: Sechs 
Beziehungsgeschichten. Würzburg: Echter Verlag, 2009.  
 
———. Hans Urs von Balthasar und seine Philosophenfreunde: fünf Doppelporträts. 
Würzburg: Echter Verlag, 2005. 
 
Loyola, Ignatius of. Personal Writings. Edited by Joseph A. Munitiz and Philip Endean. Kindle 
Edition. New York: Penguin Classics, 1997. 
 
Marx, Karl. Early Writings. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. 
 
Marion, Jean-Luc, David Tracy, and Thomas A. Carlson. God without Being: Hors-Texte. 2nd 
edition. Religion and Postmodernism. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
 
O’Regan, Cyril. The Anatomy of Misremembering: Von Balthasar’s Response to Philosophical 
Modernity. Chestnut Ridge, NY: Crossroad Pub, 2014. 
 
Oster, Bischof Stefan, and Peter Seewald. Gott ohne Volk?: Die Kirche und die Krise des 
Glaubens. München: Droemer TB, 2016. 
 
Oster, Stefan. Mit-Mensch-Sein: Phänomenologie Und Ontologie Der Gabe Bei Ferdinand 
Ulrich. Originalausg. Scientia & Religio, Bd. 2. Freiburg: Alber, 2004. 
 
———.“Thinking Love at the Heart of Things. The Metaphysics of Being as Love in the Work 
of Ferdinand Ulrich.” Translated by Adrian Walker. Communio: International Catholic 
Review 37, no. 4 (Winter 2010): 660–700. 
 
———. “Freely to Give: Ferdinand Ulrich as Teacher and Spiritual Father.” Communio: 
International Catholic Review. 46, 1 (Spring 2019): 11–26. 

 
74 
 
Pieper, Josef. Faith, Hope, Love. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1997. 
 
Prufer, Thomas. Recapitulations. CUA Press, 2018. 
 
Schindler, D. C. A Companion to Ferdinand Ulrich’s Homo Abyssus. Washington, DC: 
Humanum Academic Press, 2019. 
 
———. “Homo viator, puer in patria: On Ferdinand Ulrich’s Philosophical Anthropology of 
Childhood,” in Communio: International Catholic Review 45, 3 (Fall-Winter 2018): 
530–52. 
 
———. The Catholicity of Reason. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2013. 
 
———. “The Grace of Being: Ferdinand Ulrich and the Task of a Faithful Metaphysics.” In 
Christian Wisdom Meets Modernity, edited by Kenneth Oakes, 149–63. Illuminating 
Modernity. London: Bloomsbury T & T Clark, 2016. 
 
———. “The Word as the Center of Man’s Onto-Dramatic Task.” Communio: International 
Catholic Review. 46, 1 (Spring 2019): 73–85. 
 
Siewerth, Gustav. „Gedanken zur Formalstruktur der Metaphysik bei Przywara“ in Gesammelte 
Werke: Band II. Konstanz: Trialogo Verlag, 2003. 240–46.  
 
———. Der Thomismus Als Identitätssystem. Frankfurt: Schulte-Bulmke, 1961. 
 
Speyr, Adrienne von. The World of Prayer. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1985. 
 
Tour, Marine de la. “The Light of the Gift in Homo Abyssus.” Communio 46, no. 1 (Spring 
2019): 27–40. 
 
Ulrich, Ferdinand. “A Dangerous Reflection on the Fundamental Act of the Creature.” 
Translated by Adrian Walker. Communio: International Catholic Review 23, no. 1 
(Spring 1996): 36–46. 
 
———. Atheismus als Menschwerdung. Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 1975. 
 
———. “Der Philosophische Akt Als Ideologiekritik.” Atti Del XXI Convegnó Del Centro Di 
Studi Filosofici Tra Professori Universitari, Gallarate, 1966: Ideologia e Filosofia 21 
(1967): 328–358. 
 
———. Gabe und Vergebung: Ein Beitrag zur biblischen Ontologie. Einsiedeln: Johannes 
Verlag, 2015. 
 
———. Gebet als geschöpflicher Grundakt. Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 1973. 
 
———. Homo Abyssus: The Drama of the Question of Being. Translated by DC Schindler. 
Washington, DC: Humanum Academic Press, 2018. 
 

 
75 
———. Leben in Der Einheit Von Leben Und Tod. Freiburg: Johannes Verlag, 1999. 
 
———. Logo-Tokos: Der Mensch Und Das Wort. Einsiedeln: Johannes Verlag, 2003. 
 
———. „Das Problem einer ‚Metaphysik in der Wiederholung‘“ in Salzburger Jahrbuch für 
Philosophie. V/VI. München, Salzburg: Verlag Anton Pustet, 1961. 
 
Versendaal, Erik van. “Plentitudo Fontalis: Love’s Groundless Yes and the Grateful Originality 
of Nature.” Communio: International Catholic Review XLVI, no. 1 (Spring 2019): 134–
81. 
 
Wierciński, Andrzej. Inspired Metaphysics? Gustav Siewerth’s Hermeneutic Reading of the 
Onto-Theological Tradition. Hermeneutic Series = Série Herméneutique, v. 2. Toronto: 
Hermeneutic Press, 2003 
 
———. and Gustav Siewerth. Philosophizing with Gustav Siewerth: A New German Edition 
with Facing Translation of Das Sein Als Gleichnis Gottes / Being as Likeness of God ; 
and a Study, “From Metaphor and Indication to Icon : The Centrality of the Notion of 
Verbum in Hans-Georg Gadamer, Bernard Lonergan, and Gustav Siewerth.” 
Konstanz: Verlag Gustav Siewerth Gesellschaft, 2005.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

