
The Social Value of Drug Addicts


Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page
  The
SOCIAL VALUE
 
 
 
of
DRUG ADDICTS
	
	
uses of the useless
Walnut Creek 
CAlifornia

Left Coast Press, Inc.
1630 North Main Street, #400
Walnut Creek, CA 94596
www.LCoastPress.com
Copyright © 2014 by Left Coast Press, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher.
ISBN 978-1-61132-117-3 hardback
ISBN 978-1-61132-118-0 paperback
ISBN 978-1-61132-119-7 institutional eBook
ISBN 978-1-61132-751-9 consumer eBook
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Singer, Merrill.
 
The social value of drug addicts : uses of the useless / Merrill Singer, J Bryan Page.
 
 
pages cm
 
Summary: “Drug users are typically portrayed as worthless slackers, burdens on society, 
and just plain useless—culturally, morally, and economically. By contrast, this book argues 
that the social construction of some people as useless is in fact extremely useful to other 
people. Leading medical anthropologists Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page analyze media 
representations, drug policy, and underlying social structures to show what industries and so-
cial sectors benefit from the criminalization, demonization, and even popular glamorization 
of addicts. Synthesizing a broad range of key literature and advancing innovative arguments 
about the social construction of drug users and their role in contemporary society, this book 
is an important contribution to public health, medical anthropology, popular culture, and 
related fields”—Provided by publisher.
 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 
ISBN 978-1-61132-117-3 (hardback)
 
ISBN 978-1-61132-118-0 (paperback)
 
ISBN 978-1-61132-119-7 (institutional ebook)
 
ISBN 978-1-61132-751-9 (consumer eBook)
 
1.  Drug addicts. 
2.  Social values. 
3.  Drug abuse—Social aspects. 
I.  Page, 
J. Bryan, 1947– 
 II.  Title.
 
HV5801.S48 2013
 
305.9ˇ084—dc23
2013029130
Printed in the United States of America
∞ ™ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48–1992.
Cover design by Martin Hoyem
Cover image: World Health Organization photo by C. Blackwell. Images from the History 
of Medicine, National Library of Medicine, PP044736 WHO box 3, Record 101437129.

Contents
Introduction 
7
Chapter One
	Drugs, Race, and Gender in the Social Construction of Drug 
Consumers: Recognizing the Origins of Othering 
25
Chapter Two
	Drug Users through the Ages: When Did We Decide 
Addicts Were a Separate Category? 
53
Chapter Three
Representations of Addicts and the Construction of Prohibitions 
71
Chapter FOUR
Imagine That: Drug Users and Literature 
88
Chapter FIVE
	Picture This: Pictorial Construction of Drug 
Users in the World of Film 
121
Chapter Six
The Legal Construction of Drug Users: Policy, the Courts, Incarcerating 
Institutions, Police Practice, and the War on Drugs 
153
Chapter Seven
Drug Users in Social Science: The Others We’ve Made 
181
Conclusion
From the Making and Using of the Useless to Social Integration 
205
References 
219
Index 
243
About the Authors 
247


7 
Introduction
Casual drug users should be taken out and shot.
Daryl Gates, former police chief, LAPD,
(quoted in Ostrow: 1990)
By World War I the American addict was identified as a social men-
ace and equated with the IWWs [Industrial Workers of the World], 
Bosheviks, anarchists, and other fear subgroups
David Musto, psychiatrist and drug historian, 1987
The fact that these really are the excess people in America, we—our 
economy doesn’t need them. . . . We pretend that we’re actually in-
cluding them in the American ideal, but we’re not. And they’re not 
foolish. They get it.
David Simon, producer of The Wire, 2008
T 
his book explores a prevailing and consequential contradiction of 
modernity. In diverse and interconnected arenas, from everyday 
popular discourse, to multiple sectors of the mass media and culture 
industries, to government pronouncements and reports, and to legislative 
exchange and court rulings, drug users routinely are portrayed as worthless 
slackers, evil doers, and lurking threats to the quality of life if not to the very 
survival of civil society—in short, as outcast Social Others with no positive 
value or useful contribution to society, the human rubbish of contemporary 
social life (Friedman 1998). As Taylor (2008:382) stresses
[T]he news media and criminal justice policy seemingly mirror each other’s 
beliefs. Indeed the reinforcement and belief in stereotypes and “outsiders” 
seems to be part of what appears to be a mutually beneficial partnership. 
“Drug stories (embellished with commonplace mythology) help sell pa-
pers.” . . . Especially drug stories which maintain and reinforce dominant 
and stereotypical images of drugs, drug users and drug-related crime.
Drug users are, it would seem, as David Simon brands them, excess 
people in America, a group of individuals that comprise a hollow surplus in 
our economy and a despised burden on society. But are drug users as socially 
worthless as they are portrayed?
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 7–24. © 
2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

8 
❋ 
introduction
Unpacking dominant ideologies about drug users in contemporary 
society, assessing the actual social roles of drug users, and questioning the 
social utility of depicting drug users as valueless (in both senses, as having 
no social worth and as lacking values) are the goals of this book. This volume 
seeks to address four interrelated questions, the first three of which are: (1) 
What are the reigning images of drug users in the modern world across as-
sorted social domains and in the popular imaginary? (2) Are these portraits 
objective representations of drug users as they live their day-to-day lives, 
seemingly physically in but not culturally a part of society? and (3) How 
do we account for discrepancies between image and actual, between what 
anthropologists traditionally called the ideal (how we think social things 
should be) and the real (how social things actually are). Ultimately, answer-
ing these questions raises a fourth unifying query: What are the uses of the 
useless? Put differently, why (and to whom) is it useful to have some people 
defined as socially devoid of value? Although the answers to the first three 
of these questions are presented in this and the chapters that follow, the last 
question is addressed in the conclusion.
Textual Construction of Outsiders
Exemplary of the outcast motif are government-funded renderings of drug 
users and their adverse impact on the nation. In a speech given at the Heri-
tage Foundation (Hutchinson 2002), the director of the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) stated
Drug abusers become slaves to their habits. They are no longer able to 
contribute to the community. They do not have healthy relationships 
with their families. They are no longer able to use their full potential 
to create ideas or to energetically contribute to society, which is the 
genius of democracy. They are weakened by the mind-numbing effects 
of drugs. The entire soul of our society is weakened and our democracy 
is diminished by drug use.
Added Thomas Harrington (2011), while Assistant Administrator and Chief 
of Operations of the DEA, “[d]rug trafficking and abuse exact a significant toll 
on the American public. More than 38,000 Americans—or approximately 12 
times the number of people killed by terrorists on September 11, 2001—died 
in 2007 as a direct result of the use of illicit drugs.” Further, the DEA stresses, 
in addition to the many health and social problems experienced by drug users 
themselves, those who suffer at their hands include their

introduction 
❋ 
9 
families, the medical system, the environment. Innocent kids, caught 
in the crossfire. Drivers killed or injured by those under the influence. 
Babies found at meth labs, their toys covered with chemicals. Victims 
of terrorists, whose acts are financed with drug profits. . . . Direct costs 
include those for drug treatment, health care, costs of goods and ser-
vices lost to crime, law enforcement, incarceration, and the judicial 
system fees. Indirect costs are those due to the loss of productivity 
from death, human suffering, drug abuse-related illnesses, victims of 
crime (Benavidez 2013:20)
In fact, if alcohol and tobacco were included as drugs in the calculation 
cited above, rather than just those drugs that have come to be banned in the 
United States, the actual figure in this emotionally charged statement would 
be 184 times greater than the number of those who died on September 11 
(Mokdad et al. 2004) and the list of “other victims” would be even longer (e.g., 
cancer patients, those who suffer from diseases due to exposure to second-
hand smoke, victims of fires sparked by cigarettes). As this carefully wrought 
distinction suggests, a critical aspect of constructing drug users as Others 
involves labeling; in this highly political activity some users of psychotropic 
drugs are included and denigrated as dangerous outsiders while others are 
excluded and protected from such representation (Becker 1963).
Othering processes are embedded in and propelled by language. As Haig 
Bosmajian notes in his book The Language of Oppression (1983:6), “While 
names, words and language can be and are used to inspire us, to motivate us 
to humane acts, to liberate us, they can also be used to dehumanize human 
beings and to ‘justify’ their suppression and even their extermination.” Thus, 
with reference to the demonization of Jews, he notes that the Nazis’ “persistent 
portrayal of the Jews as ‘vermin,’ ‘bacilli,’ ‘parasites,’ and ‘disease’ contrib-
uted to the ‘Final Solution’” (Bosmajian 1983:8). The words and metaphors 
used to create distinction were referred to by Bosmajian as the “language 
of oppression.” This is the language that characterizes much of the popular 
discourse on drug users.
Although written over 50 years ago, Howard Becker’s (1953, 1955) 
early studies of marihuana use and his larger examination of marihuana 
users and musicians, entitled Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance 
(Becker1963), remain highly relevant to efforts to understand linguistic 
processes of social labeling. According to Becker, deviance is not a quality 
of individuals, it is a product of social decisions. Deviance is not, in other 
words, an activity engaged in by terrible individuals but rather the outcome 

10 
❋ 
introduction
of someone with the power to do so publicly labeling someone’s else’s behav-
ior as bad and acting on this accusation (including trying to convince those 
who are labeled that they are to blame for the punishment they receive). In 
the case of marihuana users, Becker described how during the 1930s the 
Federal Bureau of Narcotics flooded the mass media with alarming stories 
of marihuana-crazed Mexican immigrants, marihuana-induced rape and 
prostitution, and unsuspecting youth driven by marihuana use to a life of 
delinquency. Repeated media depictions of the social threat presented by 
marihuana users facilitated the passage of anti-marihuana laws (discussed 
in Chapter 6) while fixing in the popular imagination an image of drug con-
sumers that had little to do with actual drug-related behavior and a lot to do 
with reinforcing social inequalities and controls.
A similar argument is made by Craig Reinarman and Harry Levine 
(1997) in their documentation of the series of “drug scares” that have spread 
in inundating social waves across the United States dating back to the 
temperance movement and its depictions of “demon alcohol.” Such scares, 
they argue, characterized by “extraordinary antidrug frenzy,” are driven by 
outrageous claims and “lurid stories about a new ‘epidemic’; or ‘plague’ of 
drug use” (Reinarman and Levine 1997:1). Often these social upheavals 
occur independent of actual increases in drug use or evidence of mounting 
drug-related health and social problems.
Another, classic article, Alfred Lindesmith’s (1940) “Dope Fiend My-
thology,” early on pointed out the existence of a body of stereotyped misin-
formation about drug addicts that was promoted by sensational articles and 
newspaper accounts. Found in these media depictions were routine accounts 
of the ‘dope-crazed killer’ and the ‘dope-fiend rapist.’ Notes Lindesmith 
(1940:199):
The fact that the monstrous persons depicted exist mainly as figments 
of the imagination does not alter the fact that this mythology plays 
an important role in determining the way in which drug addicts are 
handled. Among serious students of the problem and among others 
who have some actual first hand contact with drug users, as for example 
prison officials, it has always been recognized that the American public 
is singularly misinformed on this subject. Nevertheless, the organiza-
tion of the machinery of justice that deals with this problem is more 
directly based upon the superstitions of the man on the street than 
it is upon anything that has been done in the name of impartial and 
objective analysis.

introduction 
❋ 
11 
In light of this analysis, Lindesmith (1940:208) came to believe that 
“treatment of addicts in the United States today is on no higher plane than 
the persecution of witches of other ages, and like the latter it is to be hoped 
that it will soon become merely another dark chapter of history.”
A newspaper editorial written 70 years after Lindesmith’s strident call 
for change suggests there has been little improvement in the way drug users 
are portrayed. Entitled “Drug Users Share the Blame in Officer’s Death,” 
it ran on January 5, 2009 in the Dallas Morning News (2009). In the view 
of the newspaper’s editors, in light of the shooting death of police officer 
Cpl. Norman Smith during a drug raid in Dallas the prior day, everyone 
who uses illicit drugs, even occasional users, “have blood on [their] hands.” 
When police officers are killed trying to control the flow of drugs, asserts 
the editorial, it is those who buy drugs that have put police in harm’s way. 
Issues of compulsivity of addiction, the nature of policing practices, and the 
social enactment of policies that produce such raids are not discussed in the 
editorial, as the primary goal is to assign blame for the death of a policeman 
on all drug users everywhere and to make sure it is known that the newspaper 
“stands” with the family of the fallen officer.
In parallel fashion, in accounting for escalating drug-related violence in 
Mexico, Patrick Osio (2008) of New America Media, firmly asserts that it is 
time to “take the gloves off and lay the responsibility for the bloodbath taking 
place on a daily basis in Mexico where it belongs—U.S. drug users.” Those 
liable for the fact that “Mexican-style mafiosos are killing each other along 
with Mexican police officers, judges, prosecutors, journalists and innocent 
bystanders—be they adults or children” (Osio 2008) are those in the United 
States who buy small quantities of Mexican drugs on local street corners in 
L.A. or Chicago. Again, the fact that the National Institute on Drug Abuse 
defines drug addiction in medical terms and not as personal moral failing, 
or that illicit drug corporations and mainstream legal corporations are often 
extensively intertwined (e.g., bank laundering of drug money), or that it is 
unlikely that illicit drugs would flow as readily to American cities without 
police corruption are not addressed by Osio.
Imaging and the Imaginary
Cultural meanings and messages are not conveyed by words alone. Images are 
equally if not more influential in fixing dominant understandings. As Ross 
(2011a:5) indicates, “the power and utility of images to inscribe concepts 
into the minds of readers and viewers” rests in their direct communication 

12 
❋ 
introduction
without the ambiguities of words. Consider the cultural blackening of poverty 
in the United States. Even without the urgency of a sudden catastrophe like 
Hurricane Katrina or the sober shadow of an immediate calamity in the hotly 
contested politics of everyday life, there is a tendency in the United States 
to blur negative images resulting in the poor being presented pictorially as 
African American or another socially devalued ethnic group, and ethnic mi-
norities, in turn, being visually portrayed as drug-using threats to the white 
middle class. The process through which this image construction takes place 
is seen, for example, in Steven Gregory’s 1996 ethnographic study of Lefrak 
City, a predominantly African American apartment complex in Queens 
County, New York. Gregory (1996:35) found that, despite available data that 
contradicts such portrayals, in nearby primarily white neighborhoods Lefrak 
City is imagined and visualized as “a site of danger, decay, and dirt-images 
linked symbolically with pollution and disorder. . . .” These constructions, in 
turn, Gregory (1996:24) observes, are based on fixed images of the apartment 
complex as a center of “black crime, poverty, and drugs—a racialized threat 
to the area’s quality-of-life and a [necessary] focus of law enforcement and 
neighborhood ‘stabilization’ strategies.”
The theory of hegemony developed by Antonio Gramsci (1971) is par-
ticularly relevant to assessing the role of images in the ingraining of cultural 
stereotypes in the media and other dominant social institutions. Gramsci en-
gaged the question of why, given their exploitation, were the working classes 
of Europe prior to World War II not more revolutionary in their orientation 
and even open to the anti-working class ideas of fascism? The reason, Gramsci 
argued, was because dominance is not maintained through outright physical 
force but through mechanisms that persuade subordinate classes to accept 
the moral, political and cultural values of the dominant group. These class-
based values form part of a cultural universe in which all classes are social-
ized and experience the world. As Gramsci stressed, television, the movies, 
and other everyday sources of popular images function as critical engines in 
the ongoing reproduction of hegemony. Such images, linking minorities or 
the poor with violence, sexuality, drug use, or other threatening behaviors, 
are part and parcel of the process through which people assimilate attitudes 
about drug users. Based on his experience working at the BBC, Tony Freeth 
(1985:26-27), producer and director of the Campaign Against Racism in 
the Media, notes
It all takes place in an atmosphere of smiling, middle-class gentility, an 
air of righteous indignation if confronted with charges of racism. No 

introduction 
❋ 
13 
one in TV shouts racist abuse at black people. . . . No one in TV physi-
cally assaults black people, they simply feed us on a diet of “Blacks are 
the problem.”
As a result of the ingrained and representational nature of hegemonic 
messages there has been a failure to recognize that the media serves purposes 
beyond entertainment or narrow educational goals in terms of particular 
broad and naturalized understandings of the world. Central to this under-
standing is the routine acceptance of white privilege. According to Lipsitz 
(1995:369), “As the unmarked category against which difference is con-
structed, whiteness never has to speak its name, never has to acknowledge its 
role as an organizing principle in social and cultural relations.” Moreover, of 
equal importance in the hegemonic messages of the media are affirmations 
of the intellectual and moral superiority of the elite sectors of society and 
the utter intellectual, moral, economic, and social depravity of drug users.
One of the mechanisms through which popular thinking about drug 
users is periodically reinforced is through the media generation of “moral 
panics” (Cohen 1995). These commonly entail the media discovery of a new 
drug or drug form, exaggerated and distorted portrayals of the drugs harm-
ful effects, and growing emphasis on the threat to society presented by the 
new drug’s users. In this way, drugs are invested with the symbolic power to 
instigate popular moral indignation while overtly or covertly indicating the 
need for greater social control to protect society from the emergent danger. 
As Mcdermott (1992) observes,
[A] media-driven moral panic emerges from a systematic world view 
based upon an imaginary consensus that governs all reporting. This 
portrays the world as bifurcated into certain binary oppositions, e.g., 
Normal/Deviant, Sick/Wicked, Corrupt/Innocent.
Young (1973) adds that the portrayal of drug users by the media is so 
consistently misinformed, sensationalized, and inaccurate that it would 
seem that journalists lack access to the subjects of their accounts, which, as 
anthropologists who have long studied street drug users, we know is certainly 
not the case. Rather, as Mcdermott (1992) concludes, “the systematic nature 
of this type of coverage implies that the origins of this portrayal has its place 
in the social structure,” an argument that is central to this volume.
The sources of the depictions of drug users that feed the popular imagi-
nation are varied. Carl Hart, a neuroscientist at Columbia University, has 

14 
❋ 
introduction
investigated the behavioral and neuropharmacological effects of psychotropic 
drugs in the laboratory by making available crack cocaine and methamphet-
amine to active users and testing for factors that mediate drug self-administra-
tion behavior. To Hart’s surprise, documented in his personal account, High 
Price: A Neuroscientist’s Journey of Self-Discovery That Challenges Everything 
You Know About Drugs and Society (Hart 2013), his research findings did not 
match the expectations he had about drug users based on his exposure to 
them through the diverse sectors of the media. This understanding of crack 
and meth users, Hart (2013:2–3) notes, included the belief that:
No matter what, they’d do anything to get to take as much drugs as 
often as possible. I thought of them in the disparaging ways I’d seen 
them depicted in films like New Jack City and Jungle Fever and in 
songs like Public Enemy’s “Night of the Living Baseheads.” . . . Back 
then I believed that drug users could never make rational choices, 
especially about their drug use, because their brains had been altered 
or damaged by drugs.
Yet Hart found his research participants did make rational decisions 
and, further, did not live up to any of the established and widely broadcast 
popular understandings about hardcore drug users.
Over and over, these drug users continued to defy conventional expec-
tations. Not one of them crawled on the floor, picking up random white 
particles and trying to smoke them. Not one was ranting or raving. No 
one was begging for more, either—and absolutely none of the cocaine 
users I studied ever became violent. I was getting similar results with 
methamphetamine users. They, too, defied stereotypes (Hart 2013:3).
Experiences like these led Hart to consider alternative explanations of 
the behaviors often assigned to drug abusers, an examination that brought 
him to the conclusion that the effects of structural violence, including pov-
erty, discrimination, and social marginalization, have been misrepresented 
as the effects of drug use.
As we show in this volume, beyond (or usually intertwined) with de-
scriptive and categorizing words are socially useful pictorial representations 
of drug users, both those that are channeled to the public (as well as policy 
makers and the workforces of social-control institutions) via the media, in-

introduction 
❋ 
15 
cluding still photographs (e.g., in the print and electronic news media) and 
moving pictures (e.g., TV news, television and movie dramas, video, and 
documentaries), and those that become established in people’s minds and 
memories, are consequential cultural products. In her analysis of wedding 
photographs in Taiwan, for example, Adrian (2003:19) refers to pictures as 
“circulating visual texts” that are “rich with cultural meanings and textured 
by social relationships.” This is no less true with regard to pictures and visual 
portrayals of drug users. Routinely, images of drug users carry a dual mes-
sage of menace and mystery. They are depicted as being at once dangerous to 
others and to themselves. Not only do family and friends as well as strangers 
suffer at their hands, their self-inflicted emotional and physical wounds are 
portrayed as especially deep and damaging. Such imagery affirms “the power 
of pictures” to influence lives. (Elliot 2011).
Generally, media depictions of drug users, comprising “a shorthand to 
telegraph blunt, . . . stereotypical messages,” constitute “images that injure” 
(Ross 2011a:5). Despite this harm, experienced daily by drug users in their 
interactions with other sectors of society, the pictorial manufacture of drug 
user stereotypes continues because it is useful. As Ross (2011b:1) stresses, 
despite dramatic changes in the composition of media venues in recent 
years, the media remains “a vital cog in the capitalist machine in the United 
States and around the world,” and as such it generally tends “to reproduce, 
redistribute, and magnify the powerful messages and images from the very 
few who control the purse strings of the major media conglomerates.”
As Hickman (2009) has argued, there has been a relentless process of 
envisioning drug users and addiction over the last 120 years. As a result of 
such images in the media and elsewhere, “Everyone knows what a junkie 
is supposed to look like: hollow cheeks, panda eyes, haunted expression, 
wasted, decadent, desperate” (Hickman 2009:119). Such images showed 
up boldly, for example, in advertisements and glossy fashion magazines 
during the 1990s in a style that came to be known as Heroin-Chic (Ehrman 
1995, Halnon 2009). But this was but one moment in a much longer cultural 
concern with “our overwhelming desire to look” at drug users in the media, 
in art, in film, in social science texts, and elsewhere (Hickman 2009:136). 
As we gaze “with fascination, revulsion or romantic longing at pictures of 
narcotics addicts trapped in their own downward spiral, we ultimately con-
front our own obsessions and the need to feed them with an endless supply 
of satisfactory visual stimuli (Hickman 2009:136). This too is one of the 
multiple uses of the useless.

16 
❋ 
introduction
Othering and Stigmatization
The textual and visual social construction of drug users, involving “technolo-
gies of exclusion” (Anselmi and Gouliamos 1998) in various representation 
forms, constructs them not only as different but as useless, and all that that 
understanding of them implies in terms of the ways they are treated in society, 
as well as their own internalized self-images, rests on processes of distinc-
tion and ranking. Distinction is a cultural practice that divides things in the 
world on the basis of socially meaningful criteria and differentially values 
some over others based on alleged distinctive capacities. When applied to 
people, processes of distinction have been referred to as Othering (Riggins 
1997), which entails a two-step progression involving, first, the binary act 
of inclusion (seeing one’s own perceived social group as “us”) and exclusion 
(seeing other identified groups as “them”), and second, the ethnocentric 
affirmation of one’s own group as normal through the denigration of other 
groups as abnormal. As Labute (2004:71–72) stresses:
People are not comfortable with difference. . . . The thing [people 
seen as different] represent that’s so scary is what we could be, how 
vulnerable we all are.. ..We’re all just one step away from what being 
what frightens us. What we despise. So . . . we despise it when we see 
it in anybody else.
Othering, in short, entails the “assertion of difference as deficit” (Schwalbe 
et al. 2002:423).
As a core organizing practice in the creation and maintenance of social 
inequality, a dominant feature of modern society, Othering is comprised of 
a suite of behavioral practices by in-groups, including stereotypic thinking, 
stigmatizing marking and bounding, social distancing, dehumanization, 
justification of oppressive dominant practices, and (possibly) commodifi-
cation of outgroups (Lister 2004). Each of these will be discussed in turn.
Stereotypic thinking involves the assumption that all members of a 
group are more or less the same; they all share a set of inherent traits that 
are alternatively valued (i.e., our traits) or devalued (i.e., their traits). As Lee 
(1989:10) emphasizes, stereotypic thinking tends to be “unchanging, rigid, 
overly categorical, undifferentiated, . . . overly simplistic, and inaccurate 
because variation among individual instances is not taken into account,” 
among other reasons. In the case of drug users in modern society, individual 

introduction 
❋ 
17 
personality and behavioral differences are erased and drug use (or addiction) 
and its presumed uniform effects are treated as the dominant characteristics 
of all members of this identified and devalued group (Schur 1971).
Marking and bounding are processes of identifying distinctive badges 
of group membership (e.g., styles of dress, ways of talking, types of behavior, 
occupation of particular social spaces) for self and Others and the erection 
of largely impassable social barriers between groups (Fine 1994, Weis 1995). 
Marking and bounding commonly are expressions of stigmatization, which 
generally is understood in terms of Goffman’s (1963:5) seminal discussion 
of this phenomenon as involving the social construction of “an undesired 
differentness” that engulfs the whole person and results in their discredit-
ing and disempowerment relative to non-stigmatized individuals. Notable 
social markers of contemporary drug users include various psychiatric 
labels, such as impulsivity or addictive personality (e.g., Verdejo-Garcia, 
Lawrence and Clark 2008), particular forms of public appearance (e.g., 
inexpensive or worn clothing, a disheveled malnourished look, lack of 
self-care), specific identifying behaviors (e.g., being nervous, involvement 
in criminal activity), and being a member of an ethnic minority. As Bass 
and Kane-Williams (1993:79) reported with regard to the later point, 
“The picture most Americans have of a typical drug dealer or users is that 
of a young black male and the impression is that drug use is rampant and 
universal in the black community.” Underlying these assumed traits, the 
stigmatization of drug users begins with their construction as amoral or im-
moral beings capable of the most heinous crimes imaginable. Such imagery 
remains despite studies clearly showing the regularity and normalization of 
drug use in particular populations, such as young adults (Blackman 2010; 
Parker, Aldridge, and Measham 1998, Parker, Williams and Aldridge 2002). 
One expression of the continued adverse effects of marking and bounding 
processes with drug users is seen in the limited availability of drug treat-
ment. While lip service may be paid in public discourse to the need for 
more and better drug treatment, the directing of public funds to treatment 
(compared to the amount spent on interdiction, arrest, and incarceration 
of drug users), and the actual availability of and access to treatment, after 
care and social reintegration programs belies the existence of a strong social 
commitment to recovery from drug use (Singer 2004). Socially, in fact, 
there is a widespread (if inaccurate) assumption that drug use treatment 
does not work and hence it is a waste of public resources on an undeserv-
ing and recalcitrant population. Notes outspoken British judge Peter Moss 

18 
❋ 
introduction
(Whitehead 2009), for example, “I can’t think of any drug rehabilitation 
programmes that have been a success.” As a result, pathways from drug use 
are narrow and drug users are seen as a dangerous group that must be kept 
away from society through the construction of a vast system for long-term 
incarceration. This attitude is found, as well, more broadly in the healing 
and criminal-justice professions. Baker and Isaac (1973:245), for example, 
found that the nurses, law students, and police they studied, “described drug 
abusers as immoral people committing an immoral act by taking drugs and 
as displaying criminal tendencies.”
Social distancing, which follows from marking and boundary-making, 
entails the creation of guarded social space separating approved and dis-
approved groups. Note Nisim and Benjamin (2010:222), “The oppressive 
power of Othering is derived from the impassable barrier it forms between 
“us” and “them” and the social distancing it creates.” The creation of social 
distance from drug users not uncommonly is propelled by fear, repugnance 
and repulsion. In a Tennessee study of attitudes toward drug addicts that 
including police trainees and college students who did not use drugs, for 
example, Doctor and Sieveking (1973:697) found that
for the most part, policemen and nonusers saw the addict as having 
problems that were dissimilar to their own, repulsive and behaviorally 
unpredictable, and as requiring long-term assistance. Policemen felt 
significantly more strongly [than students] . . . that addicts . . . were not 
the type of people they would choose as close friends.
Further, as Kallen (1989) argues, social distancing of drug users is driven 
by a fear of contagion, a caricature that legitimizes discrimination, margin-
alization, pariahization, and dehumanization.
Dehumanization of drug users takes many forms, one critical one 
being the way they are treated by police. Describing the handling of ine-
briated Native Americans by off-reservation police, for example, Stratton 
(1973:615–616) observes:
The treatment given drunks ranged from indifference to brutality. 
Among the policemen observed, callousness and impatience prevailed; 
rarely did they display any type of kind treatment. Several patrolmen 
occasionally employed verbal or physical abuse. Often they were curt; 
one patrolman tauntingly encouraged a woman getting out of the paddy 
wagon to fall on her face.

introduction 
❋ 
19 
The Politics of Demonization
In the political consciousness and social ideologies that are forged through 
the intersection of media messages and images, official announcements, and 
community discursive activities, demonized understandings of drug users 
emerge that serve as a rationale not only for state punishment but for segrega-
tion, discrimination, and ethnic inequality as well (Mosher and Atkins 2007). 
In recent years, a significant influence on the development of this pattern was 
the announcement by President Ronald Reagan, in a major policy speech in 
1986, calling for “a national crusade against drugs . . . to rid America of this 
scourge” (quoted in Courtwright et al. 1989:344). There followed in subse-
quent years an ever-accelerating war on (primarily ethnic minority) drug 
users that has resulted in the annual arrest of over a million suspected drug 
offenders, most for simple drug possession or small-scale drug sale, and the 
rapid and dramatic escalation of the US prison population. As Dinglestad et 
al. (1996:1834) comment, “in the United States perhaps half of all current 
prisoners were convicted of drug offences or drug-related crimes. . . . Drug 
laws provide a convenient way to target certain groups: affluent drug users 
are seldom bothered by police, who concentrate more on poor, unemployed 
and minority groups.” This approach sends a dual social message that is 
reinforced through multiple institutions in society, namely that drug users 
are dangerous and must put behind bars where they can do no harm and the 
poor and ethnic minorities use drugs and must be monitored and controlled.
The result is a frequently echoed social statement about drug users as 
human rubbish. Indeed, this is the very term for drug users and other de-
valued patients employed by the health care providers described by Roger 
Jeffery (1979) in his analysis of discrimination in hospital emergency rooms. 
Notes Jeffery (1979) “two broad categories were used to evaluate patients: 
good or interesting, and bad or rubbish.” Various other demeaning labels 
are applied by health care workers to alcoholics and illicit drug users en-
countered as hospital patients. In the early 1980s, for example, Page heard 
emergency room staff at Jackson Hospital in Miami using the term “SHPOS” 
(“Sub-Human Piece of Shit”) to refer to recidivistic alcoholics and heroin 
addicts who would present more than once during a three-month rotation. 
Other comparable labels include: “AALFD” (“Another Asshole Looking For 
Drugs”), “FD” (“Fucking drunk”), PG (Pharmaceutically Gifted), “SBOD” 
(“Stupid bitch/bastard on drugs”), “SHS” (“Sullen, Hostile, Stupid,” which 
often is used specifically refer to an inner city drug/alcohol addict), and “PPA” 
(Practicing Professional Alcoholic).

20 
❋ 
introduction
These examples affirm the value of Murray Edelman’s (1988:103) work 
on symbolic politics, including his understanding of the role of language 
as “the key creator of the social worlds people experience, not a tool for 
describing objective reality.” Language in use, from this perspective, is a 
critical element in the social definition and construction of social problems. 
In this process, specific words (used both as “labels” of the problem that 
give it a distinct focus, and as descriptive and emotional “characterizers” of 
the nature and level of the social threat it poses) are mobilized in support 
of desired solutions. As Edelman argues, the latter often have already been 
selected by empowered social elites, based on their own ideologies and self-
interested policy preferences, and language is identified to construct the 
social problem in a way that implies it is resolvable or at least governable by 
the selected control strategies. The adoption of elite solutions is facilitated by 
moral entrepreneurs skilled in the generation of public anxiety, if not outright 
moral panic, often through the use of mass media, and the manipulation of 
images of good and evil in the expressed defense of vital moral boundaries 
(Buchanan et al. 2003). Through the efforts of moral entrepreneurs, elite 
ideology is translated into symbolic crusades. As Gusfield (1963) indicates, 
symbolic crusades—moral campaigns to correct wayward behaviors waged 
by particular status groups within society against other social groups—ulti-
mately reflect political controversies, assertions of authority, and exercises in 
the assertion of political power. Gusfield (1963:5) thus describes the initial 
development of the American temperance movement as “one way in which 
a . . . social elite [the New England Protestant aristocracy] tried to retain . . . 
its social power and leadership” relative to an emergent industrial working 
class. As temperance concerns spread to other parts of the country, other 
local social hierarchies came into play.
Moreover, as Yongming (1999) demonstrates in his analysis of 20th 
century anti-drug campaigns in China, symbolic crusades involve issues of 
governance and state building. Such campaigns, he argues, involve two com-
ponents, hegemonic discourses and social and political practices. While serv-
ing the interests of economic and political elites, modern anti-drug crusades 
are primarily waged publicly by governments. Anti-drug crusades offer states 
a vehicle for asserting a particular worldview and social order (discourse) and 
a means of further consolidating power within society (practices).
Nowhere are these insights better illustrated than in the U.S. politics 
of crime and drug involvement during the past 20 years. One expression 
of the reigning narratives portraying drug users as ultimate moral threats 
to American society was the passage of draconian laws designed to punish 

introduction 
❋ 
21 
severely those arrested for drug-related offenses. A prime example is the 
Supreme Court decision on June 27, 1997, upholding a Michigan state law 
that imposed a mandatory sentence of life in prison without possibility of 
parole for those convicted of possessing more than 1.5 pounds of cocaine. 
Through this decision the Supreme Court, as a branch of government, em-
braced the idea that having this amount of cocaine is the equivalent of the 
heinous crime of first-degree murder (the conscious and deliberate taking 
of a human life). Demonization of drug users in this instance served not 
only to enhance state power over the lives of those directly involved with 
illicit drugs, but, as a result of the social enforcement practices needed to 
identify, capture, and convict drug-related violators, the communities in 
which they live as well.
A further illustration of the dominant “blame drug users” mindset, 
one that gained national attention, was the explanation given by elected of-
ficials for the looting that occurred in New Orleans during the difficult days 
following Hurricane Katrina in 2005. With the city devastated, and many 
residents still stranded by polluted flood waters, the media began carrying 
sensational stories of widespread looting at local retail businesses. Shocking 
to many television viewers around the country was footage showing people 
using inflatable mattresses and other floatation devices to haul away stolen 
appliances, electronic gear, and other non-survival goods. According to New 
Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin, during an interview on Air America Radio, drug 
users were to blame for the looting and other violence in the struggling city 
(CNN.com 2005). In like manner, when interviewed on The Early Show, 
Louisiana Governor Kathleen Blanco at first insisted she was not going to 
play “the blame game,” nonetheless she went on to assert that drug addicts 
were the main perpetrators of looting in the battered city. As the Drug Policy 
Alliance Network (2005) observed,
This problem is, of course, not unique to New Orleans. All over the 
country substance abusers are routinely blamed for crime and other 
social ills—there is little discussion of the notion that prohibitionist 
drug policies themselves contribute to just these sorts of problems. It is 
far more politically popular to point to “drug addicts” as the bogeymen.
Uses of the Useless
Despite the routine and redundant depiction of drug users as wasted and 
worthless, closer examination reveals that they regularly are put to good 

22 
❋ 
introduction
social use in multiple ways, including, as discussed more thoroughly in the 
Conclusion, through the entertainment media as rich sources of dramatic 
distraction, as negative role models who help define the boundaries of ap-
proved behavior, as sources of very cheap labor (in and out of prison), as 
evidence of the unassailability of dominant understandings and values, and 
as conveniently scapegoated objects of blame for an array of social ills. In 
other words, this book, a product of many years of ethnographic research 
among drug users by its authors, is about the uses of the useless, the value 
of the devalued, and the meaning of those whose lives are represented as 
meaningless, wasted, and derelict.
The purpose of the book, in short, is demonstrate the accuracy of Edel-
man’s (1988:103) observation that the language and related actions of official 
government sources, the mass media, the cultural industries, policy makers 
and enforcers, and even public health is “the key creator of the social worlds 
people experience, not a tool for describing objective reality.” We seek to 
achieve this aim by dragging into clearer view the constructed nature of drug 
use and drug users as these are understood and responded to, especially in 
the United States, but elsewhere as well, and, through this analytic process, 
to cast a clarifying light on taken-for-granted assumptions, disguised but 
punishing inequalities and injustices, the aggrandizement of governmental 
power and corresponding restriction of rights and liberties accorded by the 
Constitution to the citizenry, and significant institutionalized mechanisms 
of everyday social control. Pursuing this objective entails an exploration of 
a phenomenon sociologist Lynn Zimmer (1992) termed “drugspeak.” This 
term labels the existence of an anti-drug semantic that problematically but 
usefully constructs the nature of drug taking and the character of drug users. 
This construction, a component of a wider cultural war that is waged through 
multiple overlapping institutions, insures the dominance of a public attitude 
about drug users and their behavior that weds fear and loathing. As Gordon 
(1994) indicates, drugspeak
establishes the legitimacy of law enforcement as the primary solution 
to the U.S. drug problem and endorses an unprecedented vigor and 
reach in applying criminal and civil penalties to those who defy prohibi-
tion.. . . . Drugspeak suppresses all but the most academic discussion of 
policy alternatives, deflects attention from items on the shadow agenda 
of anti-drug activists, and prevents consideration of the structural 
sources of the most destructive forms of drug use.

introduction 
❋ 
23 
Holism
A key insight of anthropology is that cultural systems are complex woven 
tapestries of interconnectedness and repetition. Central to the distinctive 
character of any “culture” are key themes that find expression across the 
various domains of social life, from politics to religion, from kinship to 
educational and enculturation processes, and from recreational activities 
to forms of social conflict. As Wolf (1982:388) explains, “The development 
of an overall hegemonic pattern or “design for living” [i.e., a “culture”] is 
not so much the victory of a collective cognitive logic or aesthetic impulse 
as the development of redundancy—the continuous repetition, in diverse 
instrumental domains, of the same basic propositions regarding the nature 
of constructed reality.” Individualism, a core cultural code in American 
society, is reinforced through its repetitive expression in diverse domains, 
including the parceling out of food onto individual plates (as contrasted with 
shared group bowls or platters), the tendency to allow (except in the case 
of small children) only individual patients into the privacy of a physician’s 
exam room, the expectation that individuals will put their personal career, 
employment, and other demands over the needs of parents and siblings (as 
contrasted with the familial concept of embedded identity as found in other 
“cultures”), and the constant pattern of individual assessment and ranking in 
work and other settings and the related heralding of personal achievement 
and accusation of individual failure.
Key cultural themes about drug users, and their social implications and 
uses, are explored in the following chapters across multiple cultural domains. 
Not surprisingly, in a complex cultural system like that found in Western 
societies, there are some arenas of contradiction and even conflict in the 
ways drug users are portrayed across domains. Still, the overwhelming slant 
is negative, harsh, and adversely consequential for drug users, while being 
beneficial for others who profit from drug-user demonization.
Content
To achieve the critical aims outlined above, the book is organized into the 
following chapters. Chapter 1 examines the critical role race, class, and gender 
attitudes and hierarchies play in the social (mal)construction of drug users. 
The chapter examines the landscape of persons whose drug use defines them 
as deviant, while dismantling the highly complex and troubling (if socially 

24 
❋ 
introduction
useful) set of images that surround drug use. Chapters 2 and 3 provide historic 
depth to our examination, reviewing the origins and development of “drug 
use Otherness” by addressing the question: How did drug users come to be 
defined as deviant? Chapter 3, in particular, focuses on Prohibition and its 
enduring impacts. Subsequent chapters explore the images of drug use con-
structed in various sectors of society. Drug use and drug users in the world 
of literature is the focus of Chapter 4. Of concern is drug use by writers and 
literary writing about (or depicting) drug use, including autobiographical (or 
near-autobiographical) work. A similar approach is followed in Chapter 5, 
which looks at drug use and the movies. Chapter 6 addresses the legal con-
struction of drug users, through drug laws, other policies, the courts, police 
practices, incarcerating institutions as well as the War on Drugs. Chapter 7 
holds up a mirror to our own multidisciplinary field of social-science studies, 
the ways it has constructed drug users, and the benefits derived by research-
ers from having drug users as objects of study. In the Conclusion, we pull 
the threads of our argument together by addressing the myriad uses of the 
useless (for others with vested and self-serving interests) and the need for a 
radically different course in how we think about and behave toward people 
who consume drugs.
As drug researchers, we know about the ways drug users have been useful 
to us (as participants in our studies and as subjects in tests of prevention and 
intervention programs designed to address health risks drug users face). In ex-
amining the social, political, and communication mechanisms through which 
drug users come to endure suffering and mistreatment, we seek to be useful 
to them as an oppressed group. Our concern is with reducing the harm done 
to drug users by Othering and, ultimately, how this mistreatment adversely 
rebounds on society. In other words, we urge far-reaching change in a social 
arrangement in which we all—drug users and non-drug users alike—pay a 
cost so that some might benefit from the creation of a pariah group.

25 
Chapter one
Drugs, Race, and Gender in the Social 
Construction of Drug Consumers
Recognizing the Origins of Othering
W 
hen human behavior involves the illicit ingestion of mind-altering 
drugs, the discourse about that behavior tends to accrue layers of 
social judgment, prejudice, stereotyping, and fear. This Other-
ing process is hardly unexpected, given the personal experience that many 
people can claim as a result of having direct contact with drug-impaired 
people, but how much of it is “real” (i.e., in the sense of being empirically 
verifiable) and how much is constructed (i.e., based on culturally learned and 
socially motivated attitudes and beliefs)? Race, socioeconomic status, and 
gender constitute principal components of how people in the contemporary 
world perceive any complex of behaviors, and drug use is no exception. Basic 
prejudice against drug use and drug users tends to push perceptions in the 
direction of pejorative terms and discriminatory behavior.
These perceptions often rationalize and exacerbate racial and socioeco-
nomic blame or gender prejudice. For example, the “typical” heroin user 
in some cities may be conceptualized as African American and may have 
traits attributed to him/her that correspond to racial stereotypes, such as 
unwillingness to work, irresponsibility, being given to larceny, and being 
dedicated to hedonistic pursuits. Although the literature lacks any definitive 
empirical data on the precise characteristics of the population of heroin us-
ers for the United States, the data contain sufficient basis to say that none of 
these stereotypes is true nationwide. White males dominate the population 
of heroin users, and some portion of this population, both African American 
and white, have regular jobs and families. The same applies to drug users of 
other ethnic identities as well. Along the lines of gender, in part females stand 
accused of heavy use of anti-anxiety medication (e.g., “mother’s little helpers” 
as enshrined in the lyrics of a classic Rolling Stones song), stereotypically 
characterized as over-stressed housewives, desperate to keep all the plates 
of life spinning at once, worrying about their children and their future, and 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 25–52. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

26 
❋ 
chapter one
trying to please demanding and unappreciative husbands. The research data 
actually show, however, that relatively few women take minor tranquilizers 
regularly, and that their potential for addiction, although present, is not 
great. Nevertheless, stereotypes like this exist—in fact much harsher ones 
abound—and are perpetuated in the public imaginary.
What are the origins of these pejorative conceptualizations? Are they to-
tally false, or do they contain a grain of truth? How do we go about discerning 
the difference between unwarranted assumptions about drug users and their 
“true nature?” Why do these harshly judgmental configurations populate 
media messages, inform (or misinform) public policy, and adversely impact 
the lives of many people? This chapter addresses these questions, while dis-
mantling the highly complex and troubling (if socially useful) set of images 
that surround drug using behavior and characterize drug users as devalued 
people. Specifically, the chapter examines the social and media construction 
of the poor as an unworthy group of people in society, including exploration 
of the politically useful concepts of the “welfare queen” and “welfare cheaters” 
as tropes for people of color in efforts to gut welfare programs. Embedded in 
the perspectives that drive such efforts, the chapter argues, is the belief that 
many if not most welfare recipients use their benefits to buy drugs and get 
high. This linkage of poverty and drug abuse in contemporary thinking about 
people of color, has helped to promote the incarceral and anti-community 
policies of the War on Drugs, the multi-generation reproduction of an unequal 
opportunity structure, and the single-minded and simple-minded demon-
izing of illicit drug use (Reignarman and Levine 1997).
The Making of the Undeserving Poor
During the 2012 presidential race, Republican candidate Mitt Romney gave a 
now infamous talk at a May 17 fundraiser in Boca Raton, Florida. Now known 
as the 47% speech (MoJo News Team 2012), Romney asserted the following:
There are 47 percent of the people who will vote for the president no 
matter what. All right, there are 47 percent who are with him, who are 
dependent upon government, who believe that they are victims, who 
believe that government has a responsibility to care for them, who 
believe that they are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you 
name it. That that’s an entitlement. And the government should give it 
to them. And they will vote for this president no matter what. . . . These 
are people who pay no income tax.

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
27 
Reflected in this speech is a view of the poor, including poor working 
people, held by economic elites within society, a view that is disseminated to 
the society as whole through various communication media. This is the view 
that there are many undeserving poor, people who are a weight on society 
rather than contributors to it; moreover, they are said to rob society to the 
degree that they received any government-supported health or social program 
benefits. This view, as Navarro (1986:2) points out, is historically rooted in 
an “active ideological offensive [designed to] create a new consensus around 
a new set of values, beliefs and practices” regarding the poor. This perspective 
sees the poor as a form of dependent, defective, and delinquent social parasite.
Exemplary of this attitude is the pejorative term “welfare queen” which 
was introduced into the English language in 1976, primarily by Ronald 
Reagan. In his political speeches, Reagan built an image of poor people who 
feel entitled to the benefit of other people’s hard work. He illustrated this 
claim using a newspaper report about a Chicago woman named Linda Taylor 
who was convicted of using various aliases and of cheating the government 
using false welfare applications. A parallel case even older than Taylor’s is 
the so-called “lady in mink,” as she was known after New York newspapers 
in 1947 printed several articles about a woman wearing a mink stole who 
showed up at a welfare office to pick up a check. Eventually, in this case, the 
New Yorker’s press critic A. J. Liebling (1947) revealed that despite having 
collected a large divorce settlement a number of years earlier, the woman 
and her 5-year old daughter were now dependent on $5.40 a day from the 
New York City welfare department. Moreover, the seemingly stylish mink 
was, in fact, old and deteriorating and of little real monetary value. This type 
of mischaracterization, as we will show, is the norm in this entire genre of 
attack narrative.
Being an accomplished storyteller (his nickname was the “Great Com-
municator”), and given to using stereotypes about the poor, on the campaign 
trail Reagan embellished the details of Linda Taylor’s case, without actually 
using her name, to create a fictive individual whom he presented as both real 
and as representative of the undeserving, socially useless poor. Said Reagan 
(New York Times 1976) of a woman in Chicago:
She has eighty names, thirty addresses, twelve Social Security cards and 
is collecting veteran’s benefits on four non-existing deceased husbands. 
And she is collecting Social Security on her cards. She’s got Medicaid, 
getting food stamps, and she is collecting welfare under each of her 
names. Her tax-free cash income is over $150,000.

28 
❋ 
chapter one
All of this imagery was built on a relative minor case of welfare fraud 
involving about $8,000. In their book, “The Mommy Myth,” Susan Doug-
las, a professor of communication studies at the University of Michigan, 
and Meredith Michaels, of the Department of Philosophy at Smith College 
(2004:185), pointed out the nature of Reagan’s innovative stereotyping:
He specialized in the exaggerated, outrageous tale that was almost 
always unsubstantiated, usually false, yet so sensational that it merited 
repeated recounting. . . . And because his “examples” of welfare queens 
drew on existing stereotypes of welfare cheats and resonated with news 
stories about welfare fraud, they did indeed gain real traction.
Thus, despite the fact that very few cases of individuals engaged in sig-
nificant welfare fraud have been arrested or tried, as Douglas and Michaels 
(2004) report, polls from the period show that Americans, in part because of 
sensationalized welfare cheat language and frequent stories about welfare fraud 
in the media, vastly overestimated the actual incidence of welfare fraud (which 
pales by comparison with the level of white-collar fraud committed by wealthy 
individuals). Some polls found that respondents believed that 40 percent of 
those on welfare were cheaters although the Department of Health and Human 
Services estimated at the time that less than 4 percent of individuals receiving 
welfare actually lied about their financial situation on their applications.
In fact, even during Reagan’s presidency the stereotype of the welfare 
queen was a straw dog. Having more children did not mean receiving more 
welfare assistance. The actual average welfare increase for having a child was 
about $60 per month. In some states, women with a newborn did not qualify 
for any additional aid after her second child was born. In other states, only a 
small increase was allowed. Having more children simply to get more welfare 
money would have been a form a self-destructive economics.
Still the stereotype caught hold and many others contributed to and en-
hanced making this falsehood one of the hardiest chestnuts of contemporary 
political discourse. In the words of David Zucchino, a Pulitzer Prize-winning 
reporter, and author of The Myth of the Welfare Queen (1999), the notion of 
the welfare queen is “thoroughly embedded in American folklore.”
Adds Kaaryn Gustason (2012), author of “Cheating Welfare: Public 
Assistance and the Criminalization of Poverty,” “It’s one of those persistent 
symbols that come up every election cycle.”
For example, Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour, who worked for Rea-
gan as director of the White House Office of Political Affairs in 1985–1986, 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
29 
maintained (Kessler 2011) that there was a need to increase co-payments 
for Medicaid because: “We have people pull up at the pharmacy window 
in a BMW and say they can’t afford their co-payment.” Mississippi, in fact, 
provides one of the lowest levels of Medicaid benefits to working adults in the 
country. For unemployed parents to qualify, their yearly family income must 
be less than 24 percent of the poverty level. Working parents can qualify only 
if they make no more than 44 percent of the federal poverty line. Pregnant 
women are eligible with income up to 185 percent of the poverty level. This 
means that a working couple in Mississippi with one child may earn no more 
than $8,150 a year to qualify for Medicaid, and seniors or pregnant women 
can earn no more than $20,000 a year. At these levels, people in Mississippi 
receiving Medicaid who drive a BMW are likely to be very rare, of the sort 
that birdwatchers call a “mega,” one you may never see in your lifetime. In-
deed, it is not unreasonable that a family of three earning less than $8,150 
annually would have trouble having money for a co-pay, or for much else for 
that matter. Washington Post fact checker Glenn Kessler (2011) concludes:
Given that you have to be rather poor to get on Medicaid in Mississippi, 
it seems highly unlikely the state has many Medicaid recipients driv-
ing around BMWs, even used ones. Note that Barbour said “we have 
people”—suggesting this is not a rare event. The failure of Barbour’s 
aides to provide any documentation for this claim is rather suspicious.
Similarly, during the 2012 presidential race, candidate Rick Santorum, 
while campaigning in Iowa, said “I don’t want to make black people’s lives 
better by giving them somebody else’s money,” although he later claimed he 
did not mean to say “black people.” During the same campaign, Mitt Romney 
repeatedly asserted that his opponent, President Obama, wanted to transform 
America into an “entitlement society.” Another candidate, Newt Gingrich, 
called Obama a food-stamp president, while questioning poor children’s work 
ethic, and saying that poor people should want paychecks, not handouts (Blake 
2012). Calling child labor laws “truly stupid,” Gingrich told an Iowa audience 
during the 2012 presidential campaign that children in poor neighborhoods 
have “no habits of working” nor getting paid for their endeavors “unless it’s ille-
gal.” Such children, he maintained should be allowed to work as janitors in their 
schools to earn money and develop a connection to the school (Huisenga 2011).
Franklin Gilliam (1999) of the University of California, Los Angeles 
became interested in the welfare queen narrative and initiated an interest-
ing study to unravel its effects. An assumption he made in developing the 

30 
❋ 
chapter one
study was that the idea of the welfare queen had gained the status of common 
knowledge, or what is known in social psychology as a “narrative script.” Such 
scripts distill information and concentrate it in catchwords allowing for the 
rapid communication of more complex ideas. The welfare queen script Gilliam 
found consisted of two key components: welfare recipients are dispropor-
tionately women (although the largest single group “on welfare” is actually 
children), and women on welfare are disproportionately African American 
(even though African Americans comprise only about one tenth of the total 
number of welfare recipients). In the study, participants watched one of four 
television stories about the impact of welfare reform on a woman the research-
ers named Rhonda Germaine. In the story Rhonda worries about the impact 
of the new welfare laws on her ability to care for her children. A still picture of 
Rhonda appears at two points in the story; each time it appears, it remains on 
the screen for about five seconds. Viewers were randomly assigned to one of 
four groups. Group one watched the news story with Rhonda cast as a white 
woman. Group two viewed the same story with Rhonda depicted as an African 
American woman. Group three watched the welfare story without seeing any 
visual representation of Rhonda. The last group was a control group that did 
not watch any TV news broadcast about welfare. The researchers inserted a 
new story about welfare into the middle position of their telecast following the 
first commercial break. They described the segment as having been selected at 
random from a news program broadcast during the past week. They found that 
among white study participants exposure to these script elements reduced their 
support for welfare programs, increased stereotyping of African Americans, 
and heightened support for maintaining traditional, unequal gender roles.
Research like this suggests that the media are important, if subtle, 
sources of popular stereotypes about people on welfare. One extensive 
content analysis of stories about welfare in news magazines and on network 
television carried out by Princeton political scientist Martin Gilens (1999) 
for the 1960s through 1992 found the following:
 
• Sixty-two percent of stories about poverty that appeared in TIME, 
Newsweek, and U.S. News and World Report featured African-Americans
 
• Sixty-five percent of network television news stories about welfare 
focused on African-Americans
 
• Fewer African-Americans are portrayed in “sympathetic” stories about 
poverty and welfare than whites
 
• News magazines suggest that almost 100 percent of the American 
underclass as African-Americans.

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
31 
Based on his analysis, Gilens concluded that negative feelings about 
welfare among white Americans are rooted in the perception that welfare is 
a program for African Americans, which in turn, stems from the misrepre-
sentation in the media that most welfare recipients are African Americans 
and the undeserving poor. Notably, Gilens analysis found that reports in 
the media about deserving poor focus on the elderly and the working poor 
who typically are portrayed as poor white individuals whereas poor blacks 
generally appear in stories about welfare abuse or the perennial underclass.
In the social environment created by such depictions of the ethnic mi-
norities, the poor and welfare, and after what David Rozen (2007:40) has 
dubbed “a national discourse of extreme vitriol and hyperbole directed at all 
single, poor mothers, but with a coded sub-text denoting African-American 
and Latino women,” a new law was passed called the Personal Responsibility 
and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA). Women no longer 
were allowed to stay on welfare indefinitely. Additionally, Aid to Families 
with Dependent Children (AFDC), the needs-based welfare support that 
disproportionately served ethnic minorities (at least after the 1960s and 
the Civil Rights Movement) and women was eliminated and replaced with 
the Temporary Aid to Needy Family program (TANF). As contrasted with 
AFDC, TANF set a lifetime limit of receivable support of five years. As 
Nathan and Gais (1998:7) indicated, passage of TANF involved a shift from 
income assistance to address the survival needs of poor children, to a “service 
and sanctioning strategy for behavior change” of their mothers. The passage 
of TANF as well as other constraints on the provision of welfare have been 
described as components of a “national revival movement calling for the 
restoration of moral compulsion to the lives of the poor” (Piven and Cloward 
2003:135). Of note, TANF became law under a Democratic president, sug-
gesting that the issue is not just conservative strains in the Republican Party 
but is embedded in a deep layer of social consciousness.
Despite the draconian changes noted above, the term welfare continues 
to claim a place in the American dialogue on poverty. In his aforementioned 
article, Liebling (1947) identified the underlying theme of all undeserving-
poor narratives: “that the poor are poor because of their sins and whatever 
they get is too good for them.” A parallel narrative, no doubt warmly em-
braced by most if not all of those who attended Romney’s 47 percent speech 
fund-raiser, is that the rich are rich because of their inherent virtues and 
contribution to society and whatever they have, no matter how wealthy they 
are, is wholly deserved (and, further, that concentrating wealth and economic 
power in their hands will allow it to trickle down and benefit the poor). As 

32 
❋ 
chapter one
the economic and social divide between the very wealthy (the 1 percenters 
in the contemporary lexicon) and everyone else continues to widen—e.g., 
the average net worth of the 400 wealthiest people in the United States 
jumped from $3.8 billion to $4.2 billion in 2011 compared to a 1.5 percent 
drop in median household income in the country—suggesting the failure 
of trickle-down economics, the very wealthy have been pressed to amp up 
the volume on this second narrative. In an interesting comparison of drug 
users and the superrich, journalist and commentator Lynn Stuart Parramore 
(2012) observed,
Like a drug addict turning every cushion upside-down in search of lost 
change, the 1 percenters are scrounging up every timeworn myth, lame 
justification and absurd rationalization they can think of to convince 
us that the rich are super-smart, hard-working job creators instead of 
greedy parasites refusing to pay their share in taxes and play by the 
same rulebook as everyone else.
Notably, the changes in welfare policy that forced thousands of women 
off of government assistance were not successful in eliminating poverty. 
People leaving welfare for work in the shadow of changes in welfare laws 
were found generally to earn about $6 an hour or approximately $1,000 a 
month for a 40 hour work week. Most of the jobs they found did not include 
insurance benefits (Tepperman 1998). As Welfare to Work: What Have We 
Learned (Joyce Foundation 2002), a study of research on welfare reform in 
the Midwest, reported, the effects on “poverty reduction have been modest 
or in some cases disappointing.” Most families coming off welfare who rely 
on wages alone remain poor, where poverty is defined as a yearly income of 
$$15,510 for a mother with one child and $19,530 for a family of three (2013 
figures). Thus they joined the ranks of the working poor, the very group to 
be attacked by Romney for not paying income tax (because they do not earn 
enough to pay it according to federal law).
Drug Users as Unworthy Beings
Embedded in the perspective that many if not most welfare recipients are 
cheaters is the idea that many also are drug users. This assumed unfailing 
connection is seen in efforts in numerous states to adopt laws that would 
require public welfare recipients to take drug tests before receiving any 
benefits. Movement toward limiting or banning eligibility for welfare among 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
33 
individuals convicted of drug-related crimes (including both distribution 
and use) began with passage of the 1996 “Gramm Amendment,” which 
imposed a lifetime bar on access to both Food Stamps and TANF. States 
were granted considerable discretion to modify or cancel the TANF ban. 
Within public housing, Housing and Urban Development-defined “one 
strike and you’re out” rules allowing for rapid eviction of tenants involved 
in drug-related crimes or even involvement in drug use by a guest or visitor. 
Typically, as seen in the subsequent policy adopted in the fall of 2000 by 
the Anytown Housing Authority (2000), a low standard of proof of drug-
involvement became normative: “In order to evict or terminate assistance, a 
criminal conviction or arrest is not necessary and the AHA need not meet the 
criminal standard of ‘proof beyond a reasonable doubt.’” Within six months 
of the implementation of this harsh, no second-chance policy, almost 4,000 
people had been evicted (and permanently banned) from housing projects 
around the country. Additionally, Section 902 of welfare reform legislation 
authorized states to use chemical testing to screen new TANF applicants or 
to detect illicit drug use otherwise.
Arizona was the first state to impose a testing program. Beginning in 
2009, all new welfare recipients were required to undergo a drug test if there 
was a “reasonable cause” to suspect illicit drug use. To determine reasonable 
cause, the state asked new recipients whether they had used drugs in the past 
30 days, and only those who answered yes were tested. With no penalty for 
lying, a couple of dozen applicants said they had used drugs. By 2012, 87,000 
people had been subjected to the program. How many of these tested positive 
for drug use? Only one, a factor that has probably limited the enthusiasm 
in many legislatures for passing such bills (USA Today 2012). But the effort 
goes on. In Colorado, state Representative Jerry Sonnenberg sponsored a 
similar bill that would require applicants for his state’s TANF program to 
pay for and pass a drug test before receiving government aid. According to 
Sonnenberg (Alcindor 2012), “If you have enough money to be able to buy 
drugs, then you don’t need the public assistance. I don’t want tax dollars 
spent on drugs.” Those who pass the test would be reimbursed for the $8 to 
$12 cost, but those who fail could not get assistance unless they pass a clean 
test. Florida passed similar legislation in 2011, an act that the American Civil 
Liberties Union (ACLU) sees as a presumption of guilt until proven inno-
cent. According to Jason Williamson, an attorney for the ACLU’s Criminal 
Law Reform Project, such laws unfairly stigmatize people and inaccurately 
imply that people on welfare are more likely to use drugs than other people. 
In Williamson’s view, “This exemplifies the extent to which folks are willing 

34 
❋ 
chapter one
to scapegoat poor people when it suits political interests” (Alcindor 2012). In 
other states, lawmakers have proposed legislation to implement mandatory 
drug abuse counseling for people receiving housing assistance (irrespective 
of their drug use status). Moreover, two states, Ohio and Tennessee have 
seen bills proposed that would restrict or eliminate welfare eligibility for 
anyone ever convicted of drug-related felonies (including possession of a 
small amount of marihuana).
A USA Today (2012) editorial based on pending drug use and welfare 
legislation, however, reviewed the evidence and drew the conclusion that pro-
grams to drug-test applicants and recipients of welfare benefits are not useful. 
In places where such programs have been enacted, few people test positive. As 
a result, involved states save very little money compared to the upfront costs of 
implementing testing programs. Moreover, the USA Today editorial asserted, 
these programs perpetuate the inaccurate idea that poor people use drugs 
more than others and single them out for unconstitutional privacy violations.
Beyond the realm of AFDC/TANF, policy changes have limited the 
ability of drug users to obtain federal disability payments for drug-related 
ailments. In 1996, over 200,000 individuals who received SSI or SSDI pay-
ments based upon diagnoses of drug and alcohol addiction were removed 
from recipient rolls because either drug addiction or alcoholism were factors 
in their determination of disability (Davies et al. 2000). Between December 
1996 and January 1997, another 100,000 recipients were removed from the 
disability assistance rosters because of drug issues (Swartz et al. 2000). Drug 
problems for these individuals were not defined as real or legitimate medical 
problems despite the existence of a medical definition of addiction and the 
subsequent embrace, as discussed in Chapter 6, by the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse of a view of drug addiction as a relapsing brain disease. Seen 
as being personally responsible for their disabilities, drug users came to be 
thought of as unworthy of government supported disability support.
When Poverty Equals Drug Abuse
A critical question at stake in this discussion is why is it presumed that the 
poor are more likely to be involved in drug abuse than other social classes? 
In part, the linking together of the poor and drug use is perpetuated by 
regular media images that show drug sales and drug use arrests in poorer 
neighborhoods.Without question street drug sales are more visible in poor 
neighborhoods than in those housing other socioeconomic classes. The 
middle classes and certainly the wealthy can hide their illicit behaviors 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
35 
behind locked doors, on quiet streets, or even behind gated and guarded 
islands of seeming normalcy. This concealment of drug use is less possible 
in overcrowded areas with deteriorating infrastructure, homelessness, and 
intense police presence. Further, poorer neighborhoods have long been al-
lowed to be centers of drug distribution and other illegal activities by the 
police and larger criminal justice system, despite episodic enforcement in 
the form of drug or other raids.
Nonetheless, various studies indicate that drug use itself is equally 
distributed across poor, middle class, and wealthy communities (e.g., Saxe, 
et al. 2001). Chen, and co-workers (2003), for example, found that alcohol 
consumption, which is no less drug use than the injection of heroin or the 
use of methamphetamines, is significantly higher among upper middle class 
white high school students than among poor black high school students. 
Their finding underscores a history of research showing that alcohol abuse is 
much more common among the wealthy than among poor people (Diala, et 
al. 2004; Galea et al., 2007; Burston and Roberson-Saunders 1995). That the 
association of drug abuse with poor, minority communities is a mispercep-
tion is further suggested by research showing higher use rates of use among 
affluent, suburban, or white youth than among low-income, non-white, urban 
youth (Luthar and D’Avanzo 1999)
What is of particular note here is not the radical differences in the drug 
use of the poor and the affluent but the disparities in the consequences of 
this behavior. While wealthy people use illicit drugs and suffer addiction, 
and—often, because they receive some form of public scrutiny (e.g., because 
they are celebrities or relatives of politicians) —are caught breaking drug 
laws, rarely are they punished to the extent that poor drug users are punished. 
Notes Paul Wright (2012):
The unspoken reality is that in America today there exist two systems 
of criminal justice. One for the wealthy, which includes kid-glove in-
vestigations, lackluster prosecutions, drug treatment, light sentences 
and easy, if any, prison time. The other, for the poor, is one of para-
military policing, aggressive prosecution, harsh mandatory sentences 
and hard time.
One notable source of evidence in support of Wright’s argument is seen 
in the comparatively mild sentences given to the children of wealthy politi-
cians when they are caught breaking drug laws. Jenna and Barbara Bush, 
twin daughters of George W. Bush, for example, were caught (in Jenna’s 

36 
❋ 
chapter one
case, two times) by police buying alcohol under age. Their punishment 
involved several hours of community service, a brief probation, and manda-
tory enrollment in an alcohol awareness class. The charges were eventually 
expunged from the Bush daughters’ records. A more striking case involves 
the son of former 30-year Republican Congressman Dan Burton of Indiana, 
who was on record calling for the death penalty for drug dealers. In 1994 
Burton’s son, Dan Burton II, was arrested in Louisiana while transporting 
eight pounds of marihuana from Texas to Indiana. Released on bail, he was 
arrested again five months later for growing marihuana in his Indianapolis 
apartment and possessing a shotgun to guard his plants. Despite these seri-
ous drug charges, and federal law calling for a mandatory minimum of five 
years for possessing a firearm during a drug offense, he never faced federal 
prosecution. He was prosecuted on state charges, and found guilty but his 
punishment consisted of house arrest, probation, and community service. 
Similar leniency, the kind rarely seen when the children of poor families are 
charged with violations of drug laws, occurred following the drug-related ar-
rests of Randall Cunningham, son of anti-drug warrior Congressman Duke 
Cunningham of California; Richard Riley, Jr., son of Education Secretary 
Richard Riley; John Murtha, son of Congressman John Murtha; and numer-
ous other children of high office holders. During the period of arrest of these 
well-linked individuals the average sentence for “low-level” drug-trafficking 
offenders, was 70.5 months (of which a prisoner typically served about five 
years) (Bovard 1999). A particularly noteworthy case in this regard involved 
Cindy McCain, the wife of Senator John McCain of Arizona and daughter 
of wealthy beer distributor Jim Hensley. Following back surgery, Cindy Mc-
Cain became addicted to pain-killing drugs. Following investigation by the 
Drug Enforcement Administration, she admitted to stealing Percocet and 
Vicodin, schedule 2 narcotic drugs, from the American Voluntary Medi-
cal Team, a nonprofit organization she started to deliver medical relief to 
disaster-stricken or war-torn third-world areas (and which was shut down as 
a result her theft of drugs from it). Rather than face prosecution and a prison 
term, which would be standard for a poor person caught committing a similar 
crime, she was allowed to enter into a pretrial diversion program and avoided 
acquiring a felony record. Concludes Bovard (2008), “If a poor black woman 
from Anacostia had committed the crimes that Cindy McCain committed, 
the black woman might have been sent to prison for the duration of her life.”
As the McCain case suggests, even heavily publicized cases of drug use 
among the affluent never have any sustained impact on the public image of 
the wealthy as a social class or even on the individuals involved. Moreover, 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
37 
drug treatment, not a prison cell, is the most common social response to 
drug abuse among individuals from the wealthier social classes. In the media, 
drug abuse among well-do-do individuals is portrayed as an expression of 
personal misjudgment, a temporary character defect, or a bad experience 
rather than as an expression of a lack of social worth. Furthermore, the 
type of drug treatment that is available to wealthy drug users is very dif-
ferent from the forms of therapy available to poorer drug users enrolled 
in under-funded, short-term, and narrowly focused programs. Even slots 
in these kinds of program are often only available to the poor if they can 
endure long waiting lists, personal indignities, cultural insensitivities, and 
judgmental providers as well as other insults of the lack of full commitment 
by society to actually treating the poor effectively for drug dependency and 
addiction (as opposed to helping them get their drug use under control and 
back to a more manageable level). Wealthy individuals and their families can 
afford to pay for the kind of elite treatment programs that, quite literally, 
only money can buy, namely, programs that fully address the significant 
and complex psychosocial challenges that both contribute to and are a 
consequence of prolonged drug use. For example, a 30-day inpatient stay 
at the world-renowned Betty Ford Center for alcohol and drug treatment 
located on a 30-acre campus in the resort city of Rancho Mirage, California, 
costs $32,000. Even more exclusive is Passages Malibu, dubbed by Forbes 
magazine as one of the most luxurious rehab centers in the world. In 2011, 
the cost for a month of residential therapy was $88,500.
At the other end of the social hierarchy, assertions about disproportionate 
drug use among welfare recipients have proved to be questionable. Pollack 
and co-workers (2001), for example, analyzed nationally representative 
cross-sectional data, as well as longitudinal Michigan data, to determine the 
prevalence of drug use among individuals receiving welfare. They found that 
alcohol dependence was more common among welfare recipients than among 
people who were not receiving welfare, but, the difference between the two 
groups was not statistically significant. Additionally, they found that while 
illicit drug dependence among TANF recipients was more than double the 
rate among non-recipients, only a small minority of TANF recipients were 
drug dependent. Pollack et al. (2001) also examined the prevalence of drug 
use and dependence among TANF respondents in the first three waves of the 
Women’s Employment Study, a panel study of single mothers receiving TANF 
living in an urban Michigan county. Consistent with other epidemiological 
findings, illicit drug dependence was rare among all WES respondents (at 
just over 3 percent), including those still receiving cash assistance.

38 
❋ 
chapter one
Drugs and Motherhood
Another side to the intersection of class, race, and gender is seen in domi-
nant social portrayal of drug-using pregnant women and mothers. One 
consequence of the so-called welfare reform that drastically cut access for 
poor women to financial and other support is that they were “forced to find 
alternative resources and to construct survival strategies” (Murphy and Sales 
2001). Research by Murphy and Sales with pregnant low-income drug-using 
women in the San Francisco area examined these strategies, one of which was 
involvement with drugs. According to Murphy and Sales (2001), the women 
they interviewed reported that
[D]rug use helped them overcome some of the adversities in their daily 
lives. It was sometimes a source of income and usually a source of solace 
and recreation. Although drug use helped interviewees survive on a 
day-to-day basis, in the long term, women faced severe consequences.
In part, those consequences were the result of the symbolic targeting of 
pregnant women involved in drug use as part of the War on Drugs. This tar-
geting, which included the use of “pernicious images of drug-using mothers 
having babies for the sole purpose of qualifying for government handouts in 
order to buy drugs and then neglecting and abusing these children” were pro-
mulgated by the mass media and by politicians (Campbell 2000; Humphries 
1999). In this way, argued Murphy and Sales (2001), “drug users have played 
a very important role in defining women’s and children’s poverty as an in-
dividual behavioral problem rather than the result of systematic, structural 
economic inequities.” Indeed, drug users often have proven useful in such 
reassignment of blame from the factors or groups that perpetuate social and 
economic inequality on to a highly vulnerable population, the poor.
One expression of this use of drug-involved pregnant women was the 
national outcry in response to the appearance of so-called “crack babies” 
(babies exposed in utero to crack cocaine) that emerged in the late 1980s 
(Reinarman and Levine 1989). Observed Murphy and Sales (2001):
The image of poor inner city African-Americans whose mothering 
instincts had been destroyed by crack was highly publicized and 
widely accepted. . . . Numerous media stories reported that the coming 
generation would comprise untold numbers of permanently impaired 
crack babies. It was predicted these impaired infants would topple the 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
39 
health care delivery and educational systems due to their expensive 
and lifelong problems. During the same time period, however, there 
was no comparable public discourse concerning the likelihood of huge 
expenditures of public resources for a much larger group of problem-
atic infants, tobacco babies, despite considerable available scientific 
evidence documenting the serious implications for the unborn of 
maternal tobacco smoking.
In this campaign 
of image construc-
tion, crack-involved 
pregnant women and 
mothers were blamed 
for the creation of per-
manently impaired 
children who would 
not only suffer their 
whole lives for their 
mothers’ immoral 
and criminal behav-
ior but would be an 
economic burden on 
society. Based on the 
resulting campaign of moral outrage, articulated through an onslaught of 
negative media depictions that Jackson (1998) characterized as “an astonish-
ing spree of sloppy, alarmist reporting and racial and economic scapegoating,” 
pregnant women and mothers were arrested, imprisoned, and sentenced to 
treatment and often lost custody of their children (Humphries et al. 1992). 
In support of such actions, in 1994, the television news-event program 60 
Minutes aired a segment called “Cracking Down” which acclaimed the suc-
cess and effectiveness of a South Carolina law under which women who used 
cocaine while pregnant were arrested and prosecuted under child-abuse 
statutes. The segment featured scenes of sickly, crack-exposed babies in an 
intensive-care unit while a nurse pronounced the chances of the children 
surviving being “real slim” (Jackson 1998). Less evident from the program 
was that almost all women prosecuted under the statute were African Ameri-
can. Completely invisible in the program was that the nurse who expressed 
disdainful views of crack-involved mothers later testified that she strongly 
opposed interracial marriage.
Tobacco drying, Connecticut (Photo by Claudia 
Santelices)

40 
❋ 
chapter one
Typical of the images used to depict the irresponsibility and selfish nature 
of crack-involved women is the following excerpt (Besharov 1989:1) from a 
story that appeared under the title “Crack Babies: The Worst Threat Is Mom 
Herself” in the Washington Post on August 6, 1989:
Last week in this city, Greater Southeast Community Hospital released 
a 7-week-old baby to her homeless, drug-addicted mother even though 
the child was at severe risk of pulmonary arrest. The hospital’s expla-
nation: ‘Because [the mother] demanded that the baby be released.’ 
. . . Cases like these lead to proposals to expand treatment services 
for crack-addicted mothers. But at least for now, such services would 
probably make little difference. Crack addicts typically show little or 
no interest in prenatal care and are unlikely to seek it until very late in 
their pregnancy, if ever. Often they present themselves at the hospital 
only in time to give birth. Some new mothers abandon their sick babies 
in the hospital—not returning, even if the infant dies, to help bury it.
Headlines and newspaper article titles from the period told the story: 
“For Pregnant Addict, Crack Comes First” (Washington Post, 12/18/89), 
“Crack’s Tiniest, Costliest Victims” (New York Times, 8/7/89), “Crack 
Babies Born to Life of Suffering” (USA Today, 6/8/89), “A Time Bomb in 
Cocaine Babies” (Washington Post, 9/18/90), “Parents Who Can’t Say ‘No’ 
Are Creating a Generation of Misery” (Los Angeles Times, 9/21/89), “Di-
saster in Making: Crack Babies Start to Grow Up” (St Louis Post-dispatch, 
9/18/90), “Drug Babies Invade Schools” (San Diego Union-Tribune, 2/2/92). 
Crack-involved mothers were accused of birthing a biological underclass of 
emotionally damaged and misfit children who would become a generation 
of super-predators at war with a vulnerable society. John Silber, who at the 
time was president of Boston University, worried aloud that “crack babies 
. . . won’t ever achieve the intellectual development to have consciousness of 
God.” Conservative political analyst Charles Krauthammer claimed in his 
Washington Post column: “The inner-city crack epidemic is now giving birth 
to the newest horror: a bio-underclass, a generation of physically damaged 
cocaine babies whose biological inferiority is stamped at birth. . . . Theirs will 
be a life of certain suffering, of probable deviance, of permanent inferiority.” 
To this, Krauthammer added that “crack babies” would comprise “a race of 
(sub)human drones” (reported in Vargas 2010). In this way, the ‘crack baby’ 
story, coming on the heels of the welfare queen story helped to cement a 
vision in the popular imagination of the dangerous drug using (usually 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
41 
African American) woman selling her children’s food stamps to finance her 
abhorrent crack addiction.
Years later, in 2010, after the ‘crack baby’ scare had faded from the head-
lines, the Washington Post ran a story, that noted “in the two decades that 
have passed since crack dominated the nation’s drug markets, these babies 
have grown into young adults who can tell their stories, and for the most 
part, they are tales of success” (Vargas 2010). In fact, no specific disorders 
or health conditions were ever found among people whose mothers used 
cocaine while pregnant. Moreover, the crime surge that had been predicted 
failed to materialize. Rather, by 2008, the national violent crime rate fell to its 
lowest level since 1972, when the Bureau of Justice Statistics began keeping 
records. According to FBI data for the District of Columbia, a center of the 
national crack epidemic and a place early said to be jam-packed with crack 
using women, from 1990 to 2008, the number of murders per year dropped 
from 472 to 186, the number of reported rapes fell from 303 to 186, and the 
number of robberies went from 7,365 to 4,154 (Vargas 2010).
It now is clear that the relationship between maternal crack smoking and 
adverse child outcomes is complex and affected by many factors (Bandstra 
et al. 2001). Poverty and lack of prenatal care, it appears, were significant 
contributing factors in the development of symptoms initially attributed to 
maternal crack-smoking (Mozes 1999). But, as Murphy and Sales (2001) 
accentuated, “There are ideological explanations for why these infants 
continued to be labeled crack babies rather than, in light of scientific find-
ings, poverty babies. In an era of fiscal retrenchment, the notion of poverty 
babies might engender public sympathy and interfere with the conservative 
drive to demolish social welfare programs.” Despite rising evidence that the 
“crack baby” story was really about the plight of poor babies and the grow-
ing evidence that the depiction of babies exposed to crack and women using 
crack were based on discredited assertions, in 1998 60 Minutes re-aired its 
“Cracking Down” without correcting any of the misinformation it contained, 
further perpetuating the apparently very useful “crack baby” myth.
The Greater Sin of Female Drug Use
While both men and women abuse drugs, the experience and effects of drug 
abuse are not gender neutral nor are the meanings society attaches to drug 
use by women the same as those constructed for men. Moreover, because 
of differences in the gendered life experiences of women and men and the 
ways gender relations order social life and social institutions, drug use is not 

42 
❋ 
chapter one
quite the same thing across gender. There are, in other words, drawing from 
Daly (1998), what might be called “gendered pathways to drug abuse.” Most 
importantly, drug use patterns reflect the underlying cultural construction 
of male superiority and male social and political-economic domination over 
women (Miller and Mullins 2009).
Research indicates that female drug abusers are more likely than their 
male counterparts to have a history of physical and/or sexual abuse or emo-
tional trauma, with as many as 70% of women in drug treatment reporting 
histories of such mistreatment (Najavits et al. 1997). As Chesney-Lind 
and Pasko (2004:5) indicate, the earlier victimization of girls compared to 
boys, “set[s] the stage for their entry into youth homelessness, unemploy-
ment, drug use, survival sex (and sometimes prostitution), and ultimately, 
other serious criminal acts.” Women, in fact, are more likely to begin abus-
ing drugs or alcohol after a specific traumatic life experience (Najavits, 
2002; Nelson-Zlupko et al, 1995; Virginia Department of Mental Health, 
Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services 2004). From a feminist 
perspective, these patterns suggest the many ways that drug abuse among 
women is a product of varied forms of male dominance and the physical 
and emotional abuse that find impact across women’s experience in soci-
ety. Drug abuse among women, from this perspective, can be seen as being 
closely tied to the strategies women use to navigate gender-stratified social 
environments. As Bepko (1991:1) maintains, drug abuse among women 
involves “a process in which individuals make dysfunctional attempts to 
have control over their own experience within a relational context. . . . [Thus] 
addiction is a microcosmic process that reflects and is perhaps a metaphor for 
imbalances of power in the larger social arena.” Beyond gender differences 
in the emergence and expressions of drug abuse, are notable contrasts in 
consequences. These contrasts mirror the ways gender influences society’s 
tolerance of drug use and the intensified social stigmas suffered by female 
drug abusers (Kauffman et al. 1997).
Generally, because of androcentric bias, drug-dependent women are 
socially perceived as having more significant personal problems, as being in 
greater violation of societal norms, and as being more deviant than male drug 
users. The added violation of female drug users involves their transgression of 
what are held to be critical social standards involving being a “good woman.” 
The major concern is that the female addict fails to fulfill her vital social re-
sponsibility to be a nurturer and caretaker and is deemed as a result not only 
irresponsible but reprehensible (Hodgins et al. 1997; Manhal-Baugus, 1998). 
Women of color are especially stigmatized in this regard (Brissett-Chapman 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
43 
1998), as gender, race, and class are intimately interconnected axes of social 
domination and inequality (Anderson and Collins 2012).
Even on the streets, in the underground drug economy, women are 
disadvantaged. As Maher (1997) has shown in her ethnographic account 
of the illicit street drug trade, there exists a gendered division of labor in 
income generating activities (also see Ripoll et al. 2002, Singer et al. 2013). 
Maher (1997:54) documents the ways women are “clearly disadvantaged 
compared to their male counterparts” but stresses the need for striking a 
balance between
the twin discourses of victimization and volition that inform current 
understandings of women’s drug-related lawbreaking. While this 
space must be large enough to include the constraints of sexism, rac-
ism, and poverty that [structure] women’s lives, it cannot be so big 
as to overwhelm the active, creative and often contradictory choices, 
adaptations and resistances that constitute women’s criminal activities 
(Maher 1997:201).
Another consequence of the stigmas borne by women that have been 
described in the drug-abuse research literature is the bias against female 
clients by treatment professionals. Research shows that treatment providers 
are more likely to describe the female drug-abusing clients as difficult, less 
compliant, and less responsive to treatment. Reviews of the literature reveal 
that many healthcare professionals hold especially denigrating stereotypical 
views and negative attitudes toward women who use illicit drugs (McLaughlin 
and Long 1996). Additionally, given their experience of gendered societal 
expectations, woman drug users are more likely to experience higher levels 
of guilt and shame in acknowledging their drug dependency than do men. 
Moreover, drug use treatment traditionally has been informed by male experi-
ence and from a male perspective (Walitzer and Sher 1996). These patterns 
are reflected in feminist analyses of abusive drinking among women and the 
early response of Alcoholics Anonymous
The social stigma, shame, and taboo of being a female alcoholic was so 
great that many women felt too inhibited to admit their alcoholism. 
It was thought that “nice” women didn’t become drunks . . . and the 
cultural image of the “moral woman” . . . was not easily extinguished 
by men or women inside AA, even though most AA members believed 
alcoholism was a physiological disease and not a problem of character. 

44 
❋ 
chapter one
Moreover, as women began to share their stories inside AA, they per-
ceived a double standard applied to them as alcoholic women. Also, 
some of the men and some of the wives of the alcoholics felt it was 
dangerous to include women in AA groups, where indiscrete relation-
ships might develop (Sanders 2009:8).
It is consequently not surprising to discover that women have not done 
as well in drug-abuse treatment as men, with rates of entry into treatment, 
retention, and completion of treatment being lower for women than for men 
(Hodgins et al. 1997). Feminists have critiqued the self-centeredness embed-
ded in the AA model of treatment, which has spread as well to the treatment of 
other forms of chemical abuse and has been adopted in many drug treatment 
programs. Feminist critics argue, the underlying culture of the twelve-step 
movement is not gender neutral but rather is ultimately detrimental to women, 
in that it encourages women to see themselves as the problem rather than 
recognizing the social origins of their suffering and organizing to achieve 
change in the socio-political environment (Rapping 1997).
Arrested while Black
Of  importance in this examination of social stigmatization is the fact that the 
poor, particularly the African American poor and other ethnic minorities, 
are arrested and incarcerated at rates that are disproportionate to their levels 
of drug use (Covington 1997). In a report entitled “Decades of Disparity: 
Drug Arrests and Race in the United States,” issued by Human Rights Watch 
(HRW) (2009), for example, it is noted that African Americans have been 
arrested for drug offenses nationwide at higher rates than whites for nearly 
three decades, even though they engage in drug offenses at comparable 
rates. Based on FBI data, the HRW report indicates that African Americans 
were arrested on drug charges at rates that were 2.8 to 5.5 times as high as 
those of white adults in every year from 1980 through 2007, the last year 
for which complete data were available. With specific reference to crack 
cocaine, while studies suggest that about 15 percent of the nation’s cocaine 
users (in both powder and crack forms) are African American, they account 
for about 90 percent of those convicted on crack cocaine charges (Davidson 
1999). Overall, about one in three of the more than 25.4 million adult drug 
arrestees in recent years was African American, suggesting the extent and 
persistence of racial disparities in US drug law enforcement. In 2000, for 
example, the rate of incarceration for African American males nationwide 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
45 
was almost 3,500 per 100,000 people. By comparison, for white males the rate 
of incarceration was below 500 per 100,000. On average, African American 
males were almost 8 times more likely to be imprisoned than white males. 
The racial disparities in incarceration are even more drastic for young Afri-
can American men between the ages of 18 and19 years and 25 and 29 years 
compared to their white counterparts; thus African Americans in these age 
groups were almost 9 times more likely to be behind bars than whites of the 
same age (Nunn 2002).
Another measure of the extent of mass incarceration in the African 
American community is the percentage that is in prison at any given time. 
In some locations, one third of the adult African American male population 
always is incarcerated. At the national level, while 1.6 percent of the African 
American population is in prison, almost 10 percent of African American 
males ages 25 to 29 years are in prison (Nunn 2002). Overwhelmingly, drug 
arrests are the source of the mass incarceration of African Americans, but they 
encompass arrests of other ethnic minority populations as well (Tonry 1996).
State-by-state data show that African Americans were arrested for drug 
offenses at rates in individual states that were 2 to 11.3 times greater than the 
rate for whites. Additionally, the report reveals that arrests for drug posses-
sion have greatly exceeded arrests for the sale of drugs every year since 1980. 
Moreover, the proportion of drug arrests for possession has been increasing 
relative to drug sales and has amounted to at least 80 percent of drug arrests 
annually since 1999 (Human Rights Watch 2009). As a result, there are over 
one million African American children with an incarcerated parent (or about 
one in nine), and more than half of these imprisoned parents were convicted 
of a drug or other nonviolent offense (Weston 2010).
The War on Drugs and the War on the Poor
The class and racial enforcement of drug laws contributes to a significant 
social divide in the impact of the enduring War on Drugs (Singer 2004). As 
Weston (2010), a professor of sociology at Harvard University, emphasizes:
Drugs are intensively criminalized among the poor but largely un-
regulated among the rich. The pot, coke and ecstasy that enliven col-
lege dorms, soothe the middle-class time bind and ignite the octane 
of capitalism on Wall Street are unimpeded by the street sweep, the 
prison cell and the parole-mandated urine tests that are routine in 
poor neighborhoods.

46 
❋ 
chapter one
In this regard, Robert Trojanowicz (1991) while at the National Cen-
ter for Community Policing, pointed out a pertinent pattern in drug law 
enforcement:
In New York City, narcotics officers are regularly assigned to the Port 
Authority, where they routinely confront bus patrons and ask to search 
their bags for drugs. . . . But why do the police target bus passengers 
(who tend to come from lower socioeconomic classes where minorities 
are overrepresented)?
At the same time, the health and social consequences of drug abuse are 
decidedly greater for the poor, who have few resources to spend on drug 
treatment and less access to quality care. Existing studies show that: 1) so-
cial deprivation and marginalization is associated with the most extensive 
forms of illicit drug user; 2) social and economic deprivation result in less 
access to health care and drug treatment; and 3) capacity for overcoming 
drug dependence is lower among the poor, having less access to meaningful 
social roles and adequate livelihood (Singer 2008). Critical to the impacts of 
drug use on the poor is marginalization. Thus, in a study over 1,500 active 
drug injectors from the ALIVE cohort, Genberg et al. (2011) found that 
residential relocation was associated with greater likelihood of long-term 
cessation of drug injection, but the impact of residential relocation varied 
Drug injection in Hartford (Photo by Claudia Santelices)

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
47 
depending on the deprivation of the drug user’s new neighborhood. Mov-
ing from a highly deprived to less deprived neighborhood had the greatest 
positive impact on ending drug injection, while staying in the most deprived 
neighborhoods was detrimental to people’s likelihood of ceasing drug 
injection. What was critical to continued drug injection in this study was 
not the mindset, personality, addiction level, world view, value system, or 
other personal characteristics of drug users, rather it was the nature of the 
neighborhood in which they lived.
This interpretation is supported by a study in Detroit by Boardman et 
al. (2001) of the effects of neighborhood disadvantage, experience of stress, 
and drug use. Using the 1995 Detroit Area Study and tract-level census data, 
they found that increased social stressors and higher levels of psychological 
distress among residents of poor neighborhoods is associated with drug use, 
especially among individuals with the lowest annual incomes. Those with 
the fewest resources living in the poorest areas are the least likely to be able 
to “assuage feelings of depression, anxiety and despair [without] drug use, 
which [for them] may be [the most available] and affordable coping response.”
Beyond poverty, chronic exposure to racism and classism is a known 
stressor (Baer et al. 2013; Kreiger 2005). Singer and colleagues (Baer et al. 
2013) have used the term “oppression illness” to characterize such structur-
ally imposed social stress. The psychological effects of this traumatic stress 
disorder, including depression, anger, and self-blame, are produced by the 
combined effects of being subject over time to intense social opprobrium 
(e.g., in the form of racial hatred, sexism, class discrimination) and the 
internalization of this reproach in the form of self-hatred. Other forms of 
social misery endured by the poor and ethnic minorities are less visible and 
more subtle, but consist of daily, structurally imposed insults, indignities, 
and emotional injuries stemming from the experience of status inequalities. 
These psychological wounds, which, borrowing from Sennett and Cobb 
(1972), can be referred to as “hidden injuries of oppression,” include both 
repeated exposure to disrespect (across class, race/ethnicity, sexual identity, 
and gender lines) and the enduring frustrations of prolonged social failure in 
the American culture of personal achievement. For example, each time people 
of color walk into a store and feel that they are being unduly scrutinized by 
white store employees the resulting feeling of indignity is a hidden injury 
of oppression. For the inner city poor such experiences, in varied form and 
social location, are a recurrent component of everyday oppression.
Not only do poor areas with high levels of unemployment and deteriorating 
infrastructure produce an inordinate level of social stress that may contribute 

48 
❋ 
chapter one
to self-medicating drug use, they often involve a social environment in which 
involvement in drug sales is an established and easily accessible (perhaps the 
most accessible) way of earning money. Based on his ethnographic research 
with young Latinos involved in the drug trade in New York City, Bourgois 
(2003b:4) asks: “Why should these young men and women take the subway 
to minimum wage jobs—or even double minimum wage jobs—in downtown 
offices when they can usually earn more, at least in the short run by selling 
drugs on the street corner in front of their apartment or school yard? In fact, 
I am always surprised that so many inner-city men and women remain in the 
legal economy and work nine to five plus overtime, barely making ends meet.”
During the 1980s and 1990s, many inner city areas like the one described 
by Bourgois experienced an intensification of concentrated poverty due to 
globalization, the flight of capital and production, and the loss of jobs in urban 
centers (Singer 2007). As Bourgois notes,
The economic base of the traditional working class has eroded 
throughout the country. Greater proportions of the population are 
being socially marginalized. The restructuring of the world economy 
by multinational corporations, finance capital, and digital electronic 
technology, as well as the exhaustion of social demographic models 
for public sector intervention on behalf of the poor [e.g. the welfare 
state] have escalated inequalities around class ethnicity and gender” 
(Bourgois 2003b:319).
The US inner city, a sociocultural and experiential space that Wacquant 
(2001) has termed the hyperghetto, today functions as a kind of ethno-class 
prison “in that it encloses a stigmatized population with its own distinctive 
organizations and culture.” This development, a product of technoeconomic 
and related social changes that began take hold during the 1980s and 1990s 
(the era of the rise of crack cocaine), reflects a broader societal pattern involv-
ing the devaluation of physical labor, continuing shrinkage of working class 
salaries, and a dramatic loss of working-class jobs. As a consequence of these 
sweeping structural changes, argues Wacquant, the contemporary inner city 
has lost many of its earlier communal features and acquired a social structure 
and cultural climate that parallels those of a prison. For inner city youth, 
legitimate opportunities for a dignified level of income acquisition have been 
widely replaced by illicit jobs in the underground drug-fueled opportunity 
structure. Under these conditions, the ever-vibrant drug trade and its alluring 
if ephemeral promise of conspicuous wealth for the inner city poor “remains 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
49 
a ready but risky source of casual employment for low-education men and 
women with no legitimate prospects” (Weston 2010).
Still, despite all of these factors, considering alcohol and illicit drugs 
together, there is evidence to suggest that wealthy people are at least as 
likely if not more likely than poor people to be drug abusers. The drug use of 
wealthy people, however, is less visible to the wider society as it takes place 
behind closed doors and not, very often, on the street in the view of the pub-
lic. Consequently, as Saxe et al. (2001b:1987) point out, public intervention 
programs “focus on visible manifestations of substance use. In particular, 
in the framework of prevention efforts, programs focus on illicit drug use in 
poor and minority communities where drug markets are most visible. Yet 
visibility of drugs in particular communities does not necessarily imply drug 
use among residents of those communities.” The association of drug abuse 
with poor neighborhoods, these researchers argue, may be a product of the 
tendency to associate crime and drug use, leading to the assumption that 
because more street crime occurs in poor, inner city neighborhoods there 
must be more drug use there. Ethnographic research on the drug scenes in 
urban neighborhoods, however, reveals that suburban drug users drive into 
the inner city to purchase drugs (Singer and Mirhej 2004; Williams 1992). 
Research by Riley (1997) on heroin and cocaine trafficking in six cities, for 
example, found that Whites were more likely than African Americans to 
buy drugs outside of their own neighborhoods and to buy them indoors. 
As a result, visible drug use and sales that occur in a neighborhood may not 
reflect elevated levels of drug use by people who live in that neighborhood 
(Ensminger et al. 1997)
The emergence of inner city, generally heavily minority populated, urban 
areas as centers of drug distribution has a long history. This pattern traces to 
the large migration of rural African Americans in the South into the cities 
of the North beginning in the early 1900s in one of the largest population 
shifts in US history. In huge cities like Chicago—which has been dubbed 
the most segregated city in America—the new arrivals encountered intense 
racism, imposed social marginalization, family disruption, routine structural 
discrimination, and urban poverty (which experientially was more oppressive 
than the rural poverty most migrants had endured in the South). The great 
migration of African Americans was fueled by hopes of social and economic 
advancement and a craving for liberation from the stultifying Southern-style 
Jim Crow racism. For the most part the migrants were young, single, and 
optimistic, but the urban environments that received them were anything 
but warm and welcoming.

50 
❋ 
chapter one
As parts of northern cities filled up with African Americans, the domi-
nant white society responded with a collective, if largely unspoken, deci-
sion to abandon the areas where the migrants were settling, leaving behind 
decaying schools, failing utilities and services, and few opportunities for 
legal employment, thereby condemning the inhabitants to perpetual pov-
erty. During the years of Prohibition, from 1920 to 1933, African American 
neighborhoods “became the place where whites practiced their vices” (James 
and Johnson 1996: 16). Black-owned jazz clubs, after-hours clubs, houses 
of prostitution, gambling halls, dance clubs, and other sites of recreation 
and illicit behavior emerged as important social centers for the growing 
African American urban population. Whites, desiring excitement and an 
escape from the depressing economy, flocked to the inner city “to hear Af-
rican American music, to party, to patronize houses of prostitution, and to 
gamble” (James and Johnson 1996:17). As Drake and Cayton (1970) point 
out, these centers of congregation often became points of contact between 
the purveyors of pleasure “on the illigit” and their clientele—commercial 
sex workers, bootleggers, marihuana peddlers, and pimps. These places, they 
note (Drake and Cayton 1970:610) often were “merely ‘fronts’ and ‘blinds’ 
for the organized underworld. . . . The primary institutions of the underworld 
[were] the tougher taverns, the reefer pads, the gambling dens, the liquor 
joints, and the call houses and buffet-flats where professional prostitutes 
cater to the trade in an organized fashion.”
It was during this era that inner city areas, as marginalized sectors of the 
city, emerged as drug distribution sites for the wider urban environment. In 
poor neighborhoods, drug laws may at times be fiercely enforced but unevenly 
so with visible routine illicit drug sales occurring in key “hot spot” street 
corners and open-air drug markets or at more dispersed more public or less 
public sites through neighborhoods. Poor communities, however, commonly 
have questions about the objectives of street drug-law enforcement:
The community feels that while there are more drugs sold and used 
in majority neighborhoods, law enforcement has no interest in those 
people or those crimes. The real money and the real benefits of the drug 
trade go to high-level figures outside the community. There is strong 
feeling that the drug trade could not exist without the acquiescence and 
support of the government and law enforcement, that the government 
actually manages the drug trade, and that the CIA invented crack and 
brought in it into the community. High levels of enforcement, arrest, 

the social construction of drug consumers 
❋ 
51 
and incarceration in minority neighborhoods are seen as a deliberate 
outside attack, designed as a way to incapacitate strong young minority 
men and provide work for law enforcement agencies and prison staff 
(Kennedy and Wong 2009:8).
Various analysts have concluded that the enduring flow of drugs into 
poor neighborhoods as distribution centers for a wider suburban periphery 
is facilitated, at least in part, by police corruption. Certainly it is not dif-
ficult to find cases of police on the drug take. Smith (2012), for example, 
maintains a website that provides weekly reports on police (or related 
criminal justice) drug-corruption cases around the country. For the week 
of October 31, 2012, for example, he reports cases in Gary, Indiana; Chi-
cago, Illinois; Waveland, Mississippi; and Flomaton, Alabama. The prior 
week, a former New York City Police Department officer was sentenced to 
15 years in prison for selling two stolen guns to a local drug group to pay 
off his drug debts. The General Accounting Office reports that from 1993 
to 1998 the FBI initiated about 400 state and local drug-related police cor-
ruption arrests resulting in the conviction of over 300 police officers. More 
recently, in 2001 eight San Antonio police officers were arrested for plot-
ting to protect a cocaine delivery. During the same period in Los Angeles, 
the Rampart Scandal came to light as numerous officers in the anti-drug 
unit were indicted on corruption charges that included drug dealing. Also 
during this period three police officers in Florida were indicted for drug 
trafficking, including using their patrol cars to transport drugs for local 
drug dealers (Drug Policy Alliance 2002).
It is not hard to understand how the drug war breeds police corruption; 
there are vast sums of money available to drug dealers that can be spent in this 
way and police may be underpaid and seeking additional income. Allegations 
of official complicity in the drug trade in US cities, like the one encapsulated 
in the quote on community attitudes above, have a long history. Most recently 
this charge has been leveled by Guillermo Terrazas Villanueva, spokesperson 
for the Chihuahua, Mexico state government. According to Terrazas, “It’s 
like pest control companies, they only control. . . . If you finish off the pests, 
you are out of a job. If they finish the drug business, they finish their jobs” 
(Arsenault 2012). While other Mexican officials dispute this assertion, it is 
evident from multiple local cases that one factor in the concentration of drug 
trafficking in poor neighborhoods is police corruption and complicity, as well 
as cultural attitudes about the poor and ethnic minorities.

52 
❋ 
chapter one
Conclusion: The Useful Threat of 
the Black Bogyman Drug User
The association discussed in this chapter between poverty, ethnic minorities, 
gender biases and people’s conceptions and patterns of drug use, as well as 
the pejorative sentiments that help to propel stigmatization, contribute to the 
identification and demonization of the drug user and addict as the ultimate 
social deviant, the very embodiment of beings that are alien and threaten-
ing to the dominant mainstream society. In the minds of middle class and 
suburban-dwelling Americans and their elected officials from similar or 
higher class backgrounds, inner city ghettos are “filled with black men mug-
ging whites for money to pay for heroin and then injecting this evil drug so 
that they can spend the rest of the day nodding away in a blissful vacuum” 
(Iiyama et al. 1976: 17). So compelling for them is this constructed image, 
despite being so loaded with inaccuracies as revealed by social scientific 
research, that it has helped drive continued media accounts, the enactment 
of drug-related laws and policies, the incarceration of massive numbers of 
individuals, the withdrawal of the social safety net for the poor, and the dis-
ruption of minority communities. Feeding this perilous image are angered 
attitudes about African American women as breeders of children as part 
of an indolent scam to swindle the hard-working taxpayer into supporting 
their unproductive yet lavish lifestyles, and about the male children of these 
women, exposed to drugs in utero or soon afterward, who routinely become 
worthless, drug-crazed, and violent threats lurking at the gates of innocent 
morally correct and primarily white neighborhoods. While disputable at 
every turn, these images do not easily go away, and they are not subject to 
refutation through a presentation of mere facts. This is the case because 
they are useful images, they serve important social functions for those who 
embrace them, including justifying discriminatory laws and social practices 
that sustain an unlevel playing field that works to the advantage of wealthier 
sectors of society at grave cost to poorer sectors.

53 
Chapter TWO
Drug Users through the Ages
When Did We Decide Addicts Were a Separate Category?
E 
xactly when the Othering of addicts began can be traced to the 18th 
century, probably to the gin epidemic of London. Prior to our con-
certed effort to find evidence of the concept of the addict in the writ-
ings of the ancients, we had always thought that it had been present since 
the discovery of intoxicating preparations. We could not, however, find it in 
any of those writings, from the Ghitas to the Gilgamesh epic, to the Torah, 
to Plato’s Symposium, to the letters of Paul the Apostle. All of these sources 
made mention of strong drink, and most warned against drunkenness, but 
none attributed drunkenness as a chronic condition. In all of these venerable 
writings, the lone example of the habitual addict appears in Homer’s Odyssey, 
in which Odysseus and his crew encountered and are enticed by the Lotus 
Eaters, whose lifestyle seemed to reflect an addicted condition. Neverthe-
less, because the described behaviors resembled no known addictive pattern, 
involving no known drug, the appearance of the lotus eaters in The Odyssey 
may be a product of an active imagination, or perhaps a story from another 
source, rather than an expression of personal experience. In order to trace 
when and where humankind came to “recognize” addicts and addiction, this 
chapter begins by positing humankind’s ability to ingest toxins and derive 
something other than illness or death from them as a phenomenon with deep 
evolutionary precedents.
Only speculation, albeit backed by archaeological and ethnographic 
evidence, is possible with regard to the process of discovering plant-derived 
preparations that gave pleasure to their users. After laying out the funda-
mentals of drug use among humans, this chapter proceeds in its search for 
instances in which writers of ancient texts perceived some of the people 
they knew or observed as drunkards or addicts. It appears, as noted, that 
the concept of addiction (including alcoholism) received full articulation 
in the 19th century, and that articulation co-occurred with the widespread 
availability of truly concentrated intoxicants, especially alcohol, opioids, and 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 53–70. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

54 
❋ 
chapter two
cocaine. This chapter’s narrative focuses on alcohol, because it has the longest 
documented history of human consumption. In our pursuit of instances 
where ancient writers attributed chronicity to the observed use of drugs, we 
also inspect the evidence on opioids since concentrated preparations made 
it relatively easy to become intoxicated, thereby increasing the likelihood of 
intoxication in individual users.
Evolutionary Precedents
Millennia before the first archaeologically detectable evidence that humankind 
consumed some plants or plant products to become intoxicated, humans were 
interacting with biospheres and discovering by accident the plants or plant-
derived preparations that made their senses function differently. McGovern’s 
(2003) research, for example, limits the hard evidence of wine and its use and 
storage to 7000 or 8000 years before the present. Nevertheless, we can assume 
that humans were exposed to fermented grapes and other fruit long before that. 
Likewise, across millennia of interaction with plants, paleolithic humans were 
likely to have tasted of plants, such as the flowers or fruit of datura, that caused 
them to have a variety of altered nerve functions, perhaps depressant, perhaps 
stimulant, perhaps hallucinogenic. The fact that humans willingly repeated 
these exposures tells us that on some very basic level, the human body was 
ready to process the toxins in wine and other plant material and then derive 
some kind of benefit from the plants’ effect on the nervous system.
An understanding of how humans have come to use plant-derived drugs 
and how plants have come to produce drugs has emerged as neurobiology 
and botanical pharmacology have become increasingly sophisticated at the 
molecular level. The process of knowledge development began in the mid-
1990s with the assertion that the concept of “evolutionary novelty” explained 
human use of plant-derived drugs (e.g., Nesse and Berrige 1997). Later theo-
rists held that plants and animals constantly develop action-and-reaction 
features involving plant toxins and defenses against those toxins, leaving 
humans with some of the same defenses originally developed by herbivores 
millions of years earlier (e.g., Sullivan et al. 2008).
In the former argument, Nesse and Berrige (1997) excluded human 
beings, at least temporarily, from the influence of evolutionary process in 
the human response to psychotropic plants, holding that when humans got 
around to trying some psychoactive plants, they derived reward messages 
to the brain that bypassed other systems for processing the total effect of the 
toxins being ingested. In other words, whatever was negative or not useful 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
55 
in the experience of eating opium or chewing coca was essentially over-
shadowed by the reinforcement that went straight to the pleasure centers of 
the mid-brain (Nesse and Berrige 1997). Consequently, humans liked and 
wanted this experience again, even though it did not really meet full criteria 
for being beneficial to the human consumer (e.g., providing nourishment or 
enhancing performance). Once they had discovered the “empty treat” of the 
drug high, humans began to seek the reward repeatedly.
The latter argument, forwarded by Sullivan, Hagen, and Hammerstein 
(2008), rests on the fact that plants and animals have been evolving for mil-
lennia at counter-purposes—plants developing aversive toxins to put animals 
off of eating them and animals developing metabolic mechanisms to filter out 
the plant-derived toxins so they could keep on eating. The characterization of 
the cytochrome P450 system, which resides in the human liver, but exists in 
many other animals as well, has fed this particular theory, because it provides 
strong evidence of the evolutionary universality of animals’ internal mecha-
nisms that counteract the effects of plant toxins. Drug plants present an array 
of alkaloids that often are toxic in high concentrations, but as they occur in 
plant material, they are not so toxic as to be intolerable to humans equipped 
with the cytochrome P450 mitigation system. At least that may be true for 
some humans, as the accumulated evidence on the workings of cytochrome 
P450 show considerable variation across human populations (Sullivan et al. 
2008) regarding what toxins are metabolized and thoroughly excreted. So, for 
example, Asian populations may respond to the nearly universal plant-derived 
toxin alcohol differently from European populations, although most human 
populations have categorized alcohol in the form of fermented beverages as 
desirable and often a complement to other food.
The cytochrome P450 system aids in processing plant-derived toxins 
other than alcohol, helping to keep our omnivorous ancestors out of trouble 
and mitigating the impact of consuming plants that contain drugs or alcohol 
produced from plants. If we follow the logic of this particular speculative 
theory to its conclusion, the eventual elaboration of the human nervous 
system led to circumstances in which the creatures endowed with a complex 
brain might discover and derive gratification from plant material that did not 
necessarily nourish them but did make them feel different. If that feeling was 
pleasant, these creatures were smart enough to seek out ways to repeat it. 
Although the original authors of these theories did not engage in this level of 
description, one could imagine our pre-primate ancestors, for example, forag-
ing for leafy vegetables and coming upon a succulent-looking proto-tobacco 
that had developed an emetic toxin—nicotine—that it contained in sufficient 

56 
❋ 
chapter two
amounts to put our ancestors off by making them nauseous. Some of these 
ancestors, however, acquired by mutation or other genetic process a modi-
fication that enabled them to process modest amounts of nicotine without 
getting sick, and that allowed continued consumption of the proto-tobacco, 
which for some reason—perhaps its ability to revive a tired body—improved 
their survival chances within the species’ total population.
Flash forward millions of years, and we find humans somewhat disen-
gaged from the back-and-forth counter-adaptations suggested by Sullivan, 
Hagen and Hammerstein (2008), but they are a curious species, constantly 
discovering new components of nature’s bounty and testing for nutritional 
or other value. As fully developed Homo sapiens sapiens, they now have brains 
that are so elaborately developed that they value far more than whether or not 
a plant material alleviates hunger and provides nourishment. A human may 
prize a plant or plant product if it makes him/her feel different—perhaps more 
energetic or somnolent, or if it alleviates pain. The combination of curiosity, the 
aptitude to store in their cultural warehouse vast amounts of environmental 
information, the capacity to appreciate a wide variety of effects associated with 
consumption, and the physiologic equipment to process safely a wide range of 
the toxins that may be involved makes the contemporary human being (i.e., 
anybody born after 20,000 BCE) the ideal explorer of plants and what they 
have to offer. These features of humanity also made it inevitable that the vast 
majority would discover something in their local environments to alter their 
consciousness and incorporate into cultural traditions. And this is precisely 
what occurred in global history.
Left out of this anthropocentric explanation is recognition that what 
appears to be nonhuman animal consumption of plants that contribute to 
what appear to be altered physiological states and states of consciousness 
(Huffman 2003). It is well known, for example, that cats are highly attracted 
to the valerian plant (Valeriana officinalis) and catnip (Nepeta cataria). Sniffing 
and consuming these plants appears to push cats into a state of observable 
satisfaction. Similarly, cattle will readily eat plants that contain alkaloids 
that seem to have a narcotic effect (Dudley 2002). Additionally, birds and 
various other animals have been observed seeking out and consuming 
highly fermented fruit and afterward showing signs of being drunk, such 
as stumbling and acting as if they are noticeably under the influence. All of 
these behaviors suggest that many species in addition to humans have long 
evolutionary histories consuming plants with psychoactive properties. In the 
assessment of ethnopharmacologist Ronald Siegel (2005:10), “ethnological 
and laboratory studies . . . and analyses of social and biological history, suggest 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
57 
that the pursuit of intoxication with drugs is a primary motivational force in 
the behavior of organisms.” Siegel labels this behavior “the fourth drive” in a 
list that includes the biologically based motivators of hunger, thirst, and sex. 
As this discussion suggests, human involvement with psychotropic plants 
builds on and constitutes a set of cultural elaborations of more broadly shared 
and evolutionarily far older behavioral patterns in diverse species.
Humankind and Intoxication
Wine and its consumption provide good starting points for discussing the 
beginnings of human intoxication because humankind has a documented 
continuous history of drinking wine and getting drunk from its effects that 
spans all of recorded history and reaches back into the realm of oral history 
that preceded it. This background story of wine and its consumption provides 
useful material on the formation of ancient peoples’ attitudes about intoxica-
tion and altered states of consciousness.
Because the receptacles used by Paleolithic hunter-gatherers were likely 
to be made of organic material, such as animal skin and/or reed basketry, 
archaeologists hold out little hope of finding conclusive evidence of the very 
earliest instances of humans’ consumption of fermented grapes, or proto-
wine, which might easily have occurred over 10,000 years ago, given the 
climate shifts associated with the recession of the last Ice Age (McGovern 
2003: 8). The availability of the fruit, Vitis vinifera sylvestris, that is ancestral 
to the grapes used in contemporary winemaking occurred in several differ-
ent sites in what we now call the Middle East. Archaeologists have been able 
to find apparent wine residues in ancient pottery, pointing to the presence 
in ancient parts of contemporary Georgia, Turkey, and Iraq of traditions of 
wine production (McGovern 2003: 40–42) possibly as early as 8,000 years 
ago, but at least 7,000 years ago.1
The presence of this potentially intoxicating and addictive drink, how-
ever, did not necessarily lead to the establishment of a sub-population of 
consumers identified as problematic by the rest of their group. Rather, the an-
cients expressed a caution about wine’s effects when drunk to excess (Grivetti 
1995:10). In ancient India, China, and Egypt, physicians and men regarded 
as wise consistently expressed ambivalent opinions about the consumption 
of wine. The Ayurvedic physicians of India (ca.1400 BCE) were aware of 
wine’s benefits, attributing, among other things, exhilaration, nourishment, 
and freedom from fear, grief, or fatigue to its consumption (Grivetti 1995). 
They also recognized a downside to wine drinking in excess:

58 
❋ 
chapter two
One who saturates himself excessively with . . . fresh wine . . . and at the 
same time abstains from physical movements including day-sleep, suf-
fers from diseases . . . such as diabetic boils, urticarial patches, itching, 
anemia, fever, leprosy, anorexia, drowsiness, impotency, over-obesity, 
disorders of consciousness, sleepiness, swelling, and other disorders 
(Grivetti 1995:10).
Despite the subtext of wine drinking as a chronic condition, however, they 
did not pathologize excessive drinking to the point of giving this behavior a 
separate name. That name did not enter the literature on alcohol consump-
tion until the middle of the 19th century, when Magnus Huss wrote about 
alcoholism (Phillips 2000: 271). During the 3,300 years after the Ayurvedic 
writers recorded their opinions about wine, philosophers and physicians made 
various observations about the effect of wine drinking. Egyptians warned 
against wine’s duality, noting that while it made the drinker feel good, its 
consumption in excess could lead to unacceptable behavior (Grivetti 1995:11). 
Similarly, Hippocrates noted wine’s positive effects, going so far as to include 
wine in some of his remedies, even what sounds like a wine diet: “It is better 
to be full of wine than full of food.” (Grivetti 1995:12) Nevertheless, he also 
recognized the potential harm of drinking wine in excess. Throughout the 
ancients’ musings on wine and its influence, a pattern of duality emerges in 
which wine in moderation is seen as beneficial, and wine in excess is seen as 
harmful, or at least embarrassing. With the exception of the Ayurvedic phy-
sicians, however, the ancients’ discussions focused on the acute intoxicating 
effects of wine, not on the long-term effect of addiction. We should also note 
that the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans almost always diluted wine 
with water, making the task of achieving an intoxicating dose more difficult 
than if it were consumed neat, or without dilution. Depending on how much 
water was added to the wine, the resulting drink may have had the rough 
equivalent of the proportion of alcohol found in beer (4–8 percent by volume).
Were there no people labeled as chronic drunks in the ancient world? If there 
were, the available literature does not tell us much about them. Perhaps they 
did not congregate in easily recognizable locales, such as present-day Seattle’s 
Skid Road, New York’s Bowery, or Miami’s overpasses. Among the Greeks and 
Romans, in the writings of Plato about the Greek symposium and Plutarch and 
others on the Roman equivalent convivium there was a sense that the participants 
were not drunkards but men who intended to drink on the occasion of one 
of these gatherings (Standage 2005:78). Still, even in the passages describing 
people given to excess drink, it appears that the ancient writers focused not on 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
59 
chronicity so much as on the harm that excessive drinking sessions do to the 
drinker. For example, in Plato’s Symposium, one participant suggests that after 
the previous night’s excesses the group might adopt a drinking policy:
. . . [T]hey were about to commence drinking, when Pausanias said, 
“And now, my friends, how can we drink with least injury to ourselves? 
I can assure you that I feel severely the effect of yesterday’s potations, 
and must have time to recover; and I suspect that most of you are in 
the same predicament, for you were of the party yesterday. Consider 
then: How can the drinking be made easiest?” (MIT Classics 2011).
Pausanias wanted not a reprise of the previous night’s excesses, but to 
establish some principles by means of which the same group who were drunk 
the previous night would drink but avoid excess on the night at hand. An-
cient texts repeatedly give the reader the sense that each drunken occasion 
was to the participants and witnesses more significant than the frequency 
of these occasions.
Saint Augustine’s writings on the subject of drunkenness (cf. Cook 
2006:52–56) indicate that early Christian philosophy regarding intoxication 
with alcoholic beverages deplored drunkenness as a sin of the flesh that led to 
other fleshly sins, such as lust and gluttony. Again, Augustine emphasized the 
acute state of drunkenness as undesirable, especially as a result of consuming 
excessive wine in the context of Christian ritual. Apparently, he never made 
reference to drunkards, or chronically impaired drinkers.
Burton ([1621] 2000) provided some of the first indications that alcohol 
had a relationship with ongoing problems, and he asserted, somewhat incor-
rectly according to Abel (1999), that the ancients had identified “drunkards,” 
or people given to excessive wine drinking. Informed by more accurate 
translation than that used by Burton, Abel indicates that, consistent with 
other information on the ancients’ perceptions of wine and its consump-
tion, the ancients’ emphasis remained on the drunken episode rather than 
a chronic condition. The use of flawed translations may help explain why 
Keller (1979) so forcefully asserted in his overview of alcohol and alcoholism 
that the ancients understood alcoholism, but perhaps more influential in his 
interpretation of the ancients’ writings about alcohol was his strong belief that 
alcoholism existed. Examples used by Keller to illustrate the ancients’ concept 
of alcoholism (e.g., the fall from a rooftop of Odysseus’s companion, Epenore, 
or a Greek eulogist’s friend falling down) actually describe acute bouts of 
intoxication and their consequences, not chronic conditions of drunkenness.

60 
❋ 
chapter two
Health and social ills associated with drinking alcoholic beverages ap-
peared emphatically in William Hogarth’s “Gin Lane” engraving released 
in 1751 (Rodin 1981:1238). The “gin mania” that swept the poor neighbor-
hoods of London beginning about 1715 led to the development of patterned 
habitual drunkenness, abuse of families, and neglect and mistreatment of 
children. This response to high availability of gin was not lost on Hogarth, 
who sardonically depicted the alleged effects of that liquor on the poor 
people of London, including, it appears, facial deformities consistent with 
fetal alcohol syndrome. Even if the face of the poor baby being dropped to 
his death in that famous etching was only a product of Hogarth’s outstanding 
observational acumen rather than any understanding of how the mother’s 
drinking caused the baby’s face to be misshapen, this point in Western history, 
one hundred years prior to Huss’s introduction of the concept of alcoholism, 
marks the spot when alcohol use gained recognition in the West for its long-
term consequences. If we also examine the social and economic conditions 
that produced Gin Lane, we find England making a transition to industrial 
capitalism with no constraints on the treatment of workers. Poor pay, squalid 
and overcrowded living conditions, and inter-class prejudice made the lives 
of people living in London’s tenements sufficiently grim to warrant the con-
sumption of very strong drink. A question raised by this development was 
how did the dominant sectors in society accept the increasingly inhuman 
conditions suffered by their fellow citizens? This question is fundamental 
to the purpose of this book as 
the Othering of the poor, ex-
pressed in the condemnation 
of their drug-using behaviors, 
served to justify their suffer-
ing as something they brought 
on themselves.
The beverage implicated 
in “gin lane” was qualitatively 
different from the wine and 
beer available to steady English 
drinkers before the introduc-
tion of distilled spirits by the 
Dutch in the seventeenth cen-
tury (Fleming 1975). Whereas 
beer and wine provided the 
drinker with between four 
Gin Lane (by William Hogarth, 1751)

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
61 
and fourteen percent alcohol 
by volume, gin provided 40 
percent, a truly efficient means 
of becoming intoxicated. Har-
kening back to the cytochrome 
P450 “shield” afforded by the 
herbivore forebears mentioned 
earlier, the availability of gin led 
to unprecedented stress on that 
system for processing alcohol 
in the liver. It is not surprising 
that astute observers such as 
Hogarth noticed poor health 
outcomes among the consum-
ers of gin in his native England. 
He also contrasted gin lane with 
“beer street” in a second etching, 
showing prosperity, good health, and no endangered children in that illustra-
tion. In the relatively narrow span of 170 years, the bad reputation of distilled 
liquor, including blame for the dissolution of families, maltreatment of women 
and children, and ruination of personal finances had grown to the point where 
large numbers of people, particularly women, found the consumption of “hard” 
liquor intolerable and worthy of being eradicated. In fact, the time from when 
Magnus Huss gave a name to the condition of chronic drunk to the time when 
the United States ratified its 18th amendment prohibiting sale or production 
of alcoholic beverages only spanned 69 years, an astonishingly brief period in 
which a whole country (or at least two-thirds of the states) enacted prohibi-
tion of a widespread behavior. Given the rapidity with which it occurred after 
their introduction, one wonders if distilled spirits had not been invented and 
distributed whether prohibition would have happened at all.
Other Drugs and Intoxication
This question becomes a recurring theme as we examine the histories of other 
drugs in the human pharmacopoeia: Does the “refinement” of a drug’s active 
ingredients always result in severe impact on the users? The beginnings of 
addiction as a concept appear to correspond in some cases to the refinement 
of certain basic drugs, including alcohol and tobacco, but the first important 
refinement of opioids, laudanum, pre-dates its acquiring a reputation for 
Beer Street (by William Hogarth, 1751)

62 
❋ 
chapter two
generating addicts by about three centuries. Paracelsus is credited with 
inventing this opium-based mixture in the early sixteenth century (Ball 
2006), but use of opioid preparations in medicine can be traced to ancient 
Mesopotamia (Scarborough 2010:vii–4). The Greeks and Romans, including 
Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Nicander, Celsus, and Pliny all included opium 
in larger works that described various sectors of the ancient pharmacopoeia 
of their respective eras (Scarborough 2010:vii–5). Although the ancients 
apparently recognized the danger of poisoning from opium, and had fairly 
sophisticated methods for rendering it consumable, they did not report 
non-medical use of the drug. In England, as with distilled alcohol, public 
consciousness of laudanum as a problem lagged far behind its development 
as medicine. Thomas de Quincey’s Confessions of an English Opium Eater, 
published in 1822, acknowledged that there were people in English society 
who had become habituated to a tincture of opium also called laudanum, 
but not the same as Paracelsus’ formulation (Ball 2006:182-183), notably 
including some literati, as discussed in Chapter 4.
The production of the opium-alcohol tincture laudanum is credited to the 
British physician Thomas Sydenham (Davenport-Hines 2002:184). To make 
it, he prepared a concentration of the morphine alkaloid that was 25 times as 
potent as paregoric, achieving a potential for intoxication not possible through 
use of raw opium or other preparations available in the early 19th century. The 
fact that its invention did not engender a rapid rise in the number of impaired 
users is somewhat puzzling, considering the English response to gin and the 
uptake of cocaine in Europe within a couple of decades of the introduction 
of these concentrated drugs. Perhaps because laudanum’s principal uses as 
anti-diarrhea and analgesic medicines, rather than pleasure-giving purposes, 
dominated medical applications, it simply did not occur to the recipients of 
laudanum in medical contexts to use the drug for anything other than allevi-
ating symptoms. Concentrated alcohol in the form of rum or gin or brandy, 
on the other hand, went straight to the streets as a handy mitigation of stress 
and as a welcomed social lubricant. Despite its restricted medical pattern of 
use, potential addicts eventually “discovered” laudanum, although its heavy 
consumption never became as widespread as distilled ethyl alcohol.
The “Big Five” and Their Transformation 
into More Dangerous Forms
The 19th century in Europe and the United States appears to have brought 
about a convergence of potent drug preparations which led ultimately to the 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
63 
development of the poly-drug configuration seen in present-day drug issues. 
In their concentrated forms, each presented new challenges to the metabolic 
capacities of their consumers, sometimes also producing patterns of highly 
recidivistic use. Five drugs in particular—alcohol, tobacco, opioids, cocaine, 
and cannabis became the principal components of Western drug consump-
tion,2 and all became, deservedly or not, associated with problems in the lives 
of their users. Each drug had a unique pathway toward widespread use and 
engendering problems among users. The following sections offer summaries 
of those pathways:
Alcohol. Distillation as a physical principle in the management of flu-
ids was probably known to humans in the present-day Middle East as 
early as 1,100 years ago, but as noted earlier, its use in the production 
of preparations for general consumption did not become prevalent in 
Europe until sometime in the 17th century (Standage 2005: 94–95). 
Refinement of fermented liquids derived from sugar cane or grain 
became widespread as commerce with the West Indies and the rest of 
the world developed in Europe. Rum in particular became a currency 
in international trade with which slave traders plied their commerce 
in human misery and the British Empire compensated its sailors for 
services rendered and/or imposed. The New World bustled with activ-
ity in the invention, manufacture, distribution, and consumption of 
distilled beverages, including the sour mash concoctions of southern 
North America, rye whiskey in the north of that continent, and even-
tually, tequila in Mexico. The impact of their popularity, especially 
among males in the US populations, included the profusion of drink-
ing houses, often called “saloons,” and burgeoning social problems 
related to drunkenness that plagued the saloons’ customers. The 
temperance movement in the United States was aimed at preventing 
the consequences of addiction to the powerful alcohol preparations 
sold in such establishments.
	 Tobacco. Nicotine is such a powerful drug that its dosage had to be 
reduced to make it a truly effective and heavily consumed commodity. 
The most widely used tobacco before the 19th century was in powdered 
form (snuff) as well as cut tobacco (which could be smoked in pipes, ci-
gars, or hand-rolled cigarettes). Inhalation of pipe tobacco or cigars de-
livers such a jolt of nicotine that it induces nausea and dizziness. Hand 
rolling of small quantities of “mild” tobaccos into cigarettes required 
skill and patience that not many consumers had. In Spain in 1804, the 

64 
❋ 
chapter two
introduction of hand-rolled “papeletes” constituted a first step in the 
eventual mass-production of ready-made tubes of cut tobacco from 
which smoke could be inhaled into the lungs, delivering a substantial 
dose of nicotine without dizzying toxic effects (Goodman 1993:90–99). 
These little vehicles of nicotine delivery could be carried around easily 
and consumed anywhere, and they were inexpensive enough to be used 
all the time. As the numbers of cigarette smokers grew and began in 
the 20th century to live long enough to incur cigarette-related illness, 
it became clear by 1964 that this product generated the most addictive 
tobacco consumption and the greatest hazard to the public health of 
any known drug.
	 Opioids. Opium, as we noted earlier, has been in the pharmacopoeia, 
beginning with people in the Fertile Crescent, for thousands of years, 
usually consumed as medicine for the treatment of pain, nausea, and 
diarrhea. It was a valuable medicine that could be used in very small 
quantities to treat patients for pain, coughing, or nausea. The intro-
duction of water soluble preparations, including morphine sulfate and 
diacetyl morphine (heroin) in the 19th and 20th centuries eventually 
led to more widespread consumption of opioids (Musto 1987:1–3; 
Davenport-Hines 2002:184–187). Recently, nonmedical use of opioid 
analgesics of the next generation has emerged as a drug-use pattern of 
choice in many parts of the United States. Most prominent among these 
prescription preparations is Oxycontin, which is the brand name for 
a time-release version of the semi-synthetic preparation oxycodone, 
which in certain parts of the United States, has become popular and 
also dangerous, dominating emergency department statistics on ac-
cidental overdose.
	 Cannabis. Diffusion of this drug plant into the rest of the world trav-
eled on two different historical tracks: (1) usage other than as a drug, 
and (2) use as a mind-altering drug. The former is apparently the more 
ancient, with some evidence of cannabis being used for food and fiber 
among the Chinese at least 3,500 years before the common era (BCE) 
(Booth 2003:17) The plant’s long, pliant fibers constitute useful ma-
terial for manufacturing cordage and clothing, and its fatty seeds are 
highly nutritious and totally devoid of the tetrahydrocannabinol that 
is the most pharmacologically active alkaloid in the plant. Almost as 
soon as the Spanish arrived in the New World, they attempted to en-
courage the planting of cannabis in most colonies (called Cáñamo). By 
the mid-sixteenth century, some cannabis plantations could be found 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
65 
as far south as Chile and as far north as Mexico (Carter et al. 1980:12). 
Nevertheless, in the New World, little evidence testifies to any form of 
cannabis use for mind-altering purposes until the 19th century. For 
psychotropic uses of cannabis, there was a different path, originating 
in India and traveling west into North Africa and Spain as the follow-
ers of Mohammed dominated the 8th through the 15th centuries in 
that part of the world. Reasons why it did not filter into Europe until 
the 19th century and never really became established in China are 
subject to conjecture, but alternative theories lack historical evidence. 
The European crusaders of the 11th through 13th centuries, despite 
the fact that many lived for extended periods in the “Holy Land” in 
the presence of hashish-smoking people, did not bring cannabis back 
to Europe with them. French soldiers under Napoleon, on the other 
hand, did. The wholesale shipping of indentured servants from India to 
Jamaica and Trinidad-Tobago provided another putative pathway for 
cannabis to enter the Western Hemisphere. Coming from an ancient 
tradition of cannabis use, the East Indians who were transferred to 
the West Indies likely brought their ganja with them, and, while they 
lived alongside African-descended populations, these immigrants 
imparted their patterns of drug consumption to their neighbors. All 
of the process described above is murky, because historians rarely at-
tended to drug-using patterns of the poor and/or the populations of 
color. Nevertheless, by the beginning of the 20th century, the lands 
surrounding the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico were epicenters of 
diffusion of cannabis use into North America. Regarding potency of 
the preparations consumed, there was relatively little change between 
800 and 1975, with a range of cannabis preparations’ potency from 
bhang (drink made with bottom leaves of the plant) to ganja (tops 
and flowers of the female plant) to charas, or hashish (collected resin 
rich in THC). The latter form varied between 10 and 15 percent THC 
by weight. After 1975, as a broad market had been established, astute 
growers began to increase the THC content of cannabis through ma-
nipulation of hybrid strains and strategies to avoid formation of seeds 
(sinsemilla), edging the percentage of THC into content as high as 20 
percent. It is uncertain whether this increase in potency has affected 
cannabis users in ways analogous to the apparent impact of distilled 
spirits, laudanum, and cocaine hydrochloride.
	 Coca/cocaine. As early as 1800 BCE, natives of South America 
were cultivating coca. The plant had attracted their attention because 

66 
❋ 
chapter two
someone had discovered that chewing its leaves gave feelings of well-
being and satiation (Carter and Mamani 1986:69–70). That pattern of 
coca consumption spread throughout the Andes region, so that it was 
pervasive among mountain-dwelling people at the time of the Spanish 
conquest. The Spanish colonial administrators regarded coca chewing 
as a nasty habit of benighted indigenous people (Burchard 1976, 1992) 
but the behavior attracted the attention of European tourists who, upon 
noticing the strength, endurance, and energy of Aymara- and Quechua-
speaking natives of the Andes in surroundings of high altitude, asked 
how they were able to function so well in the thin mountain air. The 
natives replied that coca enabled them to do these things. European 
chemists set about trying to discover what chemicals in the coca leaf 
might be pharmacologically active enough to cause the energy and 
strength they had observed. They were looking for the pharmaco-
logically most active of the component compounds in the coca leaf, 
and they found one that was highly active and named it cocaine. In 
order to make this compound more readily useful as an ingredient in 
medicines, the chemists who isolated cocaine added a hydrochloride 
radical to make the alkaloid water soluble. Cocaine hydrochloride 
became a pervasive ingredient in the European and North American 
pharmacopoeias, primarily in energizing elixirs. It also became useful 
as a local anesthetic for facial surgery. Before long, large numbers of 
North American housewives were addicted to the elixirs. Freud had 
briefly endorsed the drug as a treatment for depression and later re-
canted. The short half-life of its acute effects and the spiraling patterns 
that its use engenders have caused various cocaine epidemics to wax 
and wane over the century-and-a-half that this drug has been available. 
Between 2009 and 2011 it again was object of a surge in popularity in 
both Europe and the United States among youth who came of age in 
the 21st Century.
In addition to the Big Five drugs mentioned above, methamphetamine 
emerged as a drug of choice in certain parts of the United States by the be-
ginning of the 21st Century. It has a much shorter history than any of the 
big five, being isolated in 1893 and scheduled in 1944 as a pharmaceutical 
drug in the United States, specific for narcolepsy and exogenous obesity. 
Methamphetamine use as a recreational drug became pervasive in parts 
of the North American Midwest, West, and Southeast by the year 2000. In 
2008, methamphetamine was about 6 percent of the drugs mentioned in 

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
67 
emergency-department presentations that involved drugs (DAWN 2009). 
This figure places methamphetamine ahead of all other drugs in the second 
tier of drugs (those not part of the Big Five). Its potential for engendering 
addiction gained recognition during the 1960s, if not earlier. Along with its 
close relative, amphetamine, methamphetamine developed a following of 
devotees who earned a separate designation: “speed freaks” which gained 
common usage by the late 1960s. The people known to use these highly 
active stimulants acquired a reputation for obsessive, repetitive use of their 
drugs of choice, by any ingestion route possible, although the injection route 
appeared to be especially favored. The gloss that denoted this kind of drug 
user carried clear implications of ongoing use and extreme disruption of 
normal behavior patterns.
We cannot achieve the same precision in defining exactly when the drugs 
included in the Big Five (or Six) became associated specifically with a separate 
kind of human being involved in the obsessive pursuit of that particular drug. 
That, however, is exactly the kind of question that this chapter, and more 
broadly, this book seeks to answer. How and when did some human beings 
come to define a set of human beings as Others based on their long-term, 
regular consumption of a specific drug? In the preceding discussion, the 
evidence suggests that a concept of “addict” or “(fill in the addictive drug or 
activity)-holic” is not very old in the total history of humankind, perhaps as 
little as 200-years old, a phenomenon we here label social externalization. It 
is based on the identification of people within a social body who are defined 
on the basis of their use of drugs (or participation in other disapproved 
activities) as inherently different and as threatening and their subjection 
to rituals of social rejection and attacks on their social worth. In the case of 
drug-related addiction, the concept appears to be related to the refinement 
of drug preparations into highly concentrated forms capable of engendering 
craving and compulsive use. All of these developments seem to converge 
during the 19th century, so that, by 1900, it was possible to be recognized by 
your fellow human beings as an alcoholic or a person addicted to morphine 
and/or cocaine. At that time, tobacco cigarettes were gaining popularity and 
were on the verge of being mass manufactured by machines and promoted 
by governments and what were soon to be very wealthy national and trans-
national corporations (Singer 2008). Although some evidence indicates 
that people in North America and Western Europe began to recognize the 
addictive potential of tobacco long before the introduction of ready-made 
cigarettes (Goodman 1993), cigarettes became the most convenient method 
for ingesting nicotine and ultimately, the most deadly.

68 
❋ 
chapter two
The most-refined forms of cannabis, charas and hashish, were already 
ancient by 1800, but were not well known outside of India and the Middle 
East. Cannabis did, however, migrate to Europe and the New World in the 
19th century, eventually diffusing in a limited way from migration focal 
points in France and Jamaica, respectively. Those who took up cannabis use in 
France included the veterans of Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt and eventually 
members of the literati, such as Dumas and Baudelaire (1971:70–71). In the 
case of Indian ganja and its migration to the Caribbean there is no evidence 
of any preparations other than teas, infusions (that were not mind altering 
but medicinal), and smokable plant material in any of the 19th century ac-
counts of cannabis use in the New World. Ethnographic accounts of ganja 
use in Jamaica (cf. Dreher 1982; Rubin and Comitas 1975) report no forms 
of cannabis use other than either boiling or smoking the plant’s leaves, tops, 
and flowers. Some evidence of a recent trend may appear in the statistics on 
drug-treatment presentations, in which cannabis is a leading drug of choice 
in the self-reports of new treatment patients (Schensul et al. 2000). Skepti-
cism may be appropriate in interpreting these figures, however, because of 
the young (14–17) age of the presenting patients and the fact that they often 
are referred to treatment by their parents or their schools.
Regardless of the degree to which people who present for treatment of 
problems related to cannabis use can be assessed as addicts, it is clear that 
this particular drug did not develop as strong a reputation for causing drug-
related problems as did alcohol, opioids, and cocaine during a key period of 
Western history between 1700 and 1900. In fact, cannabis was essentially 
absent from discussions of drug-induced impairment as the reputations for 
addictive problems of the other three were growing most rapidly. In Western 
Europe, Baudelaire’s coterie hardly elicited a response other than bemuse-
ment at the outlandish reports of intoxicated experiences that they produced. 
Emerging news of “soldiers’ disease,” afflicting thousands of veterans who 
sustained war wounds in 19th-century wars, the widely read “confessions” 
by DeQuincey describing the life trajectory of an addict, and reports of 
cocaine-addicted housewives in the United States attracted much more 
public attention than a handful of French bohemians’ dabbling in cannabis 
use. In fact, there has developed a certain degree of social expectation that 
artists and intellectuals will engage in borderline behaviors without suffer-
ing the full weight of opprobrium to which others are subjected, especially if 
they come from subordinated social classes. To a degree, it appears, they are 
allowed to walk on the wild side as a means of providing vicarious pleasure 
to the constrained masses.

drug users through the ages 
❋ 
69 
Human susceptibility to habituation or addiction remains something of 
an enigma, yet it is highly relevant to the question of how people come to be 
perceived as addicts. Why are people affected so variously by the consump-
tion of the drugs? Most people who ever use alcohol or opioids or cocaine 
do not become alcoholics or addicts, but some do. What sets those who do 
apart from those who do not? Ming Tsuang and colleagues (1998) attempted 
to investigate this question from the point of view afforded by the sector of 
behavioral genetics known as twin studies. Using data collected from 7,500 
male twin pairs, this investigative team set out to determine how much of the 
potential to have problems with drugs involved heredity. Not surprisingly, 
they found that they could explain about half of the variance in the presence 
or absence of drug-related problems in terms of genetic background and half 
in terms of environment. This result was not surprising because studies going 
back to Vaillant (1983) have found more or less the same thing. For the pres-
ent discussion, however, the more interesting part of Tsuang et al.’s findings 
is that the genetic component characterized by their studies was generic in 
terms of the addict’s or problem user’s drug of choice. In other words, people 
with exactly the same genetic makeup (i.e., monozygotic, or “identical” twins) 
could develop problematic use of any or all of the Big Five drugs in any con-
figuration (e.g., cigarettes, alcohol, and cocaine, or marihuana, tobacco, and 
heroin). Social environment was found to influence specific drug choices, 
but genetic makeup helped determine whether or not the individual would 
have problems with his drugs of choice (Tsuang et al. 1998). In this sense, 
then, the addict or problematic drug user is in fact qualitatively unlike his/
her contemporaries in terms of genetic makeup, which in part causes him/
her to respond to psychotropic drugs differently, namely more intensely. If 
certain drug preparations were modified to deliver their key mind-altering 
ingredients (e.g., ethanol, morphine, or cocaine) in more concentrated form 
than they had ever done in the history of their use by humans, that concentra-
tion in combination with a genetic predisposition to feel that concentration 
intensely would be likely to produce a reaction beyond what had been possible 
previously. Tsuang et al. suggest that a subset of humans have the predisposi-
tion to feel drugs—any of the Big Five—more forcefully than the rest of us. 
The introduction of highly potent forms of the Big Five would have a high 
likelihood of matching drug consumption with this kind of predisposition.
Again, the biological part of the analysis only explains half of the vari-
ance (and, it should be noted, none of the social reaction to heavy drug use). 
Environmental factors explain the other half. Exposure to cultural contexts 
in which potent drugs are used is a crucial variable in the establishment of 

70 
❋ 
chapter two
addictive patterns, especially if the use pattern itself is highly frequent and 
heavy. Clearly, inner-city London was such an environment by 1750. Har-
lem in the 1960s was also, as was East Harlem of the 1980s. In each of these 
places—and socially defined place is hence an important issue—people 
internalized a vague cultural idea that they were equal with everyone else 
in society, but yet their daily experiences in interaction with other people 
told them that they were in fact unequal and did not count. They received 
poor wages for hard work and had few prospects of transcending their so-
cial place because of clogged opportunity structures. In these conditions of 
social derogation, resorting to strong drink or potent drugs could be seen as 
a strategy to get through inevitably unpleasant days and self-recriminating 
nights. Adoption of heavy, chronic patterns of consuming cheap, abundant 
drugs became widespread, and the proliferation of heavy users invited gen-
eralizations about the nature of the drug-using population at large. Given 
the recently achieved potency of the drugs of choice, by the late 1800s, the 
stage was set for the identification of addicts, especially poor addicts, but to 
a certain extent all addicts as separate subpar categories of human being.
Notes
1  Nothing of that antiquity has been found so far in the New World—probably because 
there were no fruits quite as sugar-laden as Vitis vinifera sylvestris. Corn and Agave were 
early contributors to the production of fermented beverages, but the evidence of their 
domestication is much later (ca. 1500 BCE, compared with 5000–6000 BCE for the Old 
World). The evidence also depends on residues in stone or clay containers, which appear 
later in the New World than the Old. In all likelihood humans discovered plant-derived 
preparations of some kind much earlier than the evidence for corn and agave would 
testify, but the accoutrements of these preparations left no trace from which to infer use.
2  Because they are 20th century drugs without the same historical background of be-
ing associated with problems of chronic use and addiction, we have not included LSD 
or methamphetamine in this group. By the time those drugs were synthesized and 
introduced into consumption, the concept of addiction was already well established. 
Otherwise, methamphetamine certainly would be a candidate for inclusion, based on 
its accelerating reputation as an addictive drug. LSD, on the other hand, is not really 
associated with addiction at all.

71 
Chapter Three
Representations of Addicts and the 
Construction of Prohibitions
T 
o what extent did public awareness of drug consumption’s negative 
impact on drug users and their families and others around them lead 
to the formation of public opinion against alcohol and other drugs? 
Was alcoholism as prevalent in the streets of London as Hogarth would 
have had us believe? What did the advocates of temperance find so abhor-
rent about the behavior of drunks that they wanted to abolish all alcoholic 
beverages? Why did they think they could do so in light of cultural values 
about personal freedom? All of these questions reflect the struggle with how 
powerful attitudes of intolerance come to dominate in societies that accept 
in their midst many different ways of life and systems of belief. This chapter 
focuses on the temperance movements in the United Kingdom and the United 
States, primarily because the history of those movements is so thoroughly 
documented, but partly because both polities were in the process of either 
managing or establishing world-encircling empires. In fact, the impetus for 
extending moral and religious influence to an international level appears to 
have driven the American Temperance movement and influenced the inter-
national conventions banning “dangerous” drugs (Tyrrell 1991; 2010). The 
discussion begins by attempting to explain how people come to the point of 
consigning other people to a separate and lower category than themselves, 
based on an often highly skewed reading of the others’ behavior patterns. We 
assert that this process involves attribution, in which people count themselves 
as distinct from other people based on complexes of behavior observed in 
the Others that they find, as a result of the cultural meanings they carry, to 
be abhorrent or worthy of derogation. For example, at a time of growing 
fears about terrorism, Sikhs in the United States, a group that previously 
may have been perceived as exotic but harmless, suddenly were subject to 
increasing incidence of violent attacks as they were assigned to the general 
cultural category of dangerous, head-gear wearing, foreign Others. Sociologi-
cal theories, such as “labeling” and “strain” add a layer of social process to 
this kind of thinking about others. Two historically important places where 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 71–87. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

72 
❋ 
chapter three
people engaged in this kind of thinking about Others were England and 
the United States, as they had the power to spread their ideas globally. This 
chapter traces the inchoate processes of Othering as they occurred in these 
nations, starting with temperance movements in the early 19th century, and 
culminating in the establishment of public houses in Great Britain and the 
experiment with prohibition in the United States.
The Origins of Othering
The process of vilifying not just a behavior but a category of persons who 
engage in a specific pattern of consuming drugs had its beginnings in 
the public discourse on the ills associated with consumption of alcoholic 
beverage, especially in contexts of material deprivation and moral dis-
orientation. One key to this process was, and still is, attribution. People 
who considered themselves to be “normal” began to view the lifestyles, 
behaviors, and values of a set of people in plain sight as both unacceptable 
and not normal. In so doing, they attributed intemperance, impulsivity, 
hedonism, and normlessness to people living in circumstances of poverty 
whose primary strategy for coping with hopelessness involved strong drink. 
Another key to this process of derogating other people is separation. It is 
easy to attribute undesirable characteristics to people whose way of life is 
largely unknown and but presumably different from that of the attributor. 
In fact, the combination of separation and attribution attracted the atten-
tion of sociologists, who built theories about this process of separation and 
attribution, variously called “deviance” (Becker 1963), “labeling” (Becker 
1963), “strain”(Cloward and Ohlin 1960), and “differential association” 
(Cressey 1962) among others (Cohen 1955). One of the logical dilemmas in 
these theories involves the question of precedence—what preceded what? 
Did some kind of collectively recognized experience occur in which the 
surrounding un-labeled groups recognized patterns of undesirable behavior 
among those being labeled? Did the labeling groups simply decide, based 
on differences between them and the groups being labeled, to bestow the 
label on a group they did not like?
If we look back into the beginnings of separation and attribution as they 
took place during the 18th century in England, we can recognize strong 
opinions formed by physicians regarding the nature of alcohol consumption 
as a kind of sickness. Benjamin Rush, a signatory of the Declaration of Inde-
pendence, was one of the American physicians who articulated a perception 
that the habitual drunkard could not help him/herself when confronted with 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
73 
the possibility of consuming alcohol (Levine 1978). Rush, however, was not 
the only physician to take this view of spirituous liquors and their effects 
on humankind. Levine (1978) wrote that the early temperance movement 
could rightly be called a physicians’ temperance movement because of the 
involvement of physicians who had seen first-hand the effects of repeated 
drunkenness. Rush led the movement, published his clinical findings, and 
asserted that anyone could be victimized by the consumption of liquor. He 
also declared that the only remedy for this affliction was total abstinence. 
Not-so-coincidentally, similar views on opioids developed in England at the 
same time. Rush began publishing his temperance pamphlets at the turn of 
the 19th Century, and de Quincey published his Confessions of an English 
Opium Eater in 1822.
This timing, in light of the evidence presented in the previous chapter, 
has significance as a sign of a shift in public discourse in the West on intoxi-
cants and the people who consume them frequently. No longer were drunken 
behaviors momentary events in the lives of otherwise “normal” people. 
They carried new meaning and portent as the unintoxicated tried to discern 
whether or not an episode of intoxication signified a chronic problem—akin 
to a disease. The socioeconomic circumstances of becoming drunk or high 
also received scrutiny, leading to the generation of causal theories con-
structed to explain the occurrence of abject poverty, abuse of children and 
spouses, and ultimately disease and death. These theories were not purely 
the products of inductive accumulation of facts about the dangers of addic-
tion by physicians. They gathered powerful impetus from their proponents’ 
attitudes about class, character, and moral behavior (Seddon 2010:62; Tyrrell 
2010:21). Furthermore, Tyrrell holds that the temperance movement was just 
one of several larger issues involving the United States’ expansive desire to 
“reform the world” in many different aspects of the human condition. The 
issues promoted by North American world campaigners included adhering 
to Christianity, banning prostitution, giving up nonwestern or working-class 
lifestyles, improving hygiene, and generally achieving moral purity (Tyrrell 
2010:21). This desire to achieve absolute reform will receive further attention 
later in this chapter. The word “temperance” deserves some discussion here, 
as it became the standard label for all organizations and persons who wished 
to limit or curtail alcohol consumption in their respective societies, both in 
England and in the United States. In the case of England, the temperance 
groups’ original agenda was to convince people not to drink to the point 
of drunkenness—in other words—to drink in a temperate fashion. Some 
participants in the movement, perhaps recognizing that established heavy 

74 
❋ 
chapter three
drinkers had great difficulty stopping, and were likely to suffer recidivism 
if they took a drink after becoming sober, began to demand that alcohol be 
banned completely from English society. “Temperance,” then, had in their 
eyes become undesirable, because it placed at risk former drinkers. In the 
end, as we shall see, temperance won out in England. Amid the generalized 
reformist zeal in the United States, the word “temperance” remained an 
important label of the anti-alcohol movement, despite the fact that practi-
cally all of the movement’s adherents would settle for nothing less than a 
constitutional amendment enacting total prohibition of alcohol and hence 
they were really prohibitionists.
The temperance movement in England
This movement emerged in the late 18th century, and by the 1830s, it had 
momentum. The following historic tract, made available online, gives the 
reader a sense of the tone employed by 19th century campaigners in England 
against the vices that would later be called addictions:
The habitual opium eater is instantly recognized [sic] by his appear-
ance. A total attenuation of body, and a withered yellow countenance, 
a lame gait, and a bending of the spine, frequently to such a degree as 
to assume a circular form, and glossy, deep, sunken eyes betray him at 
first glance. The digestive organs are in the highest degree disturbed, 
the sufferer eats scarcely anything, and has hardly had an evacuation in 
a week; his mental and physical powers are destroyed—he is impotent 
(Anonymous 1845?).
This writer describes stereotypically the condition of the thoroughly 
impaired opium eater, emphasizing the physical deterioration thought to 
ensue inevitably after forming the habit of consuming laudanum. The same 
source took a dim view of tobacco as well as inserting racist commentary 
about the production of cigars:
If the processes by which cigars are rolled together by the filthy and 
sweaty hands of negroes in Havannah [sic] aided by occasional applica-
tions of saliva to make the leaves adhere, were more generally known, 
it would excite as much disgust against smoking as against chewing; 
and both of these habits, as well as that of stuffing the nostrils with 
tobacco powder are so truly dirty . . . (Anonymous 1845?).

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
75 
Whoever wrote the tract containing these excerpts completely disap-
proved of the people who engaged in this behavior that he/she intended to 
stamp out. Consumption of alcohol, however, was the real target of the tract, 
and in the section addressing alcohol, the attribution of social ills becomes 
truly extravagant.
A large proportion of pauperism, loss of health and character; pre-
mature death, widowhood and orphanage; abandonment to vicious 
Opium dream

76 
❋ 
chapter three
pursuits and crimes; an enormous outlay in supporting judicial tribu-
nals, police establishments, jails, and penal settlements; the abstraction 
of land from useful crops for food; and the distraction of capital into 
wrong channels. Of the evils ensuing under the head of public morals 
and religion, the picture is too appalling to be dwelt upon (Anonymous 
1845?).
By the time that this tract likely was written, animus had accumulated 
against the perceived evils of all the accused drugs for at least 50 years, and 
the tract’s author’s vehemence reflects that animus. The final sentence, after 
having enumerated serious problems attributed to alcohol, says that the loss 
of health, leaving of widows and orphans, criminality, and waste of resources 
the writer just mentioned is not nearly as horrifying as the alcohol-caused 
moral degradation he/she refuses to describe. Elsewhere in the same tract, 
the author declares the goal of eliminating tobacco, opioids, and alcohol from 
English society. This attitude emanates from the notion that no human being 
can avoid becoming habituated to these and other drug preparations if they 
have so much as a single taste of them. Therefore, according to this view, the 
drug preparations mentioned in the tract and any others that might intoxicate 
humans must be eliminated completely from human society. This teetotal 
approach to what would eventually be called prohibition would brook no 
space for moderate uses of tobacco, alcohol, and opioids.
Another, somewhat briefer tract written by the Reverend William Wight 
(Wight 1845?) cites a succinct (if confused) expression of the same notion: 
“The temperate are the chief promoters of drunkenness” (Wight 1845?: 4). 
Did not the Scottish Temperance League identify “temperance” as a desirable 
goal? “The temperate,” however, are blamed for drunkenness. The phrase 
meant to express displeasure at those who maintained that alcohol could be 
consumed moderately, i.e. temperately. Wight’s own choice of words favors 
another term, as in his tract, the word “drunkard” appears many times, and 
its usage carries the implication of “lost soul.” Wight proceeds to assert that 
the vast majority of Scottish society consists of drunkards. He also attributes 
the apparent closing of Welsh churches to the drinking proclivities of their 
pastors. Wight also indicts the working class for intemperance in consump-
tion of strong drink, citing Birmingham and Glasgow:
Take Birmingham, the workshop of England; notwithstanding all 
the clamours of the people about taxation and depression of trade, 
it appears the people of that town are spending £600,000 annually 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
77 
in strong drink. At Glasgow, a committee was appointed some time 
back to inquire into the causes of distress so prevalent; and it came 
out in evidence that £1,200,000 were annually spent in that city in 
intoxicating liquors, of which sum the working-classes spent one mil-
lion (Wight 1845?: 6).
That the English working class had essentially self-inflicted their mis-
erable state in 19th century became a prevailing attitude among those who 
expressed concern about the pauperization of families associated with re-
cidivistic heavy drinking. Of course, neither the good Reverend Wight nor 
his Temperance Society colleagues had conducted the studies necessary to 
establish strong drink as a cause of poverty (or vice-versa, for that matter). 
In fairness to them, the expertise necessary to conduct rigorous studies of 
this kind was at least 80 years in the future, but commentators like Wight 
could cite years of inductive observations to buttress their views. Neverthe-
less, the onus of what could be called a pandemic of drinking problems in 
mid-19th century England was placed fully on the shoulders of the working 
class, leaving them to take additional blame for the deplorable conditions in 
which they lived.
Who were the people who accused the urban poor of profligate spending 
on alcohol, inattention to hygiene and home, and moral decay? It is relatively 
easy to recall the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union as a movement that 
exerted influence on the eventual ratification in the United States of Amend-
ment 18, prohibiting production, sale, and consumption of alcoholic bever-
ages in the United States, but who were these people in England? Were they 
housewives? Full-time moral crusaders? Upper-class social leaders? Friedrich 
Engels certainly was not one of them, as his works in 1846 and 1872 took the 
approach of examining structural factors, such as the process of enclosure, the 
crowding of impoverished workers in urban tenements, and the oppressive 
conditions in which the poor earned inadequate wages (Engels 1845[2001]). 
Nevertheless, his voice against class-based structural violence as the likely 
cause of London’s terrible inner city conditions and rampant gin consumption 
had little influence in England’s political landscape (Singer 1986).
Joseph Livesey (1794–1884) was one of the British temperance move-
ment’s most steadfast proponents in the 19th century. He co-organized the 
movement’s first meetings at the time of its inception in 1832 (Carter 1933). 
Orphaned at age seven and sent to live with his grandfather, Livesey learned 
how to work in his grandfather’s tiny (three looms) basement textile mill at an 
early age. As he matured, he developed his own business producing cheese. 

78 
❋ 
chapter three
Throughout his life, he spoke up against misery and injustice wherever he saw 
it, and in northern England in the early 19th century he had plenty of things 
to speak against—enclosure, poor wages, crowded housing, and debtors’ 
prison, to name a few. In the process of growing up and continuing to live 
among the poor people of London, he came to perceive spirituous liquors as 
a curse of humankind.
Two years before the first temperance movement meeting, in response 
to growing sentiment that beer was being too heavily controlled and taxed, 
Parliament passed the Beerhouse Act in an effort to encourage more cultiva-
tion of barley and hops and more manufacture of beer. The act’s framers had 
been concerned about the ongoing epidemic of gin consumption and felt that 
greater availability of beer might reduce consumption of gin (Carter 1933:25). 
According to Carter’s (1933) account, they were disastrously mistaken. Beer 
houses proliferated in response to this Act, and, believing themselves to be 
in competition with the beer houses, the gin-serving establishments stepped 
up their promotions and advertising, sometimes upgrading facilities to at-
tract their clientele. The impact on the street of these developments was the 
widespread appearance of public drunkenness. The following narrative paints 
a picture of how badly the Act proceeded in the case of an establishment that 
had been recently renovated in response to the Act’s provisions:
A band of music was stationed in front of the house; the street became 
almost impassable from the number of people collected; and when the 
doors were opened, the rush was tremendous; it was instantly filled 
with customers, and continued so till midnight. . . . We found that all 
the other gin palaces were equally crowded as before; they had all 
lowered their prices to compete with this new shop, and attracted a 
large number of customers (Carter 1933:29).
Indeed, the primary impact of the Beerhouse Act appears to have been to 
make alcoholic beverages more accessible than before the Act.
Harkening back to Hogarth’s etchings, one might ask, why so much 
public drunkenness, if much of the consumption was beer? Wasn’t beer 
supposedly the drink of gentle intoxication, not leading to ruinous drunken-
ness? The answer may lie in the impact of gin as the beverage that intoxicated 
people in a way they had not been intoxicated before. Gin and rum were the 
first spirituous liquors of high potency to be widely available and cheap, al-
lowing a large proportion of the population the opportunity to experience 
being drunk. Furnas (1965: 65–66) asserted that people could get drunk on 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
79 
fermented drinks ever since the New Stone Age, and thus the blame placed 
by early temperance advocates on hard liquor was misdirected. According 
to Furnas (1965), the idea of teetotal prohibition emanated from the real-
ization that any and all alcoholic beverages could produce drunkenness. In 
fact, as Chapter 2 explains, people did not apply a concept of chronicity to 
drunkenness until sometime after 1500, as spirituous liquors became avail-
able (Gusfield 1996:91). Gin and rum made it very easy to get drunk, and 
once people had become drunk and decided they liked the experience, they 
continued to pursue drunkenness by whatever means was available to them.
If beer were more available than gin or rum, that availability could lead 
part of the heavy drinkers’ market toward getting drunk on beer. The wide 
availability of really cheap and convenient beer may help to explain the 
Beerhouse Act’s outcome. Gin represented a pathway for discovering and 
practicing drunkenness, but once discovered and practiced, any source of 
alcohol would do in pursuit of its reoccurrence. This process was actually a 
question of probability. People drinking distilled spirits were significantly 
more likely than people drinking beer or wine to drink well past the point 
of the two-drink “buzz,” also known as the “potentiating dose.” If the ones 
who drank enough gin or rum to become drunk found that experience to be 
gratifying they could be expected to try to repeat it with whatever alcoholic 
preparation was at hand.
The sequence of events after the passage of the Beerhouse Act had the 
net effect of galvanizing the resolve of temperance advocates whose primary 
agenda was moral reform of British society. According to activists like Livesey, 
the mere presence of alcoholic beverage in the community was sufficient 
to bring about widespread drunkenness and ruinous behavior. He and his 
followers held that total abstinence represented the only way to avoid the ill 
effects of alcoholic beverages, and they formulated pledges that articulated 
the fundamental principle of avoiding all forms of alcohol:
I do voluntarily promise that I will abstain from ale, porter, wine cider, 
ardent spirits, or any other intoxicating liquors, and that I will not give 
nor offer them to others, except as medicine or in a religious ordinance; 
and that I will discountenance all the cause and practices of intemper-
ance (Carter 1933:253).
On the resolve of abstainers who took the pledge cited above and 
considerable support from the United States’ temperance movement, the 
World’s Temperance Convention took place in England in 1846, with hopes 

80 
❋ 
chapter three
of galvanizing world opinion in favor of banning alcoholic beverages (Tyrrell 
2010). The British side of the temperance movement, however, aimed for 
somewhat more moderate goals than their North American counterparts. 
They never succeeded in moving the English government toward full ban-
ning of alcoholic beverages, but they nevertheless succeeded, through the 
Wine and Beerhouse Act of 1869, in instituting the licensing of public houses 
whose hours of business were regulated and whose licensing was a matter 
for national governance. The English prohibitionists conducted a series of 
legislative skirmishes in their attempts to enact a local option veto, so that 
individual communities could ban public houses from their premises (Carter 
1933: 199), since a national ban was not in the offing. This activity never 
succeeded, and consequently, the ancient and venerable English tradition 
of going to the “local” to raise a pint with one’s mates continued uninter-
rupted. In 2005, the serving laws limiting hours and distribution of licenses 
were liberalized.
Prohibition in the United States
In the United States, on the other hand, abstentionists achieved success 
beyond Livesey’s wildest dreams. Their travails have received attention in 
Ken Burns’s television chronicle, Prohibition, as well as Szymanski’s Path-
ways to Prohibition (2003) and Tyrrell’s Reforming the World (2010) among 
many other works. Here, we explore the motivations, tactics, and outcomes 
of the prohibitionists to try to understand how they accomplished the mas-
sive, daunting and unlikely task of getting two-thirds of the states to ratify a 
complete ban on alcoholic beverages.
The local option veto also was tried by the American prohibitionists in 
various forms at various levels of government. Much of this activity took place 
in the 1890s, and by the time of the final push toward ratification of the 18th 
amendment, it had become clear that local option vetoes were not going to 
succeed. Prohibitionists eventually concluded that an amendment to the Fed-
eral constitution would be preferable (Szymanski 2003:91). Besides, the local 
ordinances would have resulted in a patchwork that could be easily evaded 
by using differences in neighboring jurisdictions’ ordinances for purposes of 
trafficking in and serving alcoholic drinks (a pattern that continues to exist 
in various parts of the United States with local alcohol control ordinances).
But why this zeal for keeping all alcoholic beverages away from all people 
in the United States? What was it about alcohol that had the prohibitionists 
so exercised? It seems that the perceived impact of drunkenness on social 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
81 
order and the sanctity of the family had strong influence on public opinion. 
The overall rate at which early Euro-Americans consumed liquor has been 
estimated at some seven gallons per year per person in the years between 
1790 and 1840 (Salinger 2002: 2). Current figures fall somewhat short of 
that amount, although comparison requires a bit of conversion into liters of 
absolute (100 percent) alcohol. If we estimate that those seven gallons were 
40 percent alcohol by volume, and using figures of 128 ounces per gallon 
and 33.8 ounces per liter, that amounts to 10.6 liters per person per year. 
Estimates provided by the World Health Organization place US consump-
tion of alcohol at 8.5 liters per person per year (WHO 2004: 12). Despite the 
strong likelihood that a higher proportion of the U.S population drinks now 
than did at the turn of the 19th century, and given the increase in women 
drinkers, individual North American drinkers drink less overall than they 
did two centuries ago. Because men predominated among drinkers in the 
late 18th and early 19th centuries, those who drank were probably taking 
in prodigious quantities of alcohol. Given the available descriptions of that 
era’s alcohol consumption patterns (see Furnas 1965), there is no reason to 
doubt that some men spent at least part of every day drunk.
The so-called “culture wars” often invoked in present-day discourse 
to denote clashes in world view within North American society are noth-
ing new. Gusfield (1996:10) points out that similar clashes occurred in the 
United States during the latter half of the 19th century, pitting segments of 
a predominantly white non-Hispanic population against each other on the 
basis of Protestant, rural world view versus Catholic- and Jew-inclusive, ur-
ban world view. In the process of marshaling forces for this clash, problems 
related to alcohol use were framed as an issue that required total intolerance 
of alcoholic beverages in order to improve social conditions. This approach 
to pathologizing all alcohol use dismissively discounted the ways in which 
Italian Catholics, Irish Catholics, and Jews drank beer and wine in contexts 
where those drinks were considered part of food and its consumption, and in 
many cases, also part of sacred ritual. Alcohol consumption, in the vast major-
ity of instances, then and now, does not lead to the kind of chronic intoxica-
tion that afflicts alcohol addicts, yet the prohibitionists, as described earlier, 
conceived of any alcohol use as inevitably leading down a slippery slope to 
eventual impairment, ill health, financial ruin, immorality, and child neglect.
Unfortunately for the forces opposing prohibition, two factors worked 
against them: (1) the pervasiveness of grim case histories describing the hu-
man damage associated with heavy alcohol consumption and (2) the ability 
of print media to present these case histories to a reading public that was 

82 
❋ 
chapter three
far more extensive than ever before. Practically every adult living in 19th 
century England or the United States had, in his/her repertoire of stories, at 
least one about a man who, in a state of intoxication, had committed some 
heinous act of violence or reckless endangerment. By the mid-19th century, 
these stories no longer remained localized, but if they were particularly 
poignant or entertaining, could disseminate across the nation by means of 
print media (Behr 2011: 63–64).
Benjamin Rush (1786), in his Enquiries writings, was early to weigh in 
on the ruinous effects of hard liquor on families:
Spirits impair the memory, debilitate the understanding, and pervert 
the moral faculties . . . [and they] produce not only falsehood, but fraud, 
theft, uncleanliness, and murder. . . . How deep the anguish which rends 
the bosom of the [drunkard’s] wife . . . the shame and aversion which she 
excites in her husband! Is he the father of children? See their averted 
looks . . . their blushing looks at each other! (Rush 1786).
This printed tract tapped into its readership’s personal experience, 
because the readers had seen similar phenomena in their immediate social 
environments. It was also designed, as are the altar calls in some church 
services, to draw the person whose own family life has resembled the one 
described into the realization that they need to stop drinking. This example, 
however, is relatively mild, and reflects an almost clinical perspective on the 
effect of heavy drinking on the drinker’s family. According to Furnas (1965) 
the next fifty years saw the emergence of far more powerful and enflamed 
narratives than this, delivered by talented and manipulative orators such as 
John B. Gough, the Reverend Theobald Mathew, General Neal Dow, and 
the first Prohibition Party candidate for president of the United States, Gen-
eral John P. St. John (Furnas 1965:128–129). Their strident tone escalated 
throughout the 19th century, exhorting their audiences to “take the pledge” 
and encourage their peers to do so.
The mid-19th century in the United States was a time of contested ways 
of life, not just with regard to the question of prohibiting alcohol, but also 
on the question of slavery. Furnas (1965) features a parallelism between 
the most widely read prohibitionist writer, Timothy Shay Arthur, and the 
famous abolitionist, Harriett Beecher Stowe. In Furnas’s analysis, the two 
activists shared a “watery” quality in their writing, but at the same time a 
certain power to manipulate the feelings of their readers. Arthur’s portfolio 
was at least as extensive as Stowe’s, which included 22 books, of which Uncle 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
83 
Tom’s Cabin was the most widely read . Arthur’s books were very diverse, 
including writings on housekeeping, mothering, retirement, career building, 
paths to prosperity, and marriage (Furnas 1965:126). His most influential 
book, however, focused on the evils of alcohol. Arthur’s Ten Nights in a Bar-
Room gave readers an elaborate narrative on how the presence of a tavern in 
a community sets in motion terrible processes, including murder, injury of 
children, deterioration of a business, fall of a public official, and the inevitable 
delirium tremens (DTs). In all likelihood, Arthur was far more familiar with 
the setting of his novel than Stowe, who lived in Connecticut, was with the 
location of Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Arthur’s descriptions of activities and opera-
tions of the Sickle and Sheaf, the fictitious bar in which his story is set, bespeak 
familiarity with bars and their clientele (Furnas 1965:129). After the Civil 
War, Arthur wrote several other novels of equally propagandist intent: The 
Bar-Rooms at Brantly, Three Years in a Man-Trap, The Strike at Tivoli Mills, 
and Danger (Furnas 1965:128). Decades after the release of Ten Nights, with 
prohibitionist activity at a fever pitch in 1890, the book’s copyright expired, 
making possible the distribution of thousands of copies by prohibitionist 
activists at 25 cents each.
During the 19th century’s period of escalating rhetoric against alcoholic 
beverages, the concept of delirium tremens became a popular tool for con-
vincing prohibitionist audiences of the ills that drinking visits upon drinkers 
(Furnas 1965 119–120). Every prohibitionist or temperance lecturer had 
his/her standard story of the pink elephants, little green men, and snakes 
of assorted colors seen by drunks who had withdrawn (or had been with-
drawn) from alcohol. The lecturers vividly described the tortured souls who 
had screamed all night, terrified of the hallucinations, cold sweats, nausea, 
and convulsions, and who begged for relief of any kind from their torment. 
There was much truth to these accounts, as withdrawal from alcohol by a 
true alcohol addict is perhaps the most torturous and life-threatening of all 
withdrawal syndromes. Nevertheless, the presentations by prohibitionists 
usually failed to report that, in order to reach the point in a drinking career 
where withdrawal symptoms occur, it is necessary for an adult to be drinking 
in excess (i.e., over five drinks a day) for an extended period of time and then 
stop or drastically reduce alcohol consumption (Erwin et al. 1998; Rosen-
baum et al. 1940). A history of drinking heavily and experiencing other kinds 
of alcohol withdrawal symptoms may eventually lead to delirium tremens 
in up to 5 percent of patients who withdraw from alcohol use abruptly. This 
condition is sometimes fatal, with a death rate that has yet to improve over 
the 5–15 percent rate originally noted in the early 1800s, despite efforts to 

84 
❋ 
chapter three
develop better treatment techniques (Erwin et al.1998). The prohibitionists’ 
discourse during the 19th century, however, implied that any and all drink-
ers would be subject to DTs in short order and without exception. Furnas 
(1965:120) provides an example of this kind of discourse when he quotes 
the well-meaning Dr. Hale:
Temperance got good service from DTs, even maintaining that this 
fulminating neuropsychiatric disaster is not confined to heavy drink-
ers “[Y]ou are not as safe as you imagine,” the American Temperance 
Society told the occasional imbiber. “ Some of the worst cases of (DTs) 
. . . have been of persons who had rarely or never been known to be in-
toxicated . . . and were regarded by their neighbors as temperate men.” 
. . . Temperance could always find well-meaning doctors eager to lie in 
the good cause (Furnas 1965:120).
The forces for prohibition used vilification of the sellers of alcoholic 
beverages as another rhetorical tactic as the campaign against strong drink 
heated up. This development seemed inevitable as women swelled the ranks 
of the prohibitionist faithful. During the 19th century in North America, 
saloons had almost exclusively male clientele. Consequently, they tended 
to be viewed by women as places where men were up to no good, a percep-
tion that was hardly unwarranted, given the numbers of women who had 
the experience of receiving men home from the saloon broke, belligerent, 
impotent, and unmanageable. Therefore, the prohibitionists reasoned, the 
person who owns and runs such establishments must be intentionally evil. 
In a quote from John Wesley, the saloon keepers were “poisoners general 
. . . [including] all who sell liquor in the common way. . . . They murder his 
Majesty’s subjects by wholesale . . . drive them to hell like sheep” (Furnas 
1965:122). Lyman Beecher, another outspoken prohibitionist, also aimed a 
blanket accusation of murder at all saloon owners. He defied “any man who 
understands the nature of ardent spirit, and yet for the sake of gain, continues 
to be engaged in the traffic, to show that he is not involved in the crime of 
murder” (Furnas 1965: 122).
If we look at these hyperbolic statements in their historical context, we 
find that alcohol was not the only thing the new North American giant was 
out to reform. Tyrrell (2010) notes that the connections between the United 
States and Britain and northern Europe became more immediate than ever 
before by the invention of the telegraph and the laying of the transatlantic 
cable in 1866 (Tyrrell 2010:15). Some of the messages passing over those lines 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
85 
involved the exchange of social and moral ideals and plans for international 
conferences in furtherance of the agenda of moral reform. The forces sup-
porting prohibition in the United States wanted, in addition to prohibiting 
alcoholic beverages, to curtail all forms of sex trade and to convert large 
segments of the world’s population to their brand of Christian Protestant 
religion. Noted missionaries, including the Leitch siblings, contributed to 
reformist perspective by expressing their disgust with the lifestyle patterns 
seen in Paris in 1879 (Tyrrell 2010:26). Increasing ease of travel and com-
munication did not simply familiarize travelers with how people in other 
countries lived; it whetted American missionaries’ appetites for reforming 
the rest of the world (an objective that has hardly fallen by the wayside over 
time). The communication and travel advances of the 19th century gave 
the American missionaries reach that they never had before, and soon they 
dreamed dreams of a Christian, morally pure World Society. Another fea-
ture of the circulation that had become open and general was the improved 
accessibility of colonial holdings of the British Empire in Africa and Asia.
In a cultural context where “carry the white man’s burden” had become 
something of a mantra, internationalism became highly fashionable by the 
late 1800s. Reformers envisioned a world in which peace, purity, and moral 
rectitude flourished, and the venal and corrupt were vanquished. To some 
Europeans, the linguistic vehicle for this world reform would be the synthetic 
“universal language,” Esperanto, which began as a movement in the 1870s. 
In 1905, an international conference on Esperanto convened, but despite 
great enthusiasm among its advocates, the language never caught on (Tyrrell 
2010:19). Linguistics as a discipline was at that time not very well developed, 
nor was the anthropological perspective on language as an integral part of 
culture. The emergence of Esperanto illustrates the naiveté and superficiality 
of the internationalist thinking that dominated the late 1800s. Apparently, 
the developers of Esperanto believed, as did Christian missionaries, that 
whenever benighted people encountered their superior language (and/or 
religious) system, they would naturally discard their own inferior system in 
favor of the superior one. A basic lesson of applied anthropology, however, is 
that people are not cultural blank slates upon which the inspired can inscribe 
their particular version of uplift and moral improvement.
The presumption of the movement of confident Westernization seems 
stunningly chauvinistic and racist, by present day standards—and entirely 
blind to the role Western imperialism was playing in the disruption of the 
world’s peoples and diverse ways of life—but at the time, given the rela-
tive plenty enjoyed by Americans and Northwest Europeans (as a result of 

86 
❋ 
chapter three
imperialism), it seemed not just logical, but altruistically beneficent to bring 
“superior” systems of belief, production, and morality to people who (they 
thought) had no knowledge of the “right” way to do things. All of this evan-
gelistic/internationalistic attitude placed drinking in a category of behavior 
that, if its benighted practitioners could be convinced to “come to their 
senses,” could be stamped out entirely. Unfortunately for the prohibitionists, 
none had the knowledge, wisdom, or cross-cultural perspective to recognize 
that their reformist plans were doomed. Instead of achieving world uplift, 
the prohibitionists’ movement gathered enough impetus to send an entire 
nation into an immense and ultimately disastrous dead-end experiment.
We alluded earlier in this chapter to the role of women in the prohibition-
ist movement. The status of women in North America and Northwest Europe 
during the 19th century constituted an important factor in the formation 
and actions of women’s groups that supported the temperance movement. 
In parallel to the development of women’s organizations to promote temper-
ance, women in the United Kingdom and the United States were preparing 
a campaign to allow women to vote in elections. The sensibilities that em-
powered women to react in opposition to the ways in which they presumed 
alcohol consumption disrupted their households were not very different from 
the ones that bridled at women’s lack of suffrage. Indeed, seeing the adverse 
effect of heavy drinking on men, and what this said about their characters, 
may well have led some women to question the right of men to have a right 
that women lacked. Given the political context of the two movements and 
their parallels, it is hardly surprising that the Woman’s Christian Temperance 
Union (WCTU), ultimately the most powerful of the women’s organizations 
that supported prohibition, would engage energetically and successfully in 
politics (Tyrrell 1991:6). As their reach extended beyond the borders of the 
United States, it became necessary to establish a World Woman’s Christian 
Temperance Union (WWCTU), an example of the internationalist inten-
tions of would-be reformers based in the United States. As the WCTU and 
the WWCTU grew, they became increasingly powerful politically, and 
this power enabled the eventual ratification of Amendment 18 in 1919. 
Any politician interested in remaining incumbent between 1910 and 1930 
found himself with the prospect of an electorate about to double in size, and 
a salient issue of concern for the new half of the electorate was prohibition. 
In the interest of self-preservation, that politician would seriously consider 
ratification of prohibition, regardless of his personal habits, beliefs, or pro-
clivities. According to this interpretation, prohibition of alcoholic beverages 
was ratified in the United States as a direct consequence of the florescence 

addicts and the construction of prohibitions 
❋ 
87 
of women’s consciousness. Unfortunately, in that particular social context, 
the internationalist and chauvinistic ideas driving that consciousness helped 
launch a disaster.
In the course of constructing this disaster the prohibition movement 
succeeded in categorizing all of their fellow Americans as potential alcoholics, 
a line of thinking that played out similarly in the policies formed regarding 
other varieties of potentially addictive drugs. Whether the debate involved 
opioids, cannabis, or cocaine, the political rhetoric inevitably contained dire 
warnings about the drug equivalent of the “fatal glass of beer”; a mere taste 
could lead to a life of sin and perdition. The official stance assumed by the 
United States today seems to reflect a collective amnesia with regard to the 
first prohibition, as society’s leaders persist, despite a track record of failure, 
in pursuing another prohibition. Organizations advocating the abolition of 
international opium trade began to form in the United States while the alcohol 
prohibition movement was gaining velocity (Blackman 2004:9). They would 
have a distinct influence on the legal status of opioids and other drugs in the 
years to come. In the succeeding chapters, we address these interpretations of 
human drug-using behavior and analyze their validity in terms of our direct 
field experience in studying drug use.

88
Chapter Four
Imagine That: Drug Users and Literature
T 
he human history of culturally shaped material expression is ancient, 
with early examples being preserved as cave art, petroglyphs, and 
earth figures dating to the Upper Paleolithic period. In the course 
of human history, systematic recordkeeping in the form of inscription on a 
medium surpassed the spoken word as a culturally constituted mechanism to 
crystalize the memory of the flow of goods, events, and figures while facilitat-
ing the maintenance of the political-economic structure and inequality in 
human society. As writing came to inscribe human experience and the activi-
ties of living, it became a cross-cultural multivocal record of human involve-
ment with psychotropic drugs and their impact on the human experience. 
This chapter examines this record historically exploring various literatures 
as a means of assessing patterns, themes, and attitudes that express the social 
construction of drugs and drug users in human society. Given the enormity 
of the human oeuvre, this review is selective, beginning with early religious 
writing and focusing especially on well-known works of fiction and authors 
whose writings and lives have included more than just a passing encounter 
with drugs. The objective is not to be exhaustive but sufficient to touch on 
key themes in the literary construction of the drug user and the role of drugs 
in literary production, including examples that at times seem to run counter 
to the broader arguments of the book (and why these were produced). At 
the same time, dark images of drug use, and woeful accounts of the adverse 
impacts of drugs on the lives (including as causes of death) of many writers, 
can be seen to support conventional attitudes about drug use and to reinforce 
acts of Othering and images of uselessness.
The Deepest Roots of Drugs in Literature
Throughout recorded history, in many different cultural contexts, there 
have been inscribed local descriptions of people using drugs, often to the 
detriment of themselves and others, including classic works like the Gil-
gamesh Epic, the Vedas, the Torah, The Rubaiyat, and the writings of Homer. 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 88–120. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
89 
These early written sources offer descriptions of states of intoxication and 
their consequences, including the basic theme that excess consumption 
damages the consumer of drugs. Yet that is not the sum total of their mes-
sage, as drug use as a normal part of life is also a theme of ancient (as well 
as new) writing.
Gilgamesh is the best known of the ancient Mesopotamian heroes 
described in the Gilgamesh Epic, a collection of 12 incomplete Akkadian-
language cuniform tablets dating to 3,000 years in the past. The tablets were 
discovered by archeologists in the remains of the library of Assyrian king 
Ashurbanipal near the modern city of Mosul in 1840. It is assumed that 
the Gilgamesh told of in the tablets was the ruler of Uruk (after which the 
country of Iraq is named) in southern Mesopotamia during the first half of 
the 3rd millennium BCE, although in the epic Gilgamesh is described is a 
demigod of superhuman strength and intense emotions. Although there is 
not extensive reference to alcohol in the tablets, it is mentioned as a normal 
part of life (Mitchell 2004).
The Vedas (which means knowledge or sacred teachings) are ancient 
Hindu texts, the oldest of which, the Rig Veda, was composed about 1500 
BCE. There are three additional Vedas: the Sama Veda, Yajur Veda, and the 
Atharva-Veda. All are written in archaic Sanskrit and contain hymns, incanta-
tions, and rituals (e.g., how to make sacrificial offerings to the gods, the devas). 
In addition to being among the most ancient surviving religious texts, they 
offer a view of everyday life in India several thousand years ago. The Vedas 
are the work of the Aryans who came south to occupy the Indus Valley about 
3,500 years ago. Among the gods of the Hindu pantheon is Soma, who was 
connected with an intoxicating plant-based drink used in Vedic rituals. In 
the Rig Veda there many hymns praising its energizing abilities. The hymns 
refer to the plant from which the juice is extracted to make soma as “God 
for Gods.” Consuming soma, a libation of both the gods and humans, it is 
suggested in the Rig Veda, confers immortality. The actual plant in ques-
tion, which is described as growing in the mountains, having long stalks, 
and a yellowish color, is unknown today, although some researchers favor a 
species of Ephedra, possibly Ephedra sinica. In his book “Food of the Gods,” 
ethnobotanist and philosopher (and drug experimenter) Terence McKenna 
(1992) (who was introduced to the literary world of drug use through the 
writings of Aldous Huxley) suggested that a likely candidate for soma is the 
mushroom Psilocybe cubensis, a hallucinogenic mushroom. This mushroom 
can be found growing on cow dung in India. McKenna pointed out that the 
Rig Veda refers to the cow as the embodiment of soma.

90 
❋ 
chapter four
The Vedas indicate that the soma drink was prepared by priests, who 
pounded the plants with stones to access its juices. These were collected and 
filtered through lamb’s wool, and then mixed with other ingredients (such as 
milk) before it was drunk. The texts describing its effects (especially bringing 
“the light”) suggest hallucinogenic properties. In addition soma is said to 
enhance alertness and awareness. Notably, more recent writers like William 
S. Burroughs and Aldous Huxley (see below) have used soma in their books, 
with Burroughs using it to label a form of opium said to have been in use in 
ancient India, while in Huxley’s Brave New World it is presented as a drug 
consumed by people to quiet anxiety and adverse emotion.
The Torah, or so-called Old Testament, mentions various kinds of drug 
use among the ancient Hebrews. One of these drugs is derived from the 
mandrake plant, a member of the nightshades family, which is known to 
have psychoactive properties. The sources of this capacity are several potent 
hallucinogenic alkaloids, such as atropine, scopolamine, and apoatropine. 
Mandrake is mentioned in Genesis 30:14–16 and in Song of Solomon 7:13.
Moreover, consuming wine was a normal part of everyday life among the 
ancient Hebrews and intoxication was apparently not uncommon. Noah, for 
example, planted a vineyard and upon harvesting his fruit got quite drunk. 
Overall the Torah is somewhat ambivalent toward alcohol consumption, 
describing wine, on the one hand, as both a gift from God (needed in vari-
ous rituals), a medicinal drink, and a source of jollity, and, on the other, as a 
cause of sinful behavior. In addition to wine, the Torah refers to strong drink, 
which, because of a lack distillation among the ancient Hebrews may have 
referred to various forms of beer.
Beyond these drugs, as anthropologist Vera Rubin (1975) noted, vari-
ous references to marihuana can be found in the Torah. According to Sula 
Benet (1975), a Polish etymologist who was affiliated with the Institute of 
Anthropological Sciences in Warsaw, “In the original Hebrew text of the 
Old Testament there are allusions to hemp, both as incense, which was an 
integral part of religious celebration, and as an intoxicant.” Notably, anthro-
pologist Weston La Barre (1975), noted for his study of peyote use in the 
Native American Church, referred to various biblical references in an essay 
on marihuana. For example, Exodus 30:23 is interpreted by some scholars 
as including a possible reference to marihuana.
The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám is the title used by translator Edward 
FitzGerald (2011) for a selection of ancient Persian poems. The title refers 
to the use of a quatrain pattern in the poems (a ruba’i being a two-line stanza 
with two parts). The original author of the poems lived from 1048 to 1131, 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
91 
making The Rubáiyát, with its references to wine, a window on attitudes about 
drinking from times long past.
Exemplary of this attitude about wine are these quatrains:
Did God set grapes a-growing, do you think,
And at the same time make it sin to drink?
Give thanks to Him who foreordained it thus—
Surely He loves to hear the glasses clink!
I desire a little ruby wine and a book of verses,
Just enough to keep me alive, and half a loaf is needful;
And then, that I and thou should sit in a desolate place
Is better than the kingdom of a sultan.
In spring if a houri [virgin in paradise]-like sweetheart
Gives me a cup of wine on the edge of a green cornfield,
Though to the vulgar this would be blasphemy,
If I mentioned any other Paradise, I’d be worse than a dog.
If these translations are correct and they are read literally (some com-
mentators view the text as symbolic expression of Sufi mystical understand-
ings of the divine rather than early attitudes and pleasures) it would seem 
that wine is held to be a normal part of life, indeed one of life’s enrichments, 
and thus is approved by a benevolent god. Overindulgence is not addressed 
but rather drinking as a pathway to early enjoyment.
Homer, the ancient Greek poet, is best known for his Illiad and the 
Odyssey, which had a sweeping impact on the subsequent history of West-
ern literature. While it remains uncertain, Homer is believed to have lived 
somewhere in the 7th or 8th centuries BCE. From his work, it is evident that 
Homer was well aware of intoxication, drug-related supernatural inspira-
tion, and hallucinogenic visionary experiences, as these appear as consistent 
themes in his work. For example, in the Odyssey, he describes a group of 
people, known as the Lotus-Eaters, who spent their days getting high and 
forgetting about routine responsibilities and life’s troubles. (Hill 2008). The 
source of their altered awareness was the seductive honey-sweet fruit of the 
lotus plant, which stifled any motivation they might have to do anything else 
but get high and provided them with the experience of absentminded bliss. 
In the text, Odysseus tells of his efforts to rescue some of his soldiers who 
have encountered the temptations of the Lotus-Eaters’ approach to life. The 
plant made the solders feel good enough to lay down their weapons, reject 
warrior Greek culture, and spend their days consuming the narcotic lotus. 
This episode suggests an underlying tension that might have existed in Greek 

92 
❋ 
chapter four
society at the time of Homer between a celebration of marshal virtue and 
the violence of the battlefield, on the one side, and those who came to object 
to endless conflict and its alarming costs, on the other. At the same time, it 
reveals a degree of ambivalence about drug use, which offers an escape from 
life’s burdens and demands, but leads to stuporous indolence.
Through these brief glimpses into the literary past, it is possible to see 
that the harsh condemnatory attitudes that were later to emerge, as well as 
the categorization of the drug user as a distinct class of dangerous Others 
were not part of earlier thinking and writing about those for whom drug use 
is a pivotal element in their life course. The drug user as a useless and threat-
ening boogey man was constructed over time in a world of changing social 
structures and relationships, a process in which literature plays a complex 
and even contradictory part.
Drug Users as Writers and 
Writings about Drug Users
In 2000, famed horror writer Stephen King, author of a long series of short 
stories and best-selling novels, including Carrie, The Shining, Misery, and 
The Green Mile, and a bestselling author of the 20th century, remarked 
during an interview, “With cocaine, one snort, and it just owned my 
body and soul. . . . Cocaine was my on-switch, and it seemed like a really 
good energizing drug. You try some and think, ‘Wow why haven’t I been 
taking this for years?’” (quoted in Rogak 2010:96). In these words, King 
expressed his initial experience with cocaine, although his use of other 
drugs had begun years earlier. Like many well-known (e.g., John Keats, 
Ernest Hemmingway, James Baldwin, Tennessee Williams, Marcel Proust, 
Jean Cocteau, Dorothy Parker, William Faulkner, and Mary Karr) and 
many lesser known authors, King’s personal life was filled with the use of 
drugs for many years.
For some authors, personal drug use provides the experience and im-
agery that fills their stories, poems, and other literary production. Since 
Thomas de Quincey’s 1822 confessions of opium consumption, literary 
readers have been exposed to profuse representations of drug use, its 
benefits and dangers, its social worlds, and place in relationships through 
printed words. The following section of this chapter examines the applica-
tion of mind-altered experiences to the process of creative writing generally 
and creative writing that specifically incorporates descriptions, scenes, 
praises, and warnings about drug use.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
93 
My Life on Drugs
Drugs, for shorter or longer periods, have been a significant element in the 
lives of many authors, and many have written about it in autobiographical 
works. For some, this has been a sublime experience, for others a tragic one, 
although most heavily drug-involved writers have experienced both the 
heaven and hell of drug consumption.
In the case of already-mentioned Stephen King, much of the 1980s was 
spent on a protracted drug and alcohol binge that so impacted his memory 
that even today he cannot recall working on the numerous books he pro-
duced during that period. King admitted that drugs helped him cope with 
the dreadful unhappiness that haunted him since his childhood in Portland, 
Maine, after the Second World War. King’s father abandoned the family when 
he was two and he long feared his mother, who was forced to take various 
menial jobs, would do the same. Plagued by nightmares, as a child King’s 
imagination was filled with grisly images of his mother laid out in a coffin 
and himself swinging from a gallows, with crows pecking out his eyes. His 
days were driven by multiple fearful and destructive anxieties which included 
a gnawing sense that he would be sucked down the toilet, an inescapable 
preoccupation with death, and macabre thoughts about body deformities. 
Eventually, King realized that one way he could deal with his burdensome 
angst was by writing stories about them, based on the idiosyncratic belief 
that if he could write about something frightening it would not happen. 
While an English student at the University of Maine, he found that drugs like 
marihuana, amphetamine, alcohol, and LSD also were useful in controlling 
his many anxieties.
After graduation, married with two children and working as a high-
school teacher, King, aspiring to be an author, encountered growing frustra-
tion in trying to get his stories and novels published. When his mother died in 
1973, he fell into a deep depression that hung on even as his first book Carrie 
was published, an event that earned him a sizeable royalty and allowed him 
to become a full-time writer. Still saddled with dark thoughts, he began to 
drink and smoke heavily, and was introduced to cocaine, which was readily 
available at the Hollywood parties he attended as Carrie and The Shining were 
made into movies toward the end of the 1970s. All of these drugs, he felt, 
helped drive him through intense late-night writing marathons, and cope 
with his newly acquired fears of snakes, rats, and the number 13. He came 
to believe that he would be unable to write if he was not under the influence 
powerful chemicals.

94 
❋ 
chapter four
In On Writing, A Memoir of The Craft (King 2000), a biographical essay, 
King wrote about his brother David who was struck by a drunk driver and 
almost died. He also reported on his drug and alcohol addiction explain-
ing that he got drunk for the first time in 1966 during a senior class trip to 
Washington. In the mid-1980s King wrote Misery, the title of which, and 
its exploration of entrapment, he revealed, described his state of mind at 
the time because of his drug use. In 1986, he wrote The Tommyknockers, 
commonly working until late into the night with his heart pounding and 
cotton swabs wedged in his nose to stop the bleeding caused by snorting 
abundant quantities of cocaine. Notably, The Tommyknockers was about 
alien beings from whom humans could get super energy at the price of 
their souls. King explained that while he did not intend the book’s theme 
to be a metaphor for his own relationship with drugs and alcohol, his 
subconscious probably did. King also reported that Jack Torrance, the 
recovering alcoholic character in his book The Shining, was modeled on 
his memories of his own alcoholic father. In the novel, the character Tor-
rance thinks about drinking all the time and eventually gets drunk and 
goes on a murderous rampage. Throughout the book, alcoholism is linked 
to dysfunctional families, domestic abuse, and cycles of family violence. 
Some reviewers have interpreted The Shining as a temperance narrative 
that argues against alcohol consumption.
Ultimately, in his own life, King reached the point that he was spend-
ing most of his days high while suffering from blackouts from the drugs 
he consumed. Confronted by his wife and family about his self-destruc-
tiveness, he began to change his ways, only to be thrust into a period of 
painful writer’s block. As he emerged from the latter, his stories lost some 
of their haunted intensity but King has remained a highly successful and 
well-published author.
King’s life has been characterized by a troublesome contradiction: drugs 
were part of the fuel that drove him to literary success but also the toxin that 
almost destroyed his life. In this, among literary authors, King is not alone. 
Indeed, five of the nine Americans to win the Nobel Prize for Literature had 
significant alcohol-related problems, a group that includes Sinclair Lewis 
(1930), Eugene O’Neill (1936), William Faulkner (1949), Ernest Hemingway 
(1954), and John Steinbeck (1962). Indeed, the idea that drugs are a vital 
part of the writing experience, fueling creativity and unchaining the writer’s 
imagination, has had a life of its own among both successful and would-be 
writers. This notion is sharply disputed by others. Iain Smith, psychiatrist 
and addiction expert from Scotland, argues instead that

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
95 
The reason why this myth is so powerful is the allure of the substances, 
and the fact that many artists need drugs to cope with their emotions. 
Artists are, in general, more emotional people. . . . [But w]hen you try 
and capture the experiences [triggered by drugs] they are often non-
sense. These drugs often wipe your memory, so it’s hard to remember 
how you were in that state of mind (quoted in Van Radowitz 2010).
Without question, for some well-known authors, alcohol destroyed both 
their literary ability and their life. F. Scott Fitzgerald, for example, gained 
success as a writer while in his early 20s, selling stories about life during 
the Roaring Twenties that earned him access to an immoderate lifestyle 
characterized by frequent parties and regular drinking. While writing his 
most celebrated novel, The Great Gatsby (Fitzgerald 1993), he was able to 
refrain from drinking. But the success of this work led to considerable social 
pressure to produce a follow-up best seller. Regular drinking, however, made 
it difficult for him to focus on a novel-length project. He focused instead 
on writing short stories that he could sell for quick access to cash. By the 
late 1920s, Fitzgerald began to see alcohol as necessary for his writing, the 
energy fueling his artistic facilities. In 1931, he moved to Hollywood to start 
up a career as a screen writer. But his drunken behavior during Hollywood 
parties led him to being fired. By his 40th birthday, he had hit bottom and 
attempted suicide by drinking a bottle of morphine. In the last years of his 
life, Fitzgerald experienced worsening symptoms related to alcohol con-
sumption, and he died of a heart attack at the age of 44.
Another noteworthy example of an author’s rocky encounter with 
alcohol is that of John Sutherland, a professor of English literature in Eng-
land, a self-confessed “recovering drunk” and author of Last Drink to LA 
(Sutherland 2001). In this book, Sutherland relays his own struggles with 
alcohol and his experiences in Alcoholics Anonymous. Listening to his fel-
low AA members share their life stories and long-term relationships with 
“booze,” he came to believe that the one thing about alcohol addiction is that 
it makes you good at is storytelling, although most the stories he heard at 
AA meetings he believed to be exaggerated and self-serving. To the degree 
that alcohol lubricates storytelling capacity, it is perhaps not surprising 
how frequently heavy and problematic drinking is found among writers. 
What drives some people to write—deep personal suffering—may also 
drive them to drink. The experience of alcohol’s effects, in turn, finds its 
way into what they write, how they write, and may in time join the causes 
of why they write or fail to write.

96 
❋ 
chapter four
A somewhat muddied and much earlier case is that of Edgar Allen Poe, 
a famed writer of the horror genre who certainly used drugs (in particular, 
alcohol) and wrote about drug-using characters. But the full impact of drugs 
on his life has remained an issue of dispute for over one hundred years. Also 
mysterious are the conditions of Poe’s death and the role of drugs in his de-
mise. Based on various sources of information, it is commonly concluded that 
Poe was an alcoholic. On its website, the partisan Edger Allan Poe Society 
of Baltimore notes (2009),
Certainly, Poe drank and often drank more than was good for him, 
even after he had promised himself to stay away from alcohol. It also 
seems likely that Poe’s father (David Poe Jr.) and brother (Henry Poe) 
were hard-core drinkers.
Still the society asserts that Poe’s depictions of drug use were not 
autobiographical but only served as a literary device. Poe’s use of drugs, 
the Society maintains, was sporadic and not a major force in this liter-
ary career. Yet Poe is known to have been dismissed from his job at the 
Southern Literary Messenger in the mid-1830s because of alcoholism and 
to have increased his drinking and drug use after the death of his young 
wife. Interestingly, 147 years after his death, doctors at the University of 
Maryland Medical Center concluded that Poe died of rabies and not from 
the complications of alcoholism (as was long asserted by some literary his-
torians). This conclusion was based on a medical review of Poe’s condition 
in the hospital several days before his death, most prominently suggested 
by the fact that he had trouble drinking water and slipped in and out of 
consciousness and lucidity during this period (which is characteristic of 
rabies and not alcoholism).
Whatever Poe’s personal practices, it is undeniable that characters he cre-
ated used drugs. Exemplary is the short story “Lady Ligeia,” (1838) in which 
the narrator is presented as smoking opium while sitting with his dead wife’s 
corpse overnight. While under the influence, he hallucinates that his long lost 
love, Lady Ligeia (a woman the narrator describes as having the radiance of 
an opium dream), has come back from the dead and taken possession of the 
lifeless body of his deceased wife. Uniting elements like the macabre, mental 
illness, and the use of mind-altering drugs, Poe achieved a renowned place 
in the pantheon of the American literati. In doing so, he communicated a 
particularly dark message about drug use that nonetheless harmonizes with 
other such cultural assertions.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
97 
Writing under the Influence
A notably large number of well-known and celebrated literary contributions 
were composed under the influence of mind-altering drugs. Philosopher and 
writer Sadie Plant (1999:265–266) has suggested in her fast-paced, fact-filled, 
but meandering cultural history of drug use, that the methodology in this 
approach to composition,
is to plunge into a world where nothing is as simple or as stable as it 
seems. Everything about it shimmers and mutates as you try to hold 
its gaze. Facts and figures dance around each other; lines of inquiry 
scatter like expensive dust.
The challenges of writing with high doses of psychotropics “on board,” 
as (Kimiya 2000) emphasizes stem from the fact that
As anyone who has ever tried to write anything after partaking of 
psychoactive substances knows, altered states of consciousness go 
into words the way a tsunami goes into a squirt gun. Your synapses 
may be firing like Gatling guns, your mind may be soaring through 
the empyrean, but what you succeed in getting down on paper are 
incoherent gestures, endless digressions and fragments of fragments.
And yet, many pages have been filled, and often successfully so, by writers 
following the ingestion of a variety of drugs, often in combination. In 1797, 
for example, the influential Romantic poet and literary critic Samuel Taylor 
Coleridge wrote the symbolic poem “Kubla Khan or A Vision in a Dream” 
(which is believed to be a poem about poetry) while taking the patented 
narcotic drug laudanum (to treat anxiety and depression). Images for the 
never-finished poem had their origin in a drug-induced dream that followed 
Coleridge’s reading the book Purchas, His Pilgrimage, or Relations of the World 
and Religions Observed in All Ages and Places Discovered, from the Creation to 
the Present that briefly described Xanadu, the summer palace of the Mongol 
ruler and Emperor of China Kublai Khan. The poem, guided by Coleridge’s 
conviction that writing should pull the reader into willing suspension of 
disbelief in things our rational minds would otherwise reject, was facilitated 
by opium ingestion to allow Coleridge “to explore life on the line between 
illusion and truth [while making] it difficult for him to reassert the differ-
ence between the two” (Plant 1999:22). During the later years of his life it is 

98 
❋ 
chapter four
believed that Coleridge consumed as much as two quarts of laudanum—an 
alcoholic herbal preparation containing approximately 10% powdered opium 
by weight—a week. Coleridge joined the ranks of writers who struggle with 
addiction for many years; in Coleridge’s case unsuccessfully so, and he died 
a victim of his drug use in 1834 at the age of 61. Even before he succumbed 
to its powers, Coleridge suffered continually from a gut-wrenching sense of 
guilt about being a user, condemning himself repeatedly in letters, lamenting
ingratitude to my maker for the wasted Talents; ingratitude to so many of 
my friends who have loved me I know not why; of barbarous neglect of my 
family . . . I have in this one dirty business of Laudanum a hundred times 
deceived, tricked, nay, actually and consciously lied—And yet all these 
vices are so opposite to my nature, that but for this free-agency-annihilating 
Poison, I verily believe that I should have suffered myself to be cut in pieces 
rather than have committed any one of them (Ingram 1998:223).
Scottish writer Robert Louis Stevenson’s drug of choice was cocaine. It 
is alleged that he wrote his famous The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde 
(1886) during a six-day cocaine binge (although this is disputed by some liter-
ary historians). He used cocaine to treat his tuberculosis. The novella is about 
a London lawyer named Gabriel John Utterson who investigates the strange 
relationship of his old friend Dr Henry Jekyll to the evil figure known as Ed-
ward Hyde (in a case of dissociative identity disorder), a story that became 
one of Stevenson’s best sellers. His wife Fanny said of the novella’s writing: 
“That an invalid in my husband’s condition performed the manual labour 
alone seems incredible. He was suffering from continual haemorrhages and 
hardly allowed to speak, his conversation carried on by means of a slate and 
pencil.” (quoted in Ezard 2000). But finish he did. He even went on to write 
In the South Seas, (1896) which constitutes a strong piece of lay ethnography 
based on Stevenson’s travels to various Pacific islands.
In the short book, Stevenson tells the tale of a genteel and refined aristocrat 
who is consumed by the dark power of an unknown chemical addiction, which 
in Mathiasen’s (2009) view, expresses a moralistic attitude toward addiction. 
One likely suspect for the drug that ravages Dr Jekyll and unleashes the beast 
within him, Mr. Hyde, is opium, which, as discussed below, was well-known 
from the opium dens that sprang up around London during the Victorian era 
in which Stevenson lived (Wright 1994). Additionally, there is Stevenson’s 
(1886:70) description of the drug’s effects spoken by Dr Jekyll: “The most 
racking pangs succeeded: a grinding in the bones, deadly nausea, and a horror 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
99 
of the spirit that cannot be exceeded at the hour of birth or death. Then these 
agonies began to swiftly subside, and I came to myself as out of great sickness.” 
Unable to bear the duality of his tortured drug-dependent existence, Dr Jekyll 
commits suicide, a final moral warning about the evils of psychoactive drugs.
Acclaimed Victorian poet Elizabeth Barrett Browning began the use of 
laudanum while still a teenager as a treatment for various nervous disorders 
(known during the patriarchal era of her life as hysteria, a consequence of 
having debilitating female hormones). Also part of her treatment, which she 
called her elixir, especially for insomnia and what she described in a letter 
to her husband as “continual aching sense of weakness” (quoted in Aiken 
2012) were opium and morphine mixed with ether. These she praised for 
Police raid on London opium joint

100 
❋ 
chapter four
their tranquilizing effect and viewed as necessary for her poetic efforts. In 
her letters, Browning described intense drug-sustained writing sessions and 
productivity: “I am in a fit of writing—could write all day and night—& 
long to live by myself for 3 months in a forest of chestnuts and cedars in an 
hourly succession of poetical paragraphs and morphine draughts” (quoted 
in Aiken 20, 2011). As her dependence on drugs became known in literary 
circles, American poet Julia Ward Howe, author of “The Battle Hymn of the 
Republic,” accused her of relying on opium as her primary source of poetic 
imagination. While this accusation upset her, she admitted to her husband 
that the charge “was perfectly true, so far, that life is necessary to writing, 
& that I should not be alive except by help of my morphine” (quoted in Fox-
croft 2007:48). Despite her attachment to drugs, Browning was aware that 
others might view her behavior as degenerate and was thus concerned that 
it be known that her drug use was medicinal and hence respectable in the 
eyes of society. In another letter to her husband she more playfully asked, 
“Can I be as good for you as morphine is for me. I wonder, even at the cost 
of being as bad also?” Her always protective husband’s romantic response: 
“May I call you my morphine?” (quoted in Foxcroft 2007:46). Following 
two miscarriages, Browning cut back the extent of her drug use, fearful that 
drugs might have poisoned her unborn children. Eventually, she gave birth 
to a son when she was forty-three.
Celebrated American science-fiction writer Philip K. Dick, author 
of numerous novels as well as various essays and short stories, used the 
amphetamine-like drug semoxydrine as well as various hallucinogens to 
inspire many of his works. Best known of his collected works were the novels 
Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? Time Out Of Joint, The Three Stigmata of 
Palmer Eldritch, and the Hugo-award winning The Man In The High Castle. 
Despite his over productivity, Dick had a chaotic personal life, with five 
marriages and rotating bouts of ability and inability to produce. Moreover, 
he was weighted down by what he experienced as direct encounters with the 
divine. The final years of Dick’s life were haunted by a visitation from God, 
or God-like being. Dick spent a number of years writing journals regarding 
this asserted visitation and his interpretations of the event. His last novels 
all deal in some way with the being in his visions, especially Valis, in which 
the title character is an extraterrestrial God-like machine that contacts a 
schizophrenic and possibly drug-addicted science fiction writer named 
Philip K. Dick. Despite his award-winning novels and broad acclaim, Dick 
was never financially successful. Toward the very end of his life, however, he 
achieved a degree of financial stability, in part from the money he received 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
101 
from the producers of Blade Runner for the rights to his novel Do Androids 
Dream of Electric Sheep?
Iconic Beat Generation writer Jean Louis (Jack) Kerouac produced the 
initial draft of his legendary and impulsive On the Road in less than three 
weeks. The “spontaneous prose” method (Kerouac’s term) that character-
ized his writing style was shaped in no small measure by his consumption of 
drugs while at his writing desk. In his master’s thesis on Kreouac, Eric Izant 
(2008) argued that the altered states of consciousness produced by Kerouac’s 
drug use should be considered in conjunction with historical, cultural, and 
biographical factors in tracing the evolution of Kerouac’s creativity. As a lead-
ing member of the Beat Generation, Kerouac regularly used drugs as both 
social expression of rebellion against mainstream 1950s American society 
and because of the belief that it offered artistic insight. The latter idea has a 
long tradition among writers and other artists who come to view drugs as 
modern-day muses and accessible chemical gateways to a transcendental 
realm of visionary truth. Kerouac, who believed writing in English had lost 
its potential for true communication because the art had become ossified in 
rigid forms of proper grammar and sentence construction, sought a prose 
style that would allow the highest levels of authenticity in expressions of 
human experience and emotion. Kerouac used drugs like amphetamine (in 
the form of Benzedrine), marihuana, and alcohol, each of which offered their 
own altered perception, to achieve new frames of consciousness, and then 
recreated and expressed these altered states through his writing. The first of 
these drugs fueled Kerouac’s legendary typing marathons, allowing him to 
not only expeditiously write On the Road in a few weeks but works like The 
Subterraneans in three days.
The core features of Kerouac’s prose style involved a de-emphasis on 
revision, limited punctuation, and the use of long-flowing sentences. He 
also sought to share subjective experiences truthfully, an ability he believed 
was aided by the use of marihuana. Marihuana also provided a dream-like 
quality to Kerouac’s texts. Later, he wrote Desolation Angel’s while sober, 
suggesting that Kerouac’s belief that drugs were a necessity for his style may 
not have been completely true. During the latter part of his career, Kerouac 
turned to alcohol, which he consumed prodigiously during the writing of 
Big Sur and Vanity of Duluoz. These later works were characterized by a less 
rebellious style that appears to have been influenced by rampant alcohol 
abuse. He died at the age of 47 (1969) due to internal bleeding caused by 
alcohol abuse, resulting in his life, if not his art, providing support for the 
threats of drug use.

102 
❋ 
chapter four
Writing of the Experience
Beyond writing books under the experience of drugs, authors also have 
written them about the experience of drugs. Beginning with Thomas de 
Quincey, who has been mentioned in previous chapters, autobiographical 
texts about drug use and its impact on the writers’ lives have communicated 
quite contrasting messages, both positive and negative about life on drugs. 
De Quincey’s influential autobiographical account of his addiction to opium, 
entitled Confessions of an English Opium Eater was published in 1822. Feldman 
and Aldrich (1990) credit de Quincey as being the first writer to produce a 
book-length work that could fairly be called a “drug ethnography.” Having 
first taken opium to relieve a prolonged headache, de Quincey went on to 
use the drug for ten years because of the “artificial state of pleasure” that it 
brought him. Although an adventurer and not a trained social scientist, de 
Quincey, who spent a number of years living among the urban poor, was 
a keen observer of the significant upsurge in opium and alcohol use in the 
working-class districts of London during the Industrial Revolution. “Happi-
ness might now be bought for a penny,” he wrote, “and carried in the waist-
coat pocket; portable ecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle; and 
peace of mind could be sent down in gallons by the mail pouch” (de Quincey 
1822:44). As Plant (1999:8) points out, “Opium grew in popularity in the 
late eighteenth century, as the first steam engines sputtered to life and the 
first great factories were built.” De Quincey also was interested in drug use 
among prominent individuals, those whose lives were made comfortable by 
the rise of industrialization, such as intellectuals like the poet Samuel Taylor 
Coleridge. In his book, de Quincey recorded his personal experiences with 
and observations of opium use across social classes. Unlike in Asia where it 
was smoked, the opium users observed by de Quincy drank it in liquid form, 
a practice that continued until the introduction of the hypodermic needle. As 
part of his assessment of the experience of opium, he (de Quincey 1822:55) 
contrasted it with drinking wine, saying:
[T]he main distinction [between wine and opium] lies in this, that 
whereas wine disorders the mental faculties, opium, on the contrary 
. . . introduces amongst them the most exquisite order, legislation, and 
harmony. . . . Wine unsettles and clouds the judgment, . . . opium, on 
the contrary, communicates serenity and equipoise to all the faculties, 
active or passive: and with respect to the temper and moral feelings 
in general, it gives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved 
by the judgment.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
103 
The book brought him almost overnight celebrity and formed the tem-
plate for many writers who attempted to follow in de Quincey’s staggering 
footsteps.
One of those was Charles Baudelaire, a French poet, art critic and transla-
tor (e.g., of Edgar Allan Poe) and the publisher of a popular French transla-
tion of de Quincey’s book entitled “Les paradis artificiels.” Baudelaire is also 
credited with coining the term “modernity” to describe life in the metropolis 
and the role of art in capturing that experience. Baudelaire was a member of 
the Club de Hachichins (Hashish Club), which met in Paris between 1844 
and 1849 and included among its distinguished membership individuals like 
Alexandre Dumas, Honoré de Balzac, Victor Hugo, Jacques-Joseph Moreau, 
and Eugène Delacroix. The club was dedicated to exploring drug-induced 
experiences, especially hashish. Exploration of this sort was common in 
elite intellectual, scientific, and literary circles. The club convened monthly 
séances at the Hôtel Pimodan to discuss and partake of their drug of choice.
As his own contribution to the “drug experience” genre, Baudelaire wrote 
extensively in essays about using hashish, which reflect, as Plant (1999:39) 
comments, included “swings between love and hatred.” In his view, expressed 
in The Poem of Hashish (2004 [original 1885]), “Among the drugs most ef-
ficient in creating what I call the artificial ideal . . . the most convenient and 
the most handy are hashish and opium.” Opium for Baudelaire as it was for 
Coleridge was laudanum, of which he was a long-time user. Yet, ultimately 
Baudelaire “condemned hashish as a means of circumventing the effort and 
time it takes to reap [great] rewards, a shortcut to paradise” (Plant 1999:39).
American author, journalist, and explorer Fitz Hugh Ludlow, who has 
been described as “America’s first famous dope fiend” (Gross 1995), gained 
celebrity for his autobiographical work, “The Hasheesh Eater” (1857). Lud-
low was born into a religious family in New York City, to sickly mother and 
ministerial father who was an active abolitionist involved in the Underground 
Railroad. Ludlow graduated from college in the years just before the start of 
the Civil War, having befriended during his college years an apothecary whose 
shop was the site of his introduction to various psychotropic drugs. Although 
he passed the bar, Ludlow selected a writing career rather than becoming a 
lawyer and quickly began publishing articles for various popular and well-read 
magazines of his day. From early on, many of his writing, including his first 
publication, “The Apocalypse of Hasheesh” (2009a [1856]), addressed hash-
ish and opium use, drugs he used as part of the literary bohemian subculture 
of New York City centered at Pfaff’s beer cellar on Broadway, a milieu that 
included Walt Whitman. Later, he would travel west to California and fall 

104 
❋ 
chapter four
in with the literary coterie he found there, which at the time—prior to his 
rise to literary fame—counted Mark Twain among its members. Back in the 
East, Ludlow married Rosalie Osborne, whose mother had misgivings about 
the union given Ludlow’s well-known involvement with drugs.He fathered 
several children, but died of tuberculosis at the age of 34.
In writing about hasheesh in his “Apocalypse” article, Ludlow (2009a) 
observed:
The value of this experience to me consists in its having thrown open 
to my gaze many of those sublime avenues in the spiritual life, at whose 
gates the soul in its ordinary state is forever blindly groping, mystified, 
perplexed, yet earnest to the last in its search for that secret spring 
which, being touched, shall swing back the colossal barrier. In a single 
instant I have seen the vexed question of a lifetime settled, the mystery 
of some grand recondite process of mind laid bare, the last grim doubt 
that hung persistently on the sky of a sublime truth blown away.
Despite the intense and vivid sense of spiritual uplift, awakening to 
a deeper and fuller meaning of life, and the experience of “towering into 
sublimity,” Ludlow’s account of using hasheesh is counterbalanced by a 
palpable dark side.
Upon my head, in a tremendous and ever-thickening cloud, came 
slowly down the guilt of all the ages past, and all the world to come; 
by a dreadful quickening, I beheld every atrocity and nameless crime 
coming up from all time on lines that centred in myself (Ludlow 2009a).
His book-length treatment, The Hasheesh Eater, was influenced by his 
reading of de Quincey’s Confessions of an English Opium Eater. It was clear 
that he avoided writing about opium to avoid hostile comparison with de 
Quincey’s work. In Plant’s (1999:36) view, “there is little doubt that Ludlow 
was seduced by the drama of de Quincey’s addiction.” In his book, Ludlow 
further described the experience of altered consciousness through the use 
of Cannabis (specifically the resin from the flowers of the female plant) and 
the philosophical reflections it generated, including the terror of feeling 
overwhelmed by the drug.
I could not doubt it. I was in the power of the hashesh influence. My first 
emotion was one of uncontrollable terror—a sense of getting something 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
105 
which I did not bargain for. That moment I would have given all I had 
or hoped to have to be as I was three hours before (Ludlow 1857:20).
Despite this initial dread, Ludlow, who was just 21 years old when his 
book was published, proceeded to describe in florid detail the hallucinogenic 
expansion of space and time experienced under the influence, noting
One portion of me whirled unresistingly along the track of this tre-
mendous experience, the other sat looking down from a height upon 
its double, observing, reasoning, and serenely weighing all the phe-
nomena. . . . I dwelt in a marvelous inner world. I existed by turns in 
different places and various states of being (Ludlow 1857:23).
Ludlow came like other drug-using writers to believe that drug use was 
a boon to his creativity, although he also recognized that his pen could but 
poorly record the elaborate and changing hallucinatory visions experienced 
when he was high.
Although he could not overcome his own drug dependency, Ludlow, 
perhaps drawing on memories of his father’s activism, became deeply com-
mitted to helping others struggling with addiction. This work was guided by 
his belief that the opium addict “is a proper subject, not for reproof, but for 
medical treatment” (Ludlow 2009b [1868]:379). One of his essays, “John 
Heathburn’s Title” (1864), describes an opium and alcohol addict who is 
cured through the patience of a sympathetic physician using a substitution 
therapy composed of a Cannabis extract. It is based on Ludlow’s own efforts 
in treating opium addicts that came to him seeking help. He also authored 
“Outlines of the Opium-Cure” (Ludlow 2009b) in which he described an 
elaborate therapeutic plan involving isolation in comfortable surroundings, 
baths and massages, nutritional diet, and diminishing administration of 
opium over a month’s course. One of Ludlow’s (1870) last published articles, 
written for the New York Tribune, also appears to have been prompted by his 
work with destitute opiate addicts. Entitled the “Homes for the Friendless,” 
the essay advocated the establishment of homeless shelters for alcoholics 
and other drug addicts. The idea was warmly embraced by Tribune editor 
Horace Greeley.
English writer and satirist Aldous Huxley, best known for his celebrated 
book Brave New World (1932), also authored The Doors of Perception (1994), 
a work that inspired Jim Morrison’s choice of his band’s name and the drug-
informed style of his music. In the vogue of Ludlow’s most famous work, 

106 
❋ 
chapter four
Huxley provides a detailed account of his experience with the drug mescaline. 
Extracted from the Peyote cactus, mescaline induces hallucinations which 
Huxley found opened his mind and inspired him in his creative endeavors. 
Huxley’s attraction to mescaline was rooted in his long-time interest in 
spiritualism. Huxley first heard of peyote use while learning about ceremo-
nies of the Native American Church in New Mexico soon after coming to 
the United States from the United Kingdom in 1937. He also read about 
mescaline in an academic paper written by Humphry Osmond, a British 
psychiatrist working at Weyburn Mental Hospital, Saskatchewan in early 
1952. Huxley wrote to Osmand indicating his desire to be an experimental 
subject in mescaline research. He hoped the drug would bring him closer to 
spiritual enlightenment. Osmond, although having some reluctance, agreed 
and traveled to California for this purpose. The drug was administered in the 
hills overlooking Hollywood. Subsequently, over a one-month period (after a 
three-week road trip around several national parks), Huxley wrote his famous 
drug book. He explained his motivation for taking mescaline as a hope to gain 
new insight into extraordinary states of mind and expected to see brightly 
colored fanciful landscapes. While this did not occur, Huxley stated that the 
drug changed his perception of the external world. After the book was pub-
lished, and was rebuffed in some circles, Huxley wrote to Harold Raymond 
that he found it strange that when Hilaire Belloc and G. K. Chesterton wrote 
praises of alcohol they did not lose their standing as good Christians, but 
when someone suggests other paths to self-transcendence they are accused 
of being a drug addict and of being depraved (Murray 2003). Nonetheless, 
Huxley continued to use mind-altering drugs for the rest of his life and for 
a time befriended Timothy Leary with whom he shared an appreciation of 
the value of drug use. Notably, years later when stricken by cancer, and on 
his deathbed unable to speak any longer, Huxley wrote a request to his wife 
Laura for 100 g of LSD, which she obliged.
Certainly a star of the “experience with drugs” genre was American novel-
ist William Burroughs, who drew on his experience with opioids throughout 
his writing, especially in the books Junkie (1953) and Naked Lunch (1959). 
Burroughs penned the latter book in Morocco while under the influence of 
marihuana and an opium derivative called Eukodol (Townsend 2008). For 
many years, Burroughs kept his sexual orientation concealed, but with the 
publication of Naked Lunch he came out of the closet to become a recognized 
homosexual writer (and a controversial one, as he was tried for breaking US 
sodomy laws because of the content of the book). Burroughs attended Har-
vard University as an undergraduate and even had a brief try as a graduate 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
107 
student of anthropology at Harvard, and later a similarly short experience 
as a medical student in Vienna, Austria. Like Kerouac, with whom he once 
lived (he also lived in the same rundown rooming house in Paris as Alan 
Ginsberg, his lover Gregory Corso, and Peter Orlovsky), Burroughs was a 
member of the Beat Generation of writers. In fact, he and Kerouac wrote a 
novel together about an incident involving their failure to report a murder 
they knew of, but the two novice writers were unable to find a publisher (al-
though the book was published many years later in 2008). It was during this 
time that Burroughs began using morphine, and he was soon addicted, and 
even later sold heroin in New York City to support his drug habit.
His experience in the international world of drugs (which for Bur-
roughs included time spent in Mexico City, London, Paris, Berlin, the South 
American Amazon, and Tangier) provided semiautobiographical material for 
most of Burroughs’s texts. His publications, in turn, provided needed cash 
to purchase drugs. At one point, Burroughs enrolled in a drug-treatment 
program in London, but soon relapsed (after writing a letter about his treat-
ment experience to The British Journal of Addictions published in 1956). For 
a time, he even joined the Church of Scientology and initially claimed that 
their therapeutic system helped him, although he later had a falling out with 
the Scientologists that led to a sharp exchange of letters with members of the 
Church in Rolling Stone Magazine (Wills 2011).
Although his work was condemned by some as obscene (and he was pros-
ecuted on these grounds in several states), his ultimate success as a writer is 
signified by his election to the American Academic and Institute of Arts and 
Letters, as well as being awarded the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by France 
after publication of three experimental novels—The Soft Machine (1961), 
The Ticket that Exploded (1962), and Nova Express (1964)—that together 
have come to be known as The Nova Trilogy. In 1983, Burroughs was elected 
to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, and in 1984 was 
awarded. He died of a heart attack in Kansas in 1997.
The prodigious drug appetite of American journalist and author Hunter 
Stockton Thompson gained him recognition in the drug literature, especially 
for his 1972 book Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. The book, which began as an 
assignment for Sports Illustrated to cover a desert motorcycle race, recounts 
a drug-drenched road-trip that he took to Sin City in 1971. The book, which 
opens with the attention-grabbing sentence: “We were somewhere around 
Barstow on the edge of the desert when the drugs began to take hold” (Thomp-
son 1998:1). Thompson explains the drugs in question by explaining that he 
launched his trip (in both senses of the word) in possession of two bags of 

108 
❋ 
chapter four
marihuana, 75 pellets of mescaline, five sheets of LSD, a salt shaker half full 
of cocaine, a pint of ether, some tequila, rum, and beer, and a diverse collec-
tion of pharmaceutical products characterized by multiple colors and brain 
effects. The book offers a heavily drug-shaped rumination on the failure of 
the 1960s counterculture movement as well as a healthy dose of Thompson’s 
ire at the hypocrisy of American life. In the book, the narrator comments 
that Las Vegas “is not a good town for psychedelic drugs. Reality itself is too 
twisted” (Thompson 1998:47).
First serialized in Rolling Stone, a magazine with which Thompson had 
a long-time association, it was called “best book on the dope decade” by 
the New York Times Book Review (Woods 1972). In 1988, it was made into a 
movie starring Johnny Depp (as Thompson; who was in fact a friend of his) 
and Benicio del Toro (as Thompson’s equally drug-indulging attorney) and 
directed by Terry Gilliam.
Thompson became best known for his book Hell’s Angels: The Strange 
and Terrible Saga of the Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs (1967), based on a year he 
spent riding, drinking, and doing drugs with the bicker gang, while recording 
their lifestyle and life narratives (and ending with the gang rejecting him and 
beating him up). His approach to journalism, which he termed “Gonzo,” was 
a highly personalized form of over-engaged renegade ethnography in which 
the reporter becomes such an active participant in the scene being covered 
that the reporter emerges as key figure in the final narrative. In keeping with 
the unconventionality of his life, at his death Thompson’s ashes were shot 
from a cannon to the tune of Bob Dylan’s “Mr. Tambourine Man.”
Thompson came to be best known for some of his unconventional state-
ments (2012), such as:
 
• I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence, or insanity to anyone, 
but they’ve always worked for me. (Also expressed as: I wouldn’t 
recommend sex, drugs or insanity for everyone, but they’ve always 
worked for me.)
 
• If you’re going to be crazy, you have to get paid for it or else you’re 
going to be locked up.
 
• You can turn your back on a person, but never turn your back on 
a drug, especially when it’s waving a razor sharp hunting knife in 
your eye.
 
• The trouble with Nixon is that he’s a serious politics junkie. He’s 
totally hooked and like any other junkie, he’s a bummer to have 
around, especially as President.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
109 
Thompson died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound in 2005. Of note, 
Thompson served as the model for the gun-toting, drug-using Uncle Duke 
character featured in Garry Trudeau’s Doonesbury comic strip.
A number of individuals known for other things have written autobio-
graphical books about the way drugs came into their lives at certain point 
and the deep impact it made. Key texts include those by Malcolm X, Claude 
Brown, Piri Thomas, and Manuel Torres.
In the years before his conversion to Islam, and his subsequent rise as 
an articulate, charismatic, and militant African American leader, Malcolm 
X (1987) relays in his autobiography his early life as a drug user and dealer. 
His encounter with drugs began while working as a shoeshine boy at the 
Roseland State Ballroom in Boston. While his job at first seemed to be about 
shining shoes, he quickly realized that a hidden aspect of the work, selling 
alcohol and marihuana and serving as a go-between for African American 
pimps and white customers, was where the real money could be made. Even-
tually he moved to New York where he worked selling marihuana, which he 
rolled into cigarettes (“reefers”) and marketed to musicians in Harlem. For a 
period of time he even went on the road carrying a jar of marihuana “sticks” 
for sale to jazzmen in various East Coast locales. This association between 
the performance arts and drug use helped to create, in some circles, a street 
image of the drug user as a glamorous role worthy of emulation. One result, 
was not only drugs but jazz itself came to be widely condemned and its pro-
ducers demonized. Yet, during the era that Malcolm X worked the streets, 
he found that in every band, a least half of the musicians smoked marihuana 
(many would also become addicted to heroin).
I kept turning over my profit, increasing my supplies, and I sold reefers 
like a wild man. I scarcely slept; I was everywhere musicians congre-
gated. A roll of money was in my pocket. Every day, I cleared at least 
fifty or sixty dollars. In those days . . . this was a fortune to a seventeen-
year-old Negro. I felt, for the first time in my life, that great feeling of 
free! Suddenly, now, I was the peer of the other young hustlers I had 
admired. (Malcolm X 1987:99)
Before long, Malcolm X came to the attention of the police. Under in-
creasingly intense police scrutiny, he abandoned his drug business to pursue 
other hustles. Despite knowing that the police were watching him he con-
tinued to smoke marihuana and, at the same time, developed a dependence 
on cocaine. Cocaine offered him a way of handling the emotional stress of 

110 
❋ 
chapter four
participating in robberies and running guns. This outlaw lifestyle came 
crashing down, however, when he was arrested and incarcerated on burglary 
charges. It was during his time in prison that Malcolm X experienced a radi-
cal personal transformation that involved both his conversion to Islam and 
his rejection of drug use. Consequently, Malcolm X was never swallowed 
up by the post-war heroin-boom on the streets of New York City, although 
he fell victim nonetheless to racial tensions and their internecine offspring.
Author and lecturer Claude Brown, several years younger than Mal-
colm X, had by age 13 developed a powerful attraction to heroin because 
of its popularity among the older boys and girls in the New York neighbor-
hood where he grew up. As he described in his successful autobiographical 
book Manchild in the Promised Land (1965), initially, these older youth 
taught him to use marihuana. When they moved on to heroin, which, 
among other names was called “horse” at that time, he fervently wanted 
to join them. For several months during 1950 he was all but consumed by 
his craving for heroin:
Horse was a new thing, not only in our neighborhood but in Brooklyn, 
the Bronx, and everyplace I went, uptown and downtown. It was like 
horse had just taken over. Everybody was talking about it. All the hip 
people were using it and snorting it and getting this new high. . . . I had 
been smoking reefers and had gotten high a lot of times, but I had the 
feeling that this horse was out of this world (Brown 1965:110-111).
Ultimately, Brown got his chance to try the drug.
I couldn’t believe it was really happening. I almost wanted to break 
out and laugh for joy, but I held back, and I snorted. . . . Something hit 
me right in the top of the head. It felt like a little spray of pepper on my 
brain. . . . Everything was getting rosy, beautiful. The sun got brighter 
in the sky and the whole day lit up and was twice as bright as it was be-
fore. . . . Everything was so slo-o-ow (Brown 1965:110{{en dahs}}111).
While some heroin users we have interviewed over the years have re-
ported to us that their first exposure to the drug was extremely pleasurable, 
like love at first sight, leading them to adopt a long-term chase intended to 
relive the initial experience, Brown had a different reaction. After a few mo-
ments of euphoria:

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
111 
My head seemed to stretch, and I thought my brain was going to burst. 
It was like a headache taking place all over the head at once and trying 
to break its way out. And then it seemed to get hot and hot and hot. 
And I was so slow. . . . I got scared. I’d never felt this way before in my 
life. . . . My guts felt like they were going to come out. Everything was 
bursting out all at once, and there was nothing I could do. . . . And I said, 
“O Lawd, if you’ll just give me one more chance, one more chance, I’ll 
never get high again” (Brown 1965:111).
Although he recovered from the terrors of his first high, he did not keep 
his vow. But he came in time to see the harsh toll drugs were taking on his 
friends and on his community and, with the support of a psychologist name 
Ernest Papanek of the Wiltwyck School for Boys, he vowed (and successfully 
was able) to redirect his life through education.
During the years early years in the lives of Malcolm X and Claude Brown, 
over in Spanish Harlem, Piri Thomas, a boy of mixed Puerto Rican and African 
American heritage, was a member of the younger post-war generation that was 
coming of age and coming into contact with drugs. He recalled one of his earli-
est encounters with marihuana at age 13. Drinking whiskey with several friends, 
one of them produced a “stick” of marihuana and asked if he would like to try it.
I felt its size. It was king-sized, a bomber. I put it to my lips and began 
to hiss my reserve away. It was going, going, going. I was gonna get a 
gone high. I inhaled. I held my nose, stopped up my mouth. I was gonna 
get a gone high . . . a gone high . . . a gone high . . . and then the stick was 
gone, burnt to a little bit of a roach (Thomas 1967:58).
Like Malcolm X and Claude Brown, within a few years Thomas was 
using and selling marihuana and was soon addicted to heroin. Also like 
Malcolm X, he wound up in prison, where his habit switched to benzedrine, 
phenobarbital, alcohol, strained shellac, and whatever mind-altering drug 
the inmates could get their hands on that could take them away from the 
harsh realities of prison life. Ultimately, Piri too overcame his addiction and 
became an author, producing a memoir entitled Down These Mean Streets; ad-
ditionally, he was very active in drug rehabilitation programs. Like Malcolm 
X’s autobiography, Piri’s book provides an engaging account of cruel racial 
prejudice, active discrimination, struggles to build a healthy identity in an 
oppressive drug-filled social environment, drug-shaped life experiences, and 
redemption following imprisonment.

112 
❋ 
chapter four
Another autobiographic work of note focuses on the life history of Man-
uel Torres. In most ways, Torres’ life story parallels those presented above. 
A gang member from his early teens during the 1950s, he tried heroin under 
circumstances not very different from those of Claude Brown, and like Brown 
his first experience with the drug was quite unpleasant. But his addict role 
model was his uncle and he encouraged Torres to try heroin a second time.
So I snort again and hey, it’s like the shit really hit the fan. . . . you can’t 
describe it. All the colors of Times Square tumble right over your 
forehead and explode in your eyeballs like a million, jillion shooting 
stars. . . . Everything’s beautiful, and it’s like nothing’s happening baby 
but clear, crisp light (Rettig et al.: 33–34).
Soon Torres was snorting heroin on a daily basis. Then his uncle showed 
him how to skinpop (i.e., subcutaneous drug injection). Before long, Tor-
res was injecting heroin four times a day, not to achieve a rush, but “just to 
maintain” a normal stability (Rettig et al. 1977:33). Indeed, this is a common 
motive for continuing to use addictive drugs that we have heard from many 
drug users. While they may enjoy some initial rush, as a long-term addict what 
they are mainly seeking is a return to normalcy, which for them has become 
drug-dependent. In the case of Torres, he began to “boost” (shoplift) to sup-
port his drug habit and then, like Malcolm X, turned to armed robbery, which 
led to arrest and imprisonment. Many years later, in reflecting on his life in 
his co-authored book Manny, A Criminal Addict’s Story, Torres emphasized 
the political-economic origin of involvement with drugs among inner city 
youth. Responding to a statement about Durkheim’s theory that the social 
role of criminals is to set the boundaries of acceptable behavior for the rest 
of society, Torres stated:
That’s fine if you’re on the right side of the tracks. But what if you are 
locked into the streets and locked out of the jobs because of your back-
ground or your dope habit? Hell, man, its simple for me to see, because 
I’ve been there. The social order created the drug problem and anything 
that comes of heroin addiction is their fault. Personal breakdowns are 
an aspect of social breakdowns (Rettig et al. 1977:175).
These four autobiographical accounts by Malcolm X, Claude Brown, Piri 
Thomas, and Manuel Torres, and related material (e.g., Pepper and Pepper 
1984) poignantly reveal the development of the post-war urban drug scene. 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
113 
Building on the image of the “cool” marihuana user of the depression and war 
years, the close of the Second World War ushered in a period of significant 
increase in heroin use and heroin addiction. This was sparked by the return of 
soldiers from parts of the world where drugs like heroin were readily available, 
and there was an opening up of the shipping lanes for the flow of drugs smuggled 
in by organized crime groups. The street addict, a social role in modern urban 
life (Stephens 1991), became a common sight on inner city streets, as each suc-
ceeding generation of youth, boys and girls alike, sought to prove themselves to 
their older peers by adopting the coveted persona of the hard-partying fearless 
drug adventurer. Other options and role models were few for youth who grew 
up in the times and places of these authors, and none offered, in their respective 
views, as much opportunity to prove their worth or face rejection in the one 
arena—the streets—that possessed any attainable potential of self-validation. 
In the wake of the heroin “plague,” and other transformations Harlem and other 
US inner cities changed dramatically. These were the years that ghettos were 
being reconfigured as hyperghettos and life changed dramatically for residents 
of the abandoned cores of the metropolis (Singer et al. 2006; Wacquant 2001).
As a result of the myriad technoeconomic changes that began to emerge 
during the 1960s, ethnic-minority working-class labor became increasingly 
expendable, as seen in the steeply rising level of poverty in the inner city in 
subsequent years. Critical to this change, the sense of community, which was 
revived after the migration of African Americans from the South and Puerto 
Ricans from the Island to inner cities, and even survived grinding poverty 
and the fierce racial discrimination that undercut self-esteem and self-worth 
encountered in northern and mid-western metropolises, was shattered by 
widespread drug addiction among individuals who had nowhere to turn for 
drug money except robbery, burglary, prostitution, and other crimes against 
themselves, their families, and their neighbors.
Drugs, for many, however, led to arrest and imprisonment as the War on 
Drugs became a multimillion-dollar industry and drug policies became an 
increasingly powerful institutionalization of racial segregation. The result was 
the creation of a social space comprising the ghetto and the prison united by 
a revolving door, with drugs available in both sectors. From the outside, this 
structure could be imagined as a thing unto itself produced and maintained 
by weak family values, lassitude, and immorality. Unseen, of course, in such 
condescending understandings were the underlying structures of economi-
cally driven racial discrimination that were the true drivers of the system. In 
this, the mechanics of the creation of useless categories of people, and their 
many less visible uses for the larger society, came to full fruition.

114 
❋ 
chapter four
Not all introductions to psychotropic drugs were as dramatic as those just 
described. In her autobiography (1911), entitled Twenty Years at Hull-House, 
noted social reformer Jane Addams confessed an episode of drug use during 
her teen years. In this encounter with opium, she and a group of friends at 
a female seminary were inspired by their reading of Thomas de Quincey’s 
widely read book. Wrote Hull (1911:46):
We solemnly consumed small white powders at intervals during an 
entire long holiday, but no mental reorientation took place, and the 
suspense and excitement did not even permit us to grow sleepy. About 
four o’clock on the weird afternoon, the young teacher whom we had 
been obliged to take into our confidence grew alarmed over the whole 
performance, took away our de Quincey and all the remaining powders, 
administered an emetic to each of the five aspirants for sympathetic 
understanding of all human experience, and sent us to our separate 
rooms with a stern command to appear at family worship after supper 
“whether we were able to or not.”
As this example suggests, at a time when opium was a legal drug, de 
Quincey’s literary influence was significant, inspiring brief attempts at drug 
experimentation in various individuals who gained recognition for their work 
in and out of literary circles. Their writings, in turn, helped to maintain a level 
of social interest in the drug experience among readers.
Drugs in Society
It is fair to designate a whole genre of literature as “depictions of the impact 
of drugs on society,” namely writings that in whole or in part can be read as 
fictionalized accounts of the ways drugs have shaped human social life in 
a particular time and place. Exemplary is the novella The Crying of Lot 49 
(1966), seen by some as one of the best literary works of the 20th century, by 
Thomas Pynchon. Living up to Pynchon’s reputation for constructing laby-
rinthine plots crammed with innumerable interlinked riddles and cultural 
references, the novella tells the convoluted tale of a woman named Oedipa 
Maas involved in investigating the encrypted evidence of a mysterious con-
flict between two private mail distribution companies and of a suite of exotic 
characters she encounters during her inquiry. Included in this voyage into the 
netherworld of human imagination in an extensively fragmented and chaotic 
society is Maas’s encounter with a group called Inamorati Anonymous, which 

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
115 
is dedicated to helping people avoid falling in love, which is said to be the 
worst addiction of all.
Despite this assertion, the novella provides an account of the heavy toll 
drugs and drug culture have taken on the quality of human communication 
and the depth of human relationship. While drug use takes place throughout 
the book, its impact on two of the characters is of note. The first is Mucho, 
Oedipa’s husband, whose life is derailed by LSD, as he loses his identity and 
sense of self as a result of the drug’s effects. But he does not see it that way 
at first. Defending LSD, Mucho explains his reason for taking LSD in these 
terms:
You take it because it’s good. Because you hear and see things, even 
smell them, taste like you never could. Because the world is so abun-
dant. No end to it, baby. You’re an antenna, sending your pattern out 
across a million lives a night, and they’re your lives too (Pynchon 
:1965:118).
Similarly, Dr. Hilarius, Oedipa’s psychologist loses his capacity to even 
listen to Oedipa as he experiments with LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, and other 
drugs as a therapeutic tools. In due course, drug use drives Dr. Hilarius crazy.
One reading of this book is certainly that drug use (or at least 1960s 
drug culture) contributed to an ever-more fragmented and divided society 
in which each lonely individual must cope both with a suffocating sense of 
endless isolation and with confusion about the borderline between reality and 
illusion. Pynchon’s view of drugs, in short, was not a pretty picture: behind 
the claims of those like Huxley or Burroughs about the power of drugs to 
open the mind and free the self from the straitjacket of social convention, 
Pynchon saw chaos, seclusion, and social disintegration.
The book Crank (2003) is semi-autobiographical verse novel by Ellen 
Hopkins. In the book, targeted like many fictional works with a strong anti-
drug message to junior high and high school readers, Hopkins shares the 
stormy and often troublesome relationship between Kristina, a character that 
is based on her own daughter, and what is referred to as the “monster,” crystal 
methamphetamine. Kristina is introduced to the monster when separated 
from her controlling mother and visits her deadbeat and drug-involved father 
in another town. Under the influence of the drug, her personality (and name) 
is transformed as she becomes the fast-paced, risk-taking, Bree. Left behind is 
the sweet, gifted, and conventional Kristina persona. Under the spell of meth, 
Kristina/Bree’s grades plunge, her relationships with family and friends are 

116 
❋ 
chapter four
disrupted, and her involvement with drug-using boys accelerates. Ultimately 
she hits bottom when she is raped by a drug dealer and becomes pregnant. 
While she keeps the baby, and this lowers her level of drug use, her meth 
consumption continues to the end of the book. While a certain amount of 
space is opened for alternative interpretations by the pregnancy, it is evident 
that a message of the book is that drugs destroy lives and relationships, and 
that humans are at risk of this ever-lurking monster.
The title of Diary of a Drug Fiend (1922), by wealthy English author, 
occultist, poet, communalist, magician and admitted anti-semite Aleister 
Crowley, leaves little doubt about the centrality of drugs to the book. Be-
lieved to be based on Crowley own experimental use of drugs (which he 
meticulously documented) and eventual drug addiction, the book chronicles 
the lives of the characters Peter Pendragon and Louise Laleham, on a heroin 
and cocaine binge and drug-craving journey across Europe. While their 
exploration of drug use begins in a light-hearted way, ultimately, on the 
verge of committing suicide, they are saved from the maniacal evil of drugs 
by a magician (as was Crowley for a time) who shows them, via a visit to the 
occult retreat known as the Abbey of Thelema (a Crowley mainstay), how 
to impose their will over self-destructive urges. The book offers a graphic 
description of the absolute horrors of drug addiction and treachery of hit-
ting bottom, but seems also to suggest that drugs can be wonderful tools if 
managed appropriately.
Dens of Iniquity
While various drug use settings are described in literary sources, few have 
attracted as much appeal as the so-called opium den, the very label for which 
conjures up a mix of scandalous erotic and psychotropic experience (made 
manifest by the fact that lights were low and beds were a common furnish-
ing) that often transcends socially reinforced ethnic boundaries. Historically, 
opium dens have been darkly associated with the Chinese, overlooking the 
fact that it was the British who forced their colonial opium harvest from India 
onto China and helped to create a widespread drug problem there. The British 
armed forces killed Chinese in two wars (the so-called Boxer Rebellions) to 
insure the profits of a vast drug market in China, only to have the Chinese 
be blamed as the pushers who lured the innocent (read: white women) into 
their shadowy lairs of drug abandonment. In this cultural sleight-of-hand is 
revealed the social mechanics of the making of the useless other, and why 
this other is usefully made.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
117 
Opium dens appear in various well-known literary products. In the Sher-
lock Holmes story, first published in 1891, “The Man with the Twisted Lip” 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, for example, Dr. Watson, Holmes’s collaborator 
and alter ego, searches an opium den in the East End of London to find Isa 
Whitney, the husband of one of his wife’s friends. In the den, Watson discovers 
Holmes, disguised as an old man, seeking information on a new case he has 
taken on. At the time, sale and use of opium were legal in England, although 
this would change within a few years.
In the 1884 short story, “The Gate of a Hundred Sorrows,” Rudyard 
Kipling in his first published work (written when he was 18 years old) tells the 
history of a Chinese opium den in India. The language of the story bespeaks 
the attitudes of the day. Writes Kipling through his narrator, a customer of 
the Gate of a Hundred Sorrow:
I used to go there, and, somehow, I have never got away from it since. 
Mind you, though, the Gate was a respectable place in Fung-Tching’s 
time where you could be comfortable, and not at all like the chandoo-
khanas where the niggers go. No; it was clean and quiet, and not 
crowded. Of course, there were others beside us ten and the man; 
but we always had a mat apiece with a wadded woollen head-piece, 
all covered with black and red dragons and things; just like a coffin 
in the corner.
In Charles Dickens’s final (and uncompleted) novel, The Mystery of Edwin 
Drood, a graphic account is provided of an London East End opium den and 
its customers. A friend of Dickens, J. T. Field recorded that Dickens was quite 
aware of such places and that he had accompanied the famous author in the 
summer of 1869 on visits to some lock-up houses, watch-houses, and opium 
dens (with a police escort) (Kitton 1897).
The story begins as choirmaster John Jasper, a man who is secretly in 
love with his vocal student Rosa Bud, the fiancée of his nephew, Edwin 
Drood, is leaving an opium den. Sometime later he visits the den again, 
but when he leaves at dawn the operator of the den, a haggard woman 
known as the Princess Puffer, comes running after him and follows him to 
his home. This action apparently stems from something John Jasper told 
her while under the stuporous effects of opium. As noted, the novel was 
never finished so the substance of Jasper’s drug-induced revelation is not 
revealed. But there is clear indication that the opium den, while legal at 
the time, was viewed by the higher social classes as a dark and threatening 

118 
❋ 
chapter four
place entangled with all manner of socially disapproved behaviors. Notably, 
Dickens’ death, which caused the book to be unfinished, followed a period 
of poor health and his use of laudanum to both help him sleep and cope 
with the pain he felt in his legs.
To express indulgence in life’s most exotic pleasures, his novel The Picture 
of Dorian Gray, first published in the final decade of the 19th century, Oscar 
Wilde (1890) has his character Dorian visit various opium dens of London. 
Gray, aware and deeply worried that someday his youthful beauty will fade, 
is willing to sell his soul to retain an impressive image of himself captured 
in portrait by an artist friend. Wilde’s incorporation of opium dens, located 
in remote and dilapidated spaces of the city, have been interpreted by crit-
ics as representing the disreputable areas of Gray’s personality. Expressing 
Wilde’s own contempt of Victorian morality, Dorian seeks out these dens 
of the underworld after committing a murder and hopes in them to forget 
the horror of his actions by losing consciousness in a drug-induced torpor. 
Although he has a container of opium in his home, Dorian leaves the safety 
of his comfortable social environment to journey to the murky dens that 
reflect the deepening degradation of his soul, as drugs come to reflect in the 
story a degradation of the human spirit.
In Delta of Venus Erotica (1977) by Anaïs Nin, there is a short story in 
which the lead character finds herself in an opium den. Nin was a French-
Cuban author, who lived in France and later in Cuba and the United States. 
Over the course of her life, Nin had romantic relationships with many leading 
male literary figures, including Henry Miller, John Steinbeck, Gore Vidal, 
James Agee, and Lawrence Durrell. As part of a voyage of self-discovery as 
a woman, she wrote journals, novels, critical studies, essays, short stories, as 
well as erotica, and these earned her international acclaim. Stories in Delta 
of Venus Erotica dealt with many taboo subjects including abuse, incest, 
homosexuality, prostitution, infidelity, and pedophilia. In the story in ques-
tion, the female lead character Elena enters what appears to be a smoke-filled 
mosque. Nin writes (1977:134),
It was a huge room surrounded by a gallery of alcoves furnished only 
with mats and little lamps. Everyone was wearing kimonos. Elena 
was handed one. And then she understood. This was an opium den; 
the lights veiled; people lying down, indifferent to the newcomers; 
a great peace; no sustained conversations, but a sign now and then. 
A few for whom opium awakened desire lay in the darkest corners, 
spoon-fashion, as if asleep.

imagine that: drug users and literature 
❋ 
119 
The increasingly erotic description proceeds, leaving an image of 
the opium den as a site of drug-awakening sexuality. Notably in another 
story, Children of the Albatross” (2004:153), Nin wrote “In the world of the 
dreamer there was solitude: all the exaltations and joys came in the moment 
of preparation for living. They took place in solitude. But with action came 
anxiety, and the sense of insuperable effort made to match the dream, and 
with it came weariness, discouragement, and the flight into solitude again. 
And then in solitude, in the opium den of remembrance, the possibility of 
pleasure again.” While taking the visitor to the edge of proper society, drug 
dens in Nin’s hand are associated more with pleasure than pain, affirming 
the existence of alternative drug themes in literature.
In “The Lost Mine,” a short story by murder mystery writer Agatha 
Christie, her well-known dapper detective character, Hercule Poirot, is forced 
against his will to conduct part of his investigation in London in a Limehouse 
opium den “right in the heart of Chinatown” (Christie 1924:221 ). This estab-
lishment is described as being of “the lowest description” (Christie 1924:221), 
asserting a rather different view of the opium den than that presented by Nin. 
In effect, this contrast of Nin and Christie, in terms of their respective places 
within society and the degree of conventionality with which they approached 
their use of the opium den setting within their writing, says much about the 
contrastive messages about drug users, drugs, and drug use environments 
found in literature, as discussed more fully below.
Drugs, Literature, and the Issue of Usefulness
As this review suggests, some writers (at certain times in their lives or their 
whole lives) hold the view that drugs and the altered consciousness they 
produce are a kind of psychological fuel that opens their minds to new levels 
of unconventional understanding and broadens their vision as an author, 
or, at least, are needed almost medicinally to manage various physical and 
emotional symptoms enabling them to be physically able to write. Certainly, 
many of the authors we have discussed lived lives badly damaged by drugs, 
and they often describe their suffering (and that of those around them) in 
their books and other works, directly or indirectly. As a result, one can find 
harsh images of drug use and drug users in literature, but contrary images 
are also abundant and there are those writers who firmly defend drug use 
as a vital component of their literary quest. One can look at the life of the 
writer or at what the writer has produced in his/her lifetime and find quite 
varied messages about drugs. This is not surprising because there are those 

120 
❋ 
chapter four
writers who define their life work as transcending conventionality and the 
barriers to life experience and understanding imposed by society, and there 
are other writers who are inspired by quite different visions of the purposes 
of transmitting thoughts, feelings, plot lines, character descriptions, and 
story narratives into formats that can be read by others (e.g., providing enjoy-
ment). Some writers, quite literally, write against society and are therefore 
less likely to demonize those on the edges of the social order than they are 
the elites who rule from the powerful center. Writers who feel somewhat 
outside of society or even in conflict with it, may, if they make use of the drug 
user in their work, be somewhat more humanizing in their portrayal or at 
least more tolerant or less condemning. Othering of the drug user, however, 
is still common enough in literature, as exploring the edges of social life is a 
reliable means of affirming orthodox values. In sum, while the drug user as 
boogey man theme can be found in literature, it is far from the only theme 
to be found there, and hence the take-home messages for readers will differ 
depending on what they read and who they read and what they know of the 
impact of drugs on writers’ own lives.
Whatever their stance towards drugs, given the extensive and for some 
quite heavy use of drugs among the creators of literature, writers as a group 
can be said to contradict prevailing stereotypes about drug users. Some of the 
most admired and celebrated works of literature were produced by drug users 
and possibly while they were under the influence of drugs. Many writers with 
solid reputations as accomplished producers of fiction, poetry, journalistic 
accounts, and related matter have entertained and educated despite (or, at 
times because of) their drug use. Yet, somewhat magically, their creations 
are separated from their lives and their lives are separated from those of 
less socially accomplished drug users, especially minority and street drug 
users, a type of fictional creation of social reality worthy of any the authors 
reviewed in this chapter.

121 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 121–152. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter Five
Picture This
Pictorial Construction of Drug Users 
in the World of Film
I 
n the process of Othering addicts, there is hardly a more effective me-
dium than pictorial representations. The relatively brief historical span 
of the concept of addiction as a feature of public discourse began to yield 
drawings (such as Hogarth’s etchings) in the 18th century, with additional 
depictions by cartoonists such as Nast in the 19th and early 20th centuries. 
The introduction of photography and motion pictures, however, opened 
myriad possibilities for conceiving and making pictorial narratives about the 
nature and process of addiction. This chapter focuses on the development 
of moving pictures, in part because even the earliest filmmakers showed 
special interest in drug users and the effects of drugs. Films, and later videos 
extended the powers of representation far beyond those of drawings or still 
photographs, giving latitude for extended narratives about the development 
of addiction and its maintenance and treatment. Films have about two hours 
to extend the narrative, and television series such as The Wire and Breaking 
Bad have taken these potentials into previously uncharted dramatic territory 
in terms of character development and time depth of the addictive process. 
In this examination of the history of motion pictures on addiction, we use 
anthropological findings from drug-user research in our analyses. In our cat-
egorization of film portrayals of drug use, we identify a set of common themes 
about this behavior frequently communicated through this medium. We 
avoid discussion of the considerable inventory of psychedelic and so-called 
“stoner” films because they do not typically deal with the issue of addiction.
Drawings and Photos
In 1874, when Harper’s Weekly wanted to tell its readers about the depths of 
depravity caused by drunkenness, the magazine relied on illustrators, includ-
ing the famous Thomas Nast, to portray the dangers of drink using images 

122 
❋ 
chapter five
of stupefied women, careless men, and desperate, abandoned children who 
either directly or indirectly suffered from the effects of drunkenness. These 
depictions helped to fuel the growing sentiment against alcohol consump-
tion that eventually led to the enactment of prohibition. The power of visual 
images, even ones drawn from the imagination of the illustrator, to move a 
mass readership’s perceptions was at that time just in the early process of 
development. The introduction of photography, which was capable of cap-
turing images of real behaviors as they occurred, and to claim (if somewhat 
questionably so) the netting of objective real-time reality, made it possible 
for a profusion of images to appear in printed media. Photography brought 
to the attention of large readerships the conditions and state of the clientele 
in saloons and bars. If the WCTU or another temperance group created a 
disturbance in front of a bar, photographers could capture that moment and 
transmit it to people who were not present via newspapers or magazines. 
Carry Nation and her hatchet became media icons as a result of her frequent 
appearances in front of news cameras.
With regard to other drugs, photographs of users and drug clinics re-
ceived print media attention as objects of public concern. For example, Mod-
ern Medicine featured pictures of activity outside a drug clinic in 1920, and 
The Literary Digest published a photo of narcotics officers inspecting a haul of 
confiscated drugs in 1923 (Morgan 1981:113,114,119). These presentations, 
however, were essentially journalistic activities aimed at making the reading 
public aware of happenings in their communities or in the rest of the country.
Although the news media, in their use of still photography and edito-
rial cartoons, came to exert considerable influence over how the public 
perceived drug use and drug users, as well as the people who opposed them, 
the introduction and elaboration of moving pictures provided an especially 
rich opportunity for presenting compelling narratives about these topics, 
not just with documentary reports but with dramatizations of personal 
experience. Film brings especially powerful images into public conscious-
ness. Analysts and media specialists constantly work to define the power of 
images produced in ever-greater profusion by the photographic and digital 
devices that give access to all phases of the human condition. This much is 
known: it takes less than one second for an image to be recognized by a human 
viewer. Gladwell’s (2005) interpretation of this phenomenon suggests that 
volumes of knowledge, emotion, and experience can be evoked by a single 
image. In a medium that has images moving and shifting across the human 
visual field, the possibilities for evocation are endless. With this principle in 
mind, we review and examine content, quality, and intent of visual media 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
123 
with considerably more focus on film and video than on still pictures. Our 
review concentrates on the portrayal of the addict and the cultural context 
of addiction in pictorial media, in other words in the cultural construction 
of the addict within the film industry
A thorough inventory of both documentary and entertainment films, 
especially taking into account films produced outside of the United States 
and Western Europe, makes a comprehensive critical treatment of drugs in 
film impossible except in a multi-volume format. In a single chapter, we can 
only hope to point out some of the influential films that focus on the nature 
and impact of addiction, as that concept has been constructed in Western 
discourse. Therefore, we only attempt to offer a perspective on how films have 
portrayed drug users’ experiences, with special attention to the impact of 
addiction. We also mostly avoid the exploitation films (films produced with 
the intent of attracting an audience that seeks titillation) unless they have the 
trappings of educational cautionary tales, such as the infamous Reefer Mad-
ness. Most of the movies reviewed here could be construed as “mainstream,” 
intended to attract a general audience. In our review, we point out homologies 
that contribute to the audience’s conceptualization of addiction, as well as 
unique features that add innovative perspectives on addiction.
How to Construct a Drug-Using Other
Films present “an irresistible opportunity to feed the audience’s appetite 
for spectacle, for something out of the ordinary—in short, for Otherness” 
(Donally 2012:1). Some very early films focused on drug use as it was known 
before the turn of the 20th century, including titles such as Chinese Opium 
Den (1895), a kinetoscope film only 30 seconds long (Starks 1982:13). Films 
like this tended to focus on exoticism, with exoticized portrayals of Chinese 
opium dens, white slavery, and even the infamous Fu Manchu. In that sense, 
they could be termed exploitation films, although that variety of film did 
not emerge for another decade or so. The true motivation for making films 
about opium users may be related to the notion that they were known to 
have fantastic dreams when intoxicated with that drug, and early filmmak-
ers were eager to render special effects that gave the audience the feeling of 
having an opium dream. Rube in an Opium Joint (1905) depicted this kind of 
experience, as did Rêves d’un Fumeur d’Opium (Dreams of an Opium Smoker) 
(1906), a very early French film (Starks 1982:13). A Danish filmmaker and 
actor, Holger-Madsen released Opiumsdrömmen (1914) depicting very explicit 
opium dreams. Stuart Kinder, a British director, put out The Opium Cigarettes 

124 
❋ 
chapter five
(1914) which included “weird visions,” and the famous German director, 
Robert Reinert, who produced Opium (1919), included dream sequences 
(Starks 1982:15). Given the abundance of subject matter for a new medium, 
the pioneering directors’ decisions to include movies about opium smoking 
in their portfolios testifies to the specific attractiveness of this kind of content 
during the early days of filmmaking. The Victorian cultural context in which 
these films found an audience that included large numbers of people who 
were deeply confused about sexuality. In this kind of cultural environment, 
titillation often involved views of very foreign behaviors, practiced by phe-
notypically distinctive people. Opium’s identification with the “mysterious 
Orient” and its known addictive properties layered implications of behavior 
outside the bounds of propriety, even sexual enslavement, into the audience 
appeal of these early films.
By the 1930s, with the addition of sound tracks to the motion pictures, 
all of the tools were in place to construct well-acted, compellingly written 
dramas about the ecstasy and misery of drug use for audiences that might 
not like being close to drug users in person but could be entertained by their 
alleged behaviors in darkened theaters and at some distance. The same in-
gredients could also be combined into laughable attempts at disinformation 
and spurious propaganda.
Portrayals of drug users in film give the beholder a sense of the users’ 
humanity, fallibility, and culpability. Whether the protagonists are high-
functioning upper-middle-class alcoholics, as in Leaving Las Vegas, The Lost 
Weekend, Night into Morning, Days of Wine and Roses, and Come Fill the Cup, 
or crumbling street-based addicts, as in The Panic in Needle Park, Trainspot-
ting, and Christianne F., the best of the films about addiction convey those 
protagonists’ merits, flaws, and impairment thanks to highly intelligent 
and astute script writing and often superb acting. The film medium gives 
abundant opportunities to impart nuance and idiosyncrasy to a character’s 
personal profile, yet in aggregate, the homologies among on-screen addict 
characters are so strong that adverse stereotypic configurations emerge. 
These homologies include accounts of how the addictive process begins, 
description of deteriorating social relations, desperate behavior involving 
money, involvement in frantic crimes and misdemeanors, body-wrenching 
withdrawal pangs, recidivism, betrayal of intimate others, prostitution, and 
eventually, either long-term and difficult withdrawal, continued addiction 
and all of its accompanying sufferings, or death.
Whether the films are of high or low quality, the homologies listed 
above obtain across the several sub-genres that have arisen since the dawn 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
125 
of the moving-picture era. The first film generally recognized as part of the 
addiction film genre was Human Wreckage, which was released in 1923, and 
unfortunately is now believed to be a lost film (Starks 1982:48). It belongs 
to the sub-genre that we call “biographical cautionary tales.” Both memoire-
derived and fictional narratives belong to this genre, which also includes such 
films as Reefer Madness, Monkey on My Back, Ray, The Basketball Diaries, 
Marijuana—Assassin of Youth, and Lady Sings the Blues. Each gives an account 
of how a protagonist begins to use a drug, seeks alternative social relations, 
becomes desperate for money to obtain more of their drug of choice (or as it is 
portrayed, drug of domination), commits crimes, agonizes through a bout of 
torturous withdrawal pangs, relapses, and compromises personal values and 
dignity in pursuit of drugs. Presentations of Human Wreckage, for example 
often were accompanied by a lecture given by the protagonist’s widow, Mrs. 
Wallace Reid. According to her lectures, her husband was attempting to 
recover from “the fast life” shared by Hollywood stars, having checked into 
a sanitarium, when he died suddenly of complications related to withdrawal 
from morphine. Reid’s death elicited sympathy, but it also represented an 
opportunity for Hollywood to cash in on that sympathy. The film’s very title 
embodies the societal construction of the damaged and worthless drug user.
At least one of the films mentioned above misrepresents practically all 
of the components of the sub-genre—Reefer Madness, because it is purely a 
fabrication based on the most lurid journalistic accounts of aberrant behavior 
connected with young white people who smoked an evil drug: marihuana. 
Its narrative excesses are legendary, and have been fodder for great hilarity 
among young audiences from 1970 to the present. Nevertheless, the fact that 
the same components that appear in far more meritorious films also appear 
in Reefer Madness raises the question of how these components became 
fixed as part of a narrative about a drug that only rarely involves addiction. 
Likely sources include the first book-length addiction narrative in English 
literature—de Quincey’s Diary of an English Opium Eater (1822) (discussed 
in Chapter 4) and some of the 18th and 19th century tracts and books about 
heavy drinking and alcoholism (discussed in Chapter 3). Given that kind 
of material, with all the familiar elements of process from initial casual use 
to escalating self-destruction to eventual withdrawal or death, it is easy to 
imagine the screenplay writer of Reefer Madness, Paul Franklin, referring to 
the works of Thomas de Quincey; Joseph Livesey, the great English temper-
ance advocate; or American temperance author Timothy Shay Arthur in 
formulating the addiction narrative he wished to insert into his film. All of 
these writings contained the key elements of initial social use, escalation, loss 

126 
❋ 
chapter five
of social support, and undesirable outcomes. Once Franklin had conceived of 
the framework of addictive career, it was easy to contrive situations in which 
the actors could clutch their throats and growl, “I gotta have more reefer!” 
To our knowledge, no one who has spent time in the company of marihuana 
smokers, even the heaviest smokers, has ever heard such an utterance except 
when watching Reefer Madness. Acts of violence, attempted rape, and gib-
bering madness are some of the other fabrications that Franklin slathered 
into his screenplay.
Franklin’s phony contrivances notwithstanding, some grains of truth 
could be derived from his oeuvre. For example, his Jimmy character drives 
recklessly under the influence of marihuana and runs over a pedestrian. 
Most of the research that has tested acute effects of Cannabis on drivers of 
automobiles has found that psychomotor function and acuity were reduced 
and reaction time increased under the influence (e.g., Sewell et al. 2009). 
The high frequency of detecting alkaloids of Cannabis in the blood of auto-
accident fatalities testifies further to the veracity of this particular aspect of 
the effects of Cannabis (Grotenhermen et al. 2007). Also, although the film 
grotesquely exaggerated the laughter associated with cannabis use, it remains 
true that laughter is one of the drug’s most commonly reported effects, even 
cross-culturally (e.g., Page et al. 1980:125). We can find evidence of how abject 
Franklin’s ignorance of marihuana’s acute effects in the fact that he failed to 
include in his narrative the hunger cravings referred by users as the “munch-
ies,” an effect that is widely reported among users in the United States and 
elsewhere (cf. Dreher 1982; Rubin and Comitas 1975; Page and Carter 1980).
Reefer Madness did, however, go out of its way to exaggerate the things 
that the newly recruited marihuana smokers were willing to do under the 
drug’s influence. Spontaneous, inexplicable violence, overwhelming lust, and 
general loss of impulse control all played parts in depicting how marihuana 
could ruin the lives of innocent white youth. Again, having spent considerable 
time observing male Costa Rican cannabis users in various contexts, and at 
dosages far higher than any possible in the United States in the 1930s (cf. 
Page 1983; Page and Carter 1980; Page et al. 1988), Page saw no evidence of 
the kinds of behavioral aberrations depicted in Reefer Madness. Much earlier 
than Page’s observational experience, Becker (1953) reported on the process 
observed in Chicago of learning the relatively subtle effects of cannabis 
and how to appreciate them. Far from causing naïve users to launch into 
debauchery, Becker’s account of the process of learning to use marihuana 
required the guidance of experienced “veterans” to point out the nature of 
the drug’s effects and how to recognize them. None of this process received 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
127 
any attention in Reefer Madness, except techniques for smoking marihuana 
cigarettes.
Reefer Madness’s attempt to construct a fraudulent Otherness in its 
marihuana-smoking characters also has a certain poignancy, because the 
film narrative eventually directs some level of pity at the naïve victims of 
the scourge that is cannabis. Rather than fully demonizing the youths (who 
are white and middle class) who tried marihuana for “kicks,” the film either 
executes them or discards them as felons or mental patients with little hope 
of redemption. The narrator expresses the hope that people who see this film 
will “tell your children” in an effort to keep these kinds of outcomes from 
continuing.
Perhaps because Reefer Madness was an early attempt to exert influence 
on the public perception of a drug’s consumers, it feels especially contrived 
and false. Its makers relied heavily on their audience’s lack of any direct 
knowledge about the drug and its effects. By the early 1970s when Reefer 
Madness was re-discovered and re-released, millions of people in the United 
States had at least tried marihuana, and their familiarity with the drug and 
its effects converted the film from cautionary drama to uproarious comedy 
without having to change anything. In 1992, a stage production/take-off of 
Reefer Madness played for a year in Chicago, and in 1998 a stage musical ver-
sion opened in Los Angeles, eventually finding its way to the off-Broadway 
scene in 2001, but closing after a few performances. Showtime’s 2005 movie 
version of Reefer Madness incorporated the musical numbers of the stage 
show, adhering to the original movie’s plot until the last third, when it de-
volved into a zombie apocalypse, either commenting on the perception that 
marihuana smokers become zombie-like1 or seeking to exploit the growing 
interest in and domestication of monsters and other worldly beings in 21st 
century books, films and TV programming.
Another movie, written by Hildegarde Stadie and entitled simply 
Marihuana was released in 1936 by the same person who distributed Reefer 
Madness, Dwain Esper, Stadie’s husband. It followed the same exploitative 
and disinformative path, linking marihuana smoking with forbidden sex, 
gratuitous violence, and illicit activity, and finally adding a new wrinkle—an 
early expression of the “steppingstone theory.” The film’s protagonist, having 
embarked on the road to perdition, progresses to the point of injecting heroin. 
According to that theory, shortly after a young person tries marihuana, the 
weed smoker rapidly becomes the heroin injector. Otherwise, Stadie followed 
the formula laid out by Franklin, including the casual encounter, the recre-
ational exposure, the undesirable behavior, and the slide into criminality. 

128 
❋ 
chapter five
Stadie also disposed of her characters and warned the audience to beware 
of this “new” drug menace to the cream of American (i.e., white, middle and 
upper class) youth.
Cocaine had received cinematic attention before the era of talkies, 
including silent versions of Sherlock Holmes mysteries released in the early 
20th century, and notably The Mystery of the Leaping Fish (1916), a spoof 
on Sherlock Holmes starring Douglas Fairbanks Sr. as cocaine-injecting 
detective Coke Ennyday (Starks 1982:38). The film expresses a surpris-
ingly light-hearted view of regular cocaine and opium use at a time when 
these drugs were being criminalized. During the mid-1930s, The Pace That 
Kills, (also entitled The Cocaine Fiends) used a plot line that rapidly plunged 
the protagonist into full-bore criminality in a matter of minutes. Cocaine’s 
intrinsic seductiveness became the centerpiece in the principal characters’ 
fall into sin and perdition. This relatively short (just under one hour), badly 
edited film also introduced a sub-plot that would become a major theme in 
other films about addiction—young junkies in love. Two of the main char-
acters, Fanny and Eddie, begin their relationship with the occasional use of 
cocaine (presented as “headache powders” to the naïve first-time users) that 
escalates rapidly into addiction, loss of employment, and eventually prosti-
tution. One of the peculiarities of this particular film is the nomenclature 
used about the drugs, a confusion noted by Starks (1982:37) regarding the 
filmmakers’ perceptions of opiate and cocaine effects. There are multiple 
examples. Cocaine is called “dope” by the underworld characters, but in our 
experience, users have never called it that. As Fanny and Eddie progress in 
their relationship, she invites him to a “snowbird party.” This term may have 
been current to denote cocaine users, and at that point in the film, the two 
lovers were snorting powder cocaine. Nevertheless, although we have heard 
“snow” as a gloss for cocaine, users have never been called “snowbirds” in 
our experience. Later, in his addictive desperation, Eddie tells Fanny that 
he needs another “shot,” but no injection paraphernalia are in evidence. He 
later acknowledges that he is a “hophead,” a term usually employed in the 
early 20th century to denote opiate users. This mish-mosh of terms seems to 
indicate that the moviemakers were somewhat confused about the properties 
of the drug that was the ostensible focus of the film. Later, toward the end of 
the film, Eddie’s sister finds him in what appears to be a Chinese opium den. 
In their zeal to titillate and exploit, Willis Kent (producer) and William A. 
O’Connor (director) carelessly mixed cocaine, nightclub life, opium smoking, 
and prostitution into a hodgepodge of not-very-believable drug-use practices. 
The opium den seems a particularly gratuitous exoticism for this particular 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
129 
plot line although it was consistent with the content of previous movies. 
Nevertheless, we now know enough about cocaine use to recognize that 
opioids can be helpful in mitigating the cocaine “crash,” a process involving 
dopamine depletion that occurs after a long run of cocaine use. Cocaine users 
resort to alcohol, tranquilizers, or opioid drugs to ease the discomfort of the 
post-cocaine “crash.” In showing Eddie in an opium den, even The Cocaine 
Fiends contains, if perhaps accidently so, a grain of truth.
The arrest of Robert Mitchum in September of 1948 provided an oppor-
tunity for a woman named Lila Leeds to exploit the circumstances through 
a film entitled She Shoulda Said “No”! She and Mitchum, who had been 
smoking marihuana since his youth, had been arrested for possessing and 
smoking marihuana, and although the charges were eventually overturned 
in 1951, the notoriety brought by the incident made it possible to produce 
a film exploiting marihuana’s potential (still largely unknown by the US 
population) for harming American youth.
Films of the 1950s and early 1960s tended to avoid marihuana as a topic. 
Perhaps this avoidance represented the general conservatism of the times. For 
example, Prohibition had been over for 20 years, but the surviving temperance 
movement still had enough strength to stop electronic media’s advertising of 
liquor in the 1950s (Pennock 2007:5). Even the otherwise gritty, inner-city 
drama Blackboard Jungle demurred in 1955 at mentioning marihuana, which 
undoubtedly was present in such settings. The presence of rock and roll con-
stituted the major menace portrayed in that film. Among youth during this 
time, marihuana use was found disproportionately in inner city areas among 
minority youth, a group that had never been the concern of the earlier wave 
of over-the-top cinematic portrayals of this drug’s consumption.
Heroin use, however, became a major topic in prominent films released 
in the 1950s and ’60s, especially in the biographical genre. The Man with the 
Golden Arm (1955) was a film adaptation of a novel by Nelson Algren that 
had, unlike the exploitation films that preceded it, the multiple advantages 
of a skilled director (Otto Preminger, known for resisting efforts to sanitize 
portrayals of drug use in film), high production values, an Oscar-nominated 
musical score by Elmer Bernstein, and a first-rate cast, including Frank Sinatra 
in the lead role, and Arnold Stang, Robert Strauss, and Darren McGavin as 
supporting characters. Its critical reception was enthusiastic, netting Oscar 
nominations for Sinatra’s performance, Bernstein’s score, and art and set 
decoration in a black-and-white film.
The Man with the Golden Arm, however, ran afoul of the Motion Picture 
Association of America (MPAA) because that body concluded that the film’s 

130 
❋ 
chapter five
content was not acceptable to be shown to a public audience.2 Because of its 
focus on heroin use, the MPAA found The Man with the Golden Arm to be 
unacceptable, despite the fact that films of such poor quality as Reefer Mad-
ness and She Shoulda Said “No”! had received code approval. Possibly, The 
Man with the Golden Arm presented too sympathetic a view of the addict or 
addiction for the MPAA’s taste, although its torturous withdrawal scene, dur-
ing which the protagonist (played by Sinatra, who had observed patients in 
drug treatment centers to prepare for the role) withdrew from heroin, amid 
convulsions, shakes, shivers, and apparent cramps, certainly did not make 
heroin use seem desirable. Eventually, the MPAA relented and granted the 
film a code, and box office and critical success ensued. This movie’s single 
most arresting feature involved a sequence in which the protagonist had 
himself locked in a room in order to bear the rigors of “cold turkey” with-
drawal alone. These scenes later became de rigueur for biographical movies 
that included heroin addiction, despite the fact that our own field work and 
that of our colleagues (Agar 1973; Page and Salazar 1997; Rosenbaum 1981) 
found withdrawal symptoms to be far less histrionic and more flu-like (which 
is not necessarily mild) than those portrayed in the biographical movies (and 
there is no doubt that the fear of going through withdrawal can help propel 
continued drug use).
Shortly after the release of The Man with the Golden Arm, Monkey on My 
Back (1957) became the first biographical film on addiction under MPAA’s 
revised policy on formerly “taboo” content. This film about Barney Ross, a 
former boxer and war hero, and his struggles with morphine addiction, gave 
Cameron Mitchell ample opportunity to portray various desperate situations 
experienced by Ross during the course of his addiction. It also placed in the 
broad public lexicon a phrase (dating to the late 1800s, although not originally 
about drug use) that had come to denote the rigors of addiction for street 
based heroin users—“monkey on my back.” This phrase, which historically 
referred to an evil or upsetting spirit, came to be widely used in drug scenes 
in the United States and elsewhere, finding its way into an Aerosmith song 
(about the recognition of band members of their need to overcome drug 
abuse), and even becoming an expression used by Spanish heroin users when 
they begin to feel the symptoms of withdrawal (Page and Salazar 1997).
Alcoholism was apparently somewhat less taboo than other forms of ad-
diction, as The Lost Weekend (1945) demonstrated through its critical success 
and its lack of trouble with the MPAA. Ray Milland won an academy award 
for his portrayal of an alcoholic writer’s struggles with alcohol addiction. The 
film also received awards for best picture, best director (Billy Wilder) and 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
131 
best screenplay. As with The Man with the Golden Arm, The Lost Weekend had 
significant cinematic advantages of talented direction, writing, and acting, 
and an innovative musical score, an early example of using the theremin (an 
electronic musical instrument played without touch) to achieve effects of 
disorientation and pathos. The Lost Weekend had a notable advantage over 
The Man with the Golden Arm and Monkey on my Back in that its protagonist 
was an upper-middle-class writer living in New York, rather than a strug-
gling ex-convict or a struggling ex-boxer. Movie-going audiences at that 
time apparently identified more strongly with an addict who had a vocation 
and prospects in life than with marginal individuals who had no prospects. 
The risk of losing all of his life advantages added dramatic tension to the 
protagonist’s circumstances in the film. Its take-home message about our 
shared vulnerability was that intelligent, normally industrious people can 
fall victim to alcoholism and become so impaired that they cannot overcome 
their addiction without help, a theme that perhaps enhanced the film’s impact 
on its North American audience.
The following year (1947) the movie Smash Up: The Story of a Woman 
starring Susan Hayward was released. Like male drug and alcohol films, it 
expresses a motif we call “descent into hell,” which subsumes other themes 
under it, including deteriorating lifestyle, abandonment of moral and ethical 
principles, and obsession with drug procurement. The movie tells the story of 
a nightclub singer whose career is put on hold as she invests herself in support-
ing her husband’s career (a common enough occurrence during this era). But 
as his career takes off, hers slides into an addictive relationship with alcohol 
until she “hits bottom.” Four years later, a movie with a similar theme about 
the threat of alcoholism and its destructive power appeared under the title of 
Night into Morning with Ray Milland. Released about the same time was Come 
Fill the Cup, a movie with an all-star cast (James Cagney, Raymond Massey, 
Jackie Gleason and Gig Young) that conveyed the message that people with 
drinking problems must help other people to stay sober themselves. Soon 
thereafter, came the well-acted and award-winning film Come Back Little 
Sheba starring Burt Lancaster and Shirley Booth. Lancaster plays a man who 
dropped out of medical school to support a woman he impregnated but did 
not love. In self-pity, he turns to drinking, which causes him to have bouts 
of murderous anger. It too reflects the “descent into hell” theme although, 
in the end, Lancaster’s character begins to see the light.
In 1962, the issue of alcoholism received another highly acclaimed treat-
ment in Blake Edwards’s The Days of Wine and Roses. Like The Lost Weekend, 
The Days of Wine and Roses had advantages, including an innovative director, 

132 
❋ 
chapter five
a talented cast, and a great musical score. In fact, its only Academy Award 
recognized the best original song composed as part of Henry Mancini’s score. 
The film received other nominations, including the co-protagonists played 
by Jack Lemmon and Lee Remick, art direction, and set design. This version 
of the alcoholism movie used some structural components of the type we 
call “young junkies in love” —the more experienced partner introducing 
the naïve partner to the drug, shared escalation of use, deterioration of life 
circumstances (job loss, destitution), and abandonment of previously held 
values. In a departure from other narratives in which both young junkies in 
love continue their addictive paths to self-destruction, Joe Clay, the male 
lead in The Days of Wine and Roses, withdraws from alcohol addiction, ex-
periences recidivism caused by his unreformed wife, only to withdraw from 
alcohol again. As the film ends, he comes to the realization that he cannot 
reconcile with a wife who will not give up alcohol. This ending is not simply 
a departure from the “young junkies in love” type; it also departs from Hol-
lywood’s customary “love conquers all” theme. As with The Lost Weekend’s 
protagonist, Joe Clay is a promising, upper-middle-class professional who 
begins to lose everything through his constant drinking. Again, this vulner-
ability of an otherwise bright and capable adult to alcoholic recidivism seemed 
to resonate with the viewer audiences of 1962. A forceful intervention by 
his 12-step sponsor (played by Jack Klugman) helped to convince Joe Clay 
that he could not remain sober if he accepted his wife back in his home, and 
this action reiterated that alcoholics need help to remain sober, this time in 
opposition to previously supportive (and enabling) social environments.
In our discussion of high-profile, Oscar-worthy acting performances 
about addiction, we cannot omit Katharine Hepburn’s performance in the 
movie version of Eugene O’Neill’s play, A Long Day’s Journey into Night. As 
the morphine-addicted wife of an alcoholic, she took viewers through the 
biographical cautionary stations of suffering, from the introduction, to ad-
diction, to dysfunction, all in retrospect, as the action involved only a single 
day. The combination of Hepburn’s acting and O’Neill’s writing produced 
what could be called the apogee of films on the human condition of the 
addict, at least up to 1962. The introduction of Mary Tyrone (Hepburn’s 
character) to morphine involved a different kind of agency. Rather than the 
often portrayed lover or boyfriend, a physician had introduced Mary to mor-
phine, an example of what is known in the literature as an iatrogenic etiology. 
Furthermore, Mary’s pharmacist and her sons had all worked to enable her 
continued use, including the concealment of her addiction from her husband. 
Consequently, she had no experience with the desperate, principle-breaking, 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
133 
morality-bending behavior often portrayed in films that have addiction as a 
central theme. Nevertheless, O’Neill clearly presented Mary’s addiction as 
an exacerbating factor in dysfunctional household relations. In that sense, 
A Long Day’s Journey into Night was consistent with the damage assessments 
in other addiction movies—addiction makes things worse, much worse. In 
our own ethnographic research, we have encountered households in which 
one or more members have been addicts, usually in a poly-drug mode. In 
all cases, the presence of the addicts was highly disruptive, with impacts on 
child care, interaction among adults, and even decor (e.g., when the addict 
sold off articles of furniture to obtain drugs). Research by Linda Bennett 
and Steven Wolin (1990) has shown that alcoholism in a family member can 
subsume structure-building family rituals. Their findings (Bennett and Wolin 
1990:202) show that “those families whose rituals were most subsumed by the 
alcoholism . . . evidenced a greater incidence of intergenerational continuity 
of the alcoholism among the grown children . . . than those families which 
kept their family rituals distinct from the alcohol abuse behavior.”
Exploitation films have never really died off completely, but most have 
had production values considerably better than those of Reefer Madness or 
The Cocaine Fiends. One film adaptation of a 1966 Jacqueline Suzanne novel 
clearly belongs in this category—The Valley of the Dolls (1967). It was one of 
the first to dramatize the misuse of prescription medication, focusing primar-
ily on barbiturates. The film’s title used a slang term (“dolls”) for sedative/
hypnotic pills favored by women in show business. Not really focusing on 
addiction, this movie emphasized the un-glamorous aspects of what appeared 
to be glamorous lifestyles in which the players were constantly at risk due to 
their drug use. Suicide was always possible, as the barbiturates on the play-
ers’ night stands were eminently capable of killing via overdose.3 Unlike the 
exploitation films that preceded it, The Valley of the Dolls did not moralize over 
the poor choices made by its principal characters, but rather caused the audi-
ence to witness their downfall without comment. At the time of its release, 
the pills at the center of this film’s drug content were about to be supplanted 
by a new generation of sedative/hypnotics and anxiolytics that were much 
safer to use than barbiturates.4 Consequently, the drug content of Valley of 
the Dolls became irrelevant only a year after its release. Its primary source 
of notoriety was co-star Sharon Tate, who in 1969 fell victim to Charles 
Manson’s gang in a horrific burglary/murder.
Fifteen years after The Valley of the Dolls, the next generation of prescrip-
tion medications received attention in a film entitled I’m Dancing as Fast as I 
Can (1982). Among drug films, this one occupies the space of autobiographical 

134 
❋ 
chapter five
narrative, in which the author, Barbara Gordon, is the protagonist. Most of the 
other films discussed here are biographical, but not autobiographical, and this 
may explain the somewhat puzzling portrayal of what would seem to be an 
exaggeration of the problems associated with Valium. Critical commentary 
at the time the movie came out expressed confusion about the nature of the 
protagonist’s problems. Literally millions of primary-care physicians at that 
time were prescribing benzodiazepines (the class of drugs to which Valium 
belongs) to their patients, often for clearly identified anxiety, but also for a 
variety of much more vague symptoms. Even when not quite appropriate, 
most of these prescriptions had little or no aftermath, and certainly did not 
result in the institutionalization of the recipients. Why, then, was this woman 
having such severe trouble with Valium? The film never succeeds in explain-
ing the origins of these problems, which include treatment for addiction to 
Valium and time in a mental hospital. Impairment related to use of Valium 
is, as the national statistics tell us, a relatively rare occurrence, especially 
when one considers the immense denominator in that fraction. The Com-
munity Epidemiology Work Group reports some emergency department 
and hotline calls that referred to problems with Valium, but those made up 
only a small proportion of the benzodiazepine-related problems in report-
ing cities (CEWG 2011). In 1982, Valium had a larger share of the pool of 
benzodiazepine misuse than it presently does, because of the emergence of 
Xanax and Clonipin as favored recreational drugs. Misuse of prescription 
sedative/hypnotic drugs has otherwise not received much cinematic atten-
tion since the release of I’m Dancing as Fast as I Can.
Heroin use remained part of the filmmakers’ repertoire of topics through-
out the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, and during that period, the content included 
two major types, the biographical film and the young junkies in love type. The 
Panic in Needle Park (1971) exemplified the latter type, providing a breathless, 
unpleasant narrative about young people who become heroin addicts in the 
big city. The character known as Bobby, played by Al Pacino, and the Helen 
character, played by Kitty Winn, do not exactly “meet cute,” as she is in the 
process of recuperating from a substandard abortion when he visits her in 
the hospital after a brief introduction by her former lover (played by Raul 
Julia). She is the naïve partner who is at first unfamiliar with heroin, but under 
Bobby’s tutelage, she takes it up. The film essentially follows their relationship 
through the already familiar structure of young junkies in love: plunge into 
addiction, destitution, prostitution, and loss of previously held values, con-
flict, betrayal, forgiveness, further betrayal, and expression of desire to escape 
the sorrowful life they have constructed. Well portrayed are the emotional 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
135 
perils of addiction, including selfishness and self-absorption. This film even 
has a certain verisimilitude that the other cinematic treatments of addiction 
that came before it lacked. The absence of a musical score gives the scenes 
in The Panic in Needle Park additional grittiness and harsh tone, especially 
when Bobby and Helen fight. Other scenes include some of the most explicit 
images of self-injection ever to appear on screen up to the time of the film’s 
release. Our own observational experience (e.g., Page, Chitwood et al. 1990; 
Page, Smith and Kane 1990a, 1990b; Simons and Singer 2006) matches the 
self-injection scenes in The Panic in Needle Park somewhat, although use of 
tourniquet ties was far less frequent in our observations than in the movie, 
due to our frequent observations of injectors resorting to areas in the body 
not amenable to tie-off (e.g., neck, behind the knee, between the toes, and 
some locations on the body trunk).
In 1972, an autobiographical film featured heroin addiction as it oc-
curred in the Great Depression. William Duffy had co-written a memoire 
with Billie Holiday. Chris Clarke, Suzanne dePasse, and Clarence McCloy 
adapted this work into a screenplay entitled Lady Sings the Blues. The movie 
starred Diana Ross in the title role, and it had her performing the music of 
Billie Holiday. Holiday’s experience with heroin, according to the screen-
play, began as she reacted to the things she saw during a concert tour in 
the south. She apparently witnessed the aftermath of a lynching, which, 
besides leading to her choosing and performing a topical song that bemoans 
lynchings (“Strange Fruit”), made Holiday so depressed that she started 
using heroin. Because she had a skill and multiple enablers in her immedi-
ate social environment, Holiday was able to avoid sinking into criminality 
or prostitution in order to feed her heroin habit. Nevertheless, she could 
not avoid arrest for possession of narcotics (Singer and Mirheg 2006). As 
in the cases of the protagonists in The Lost Weekend and Days of Wine and 
Roses, the risk taken by Billie Holiday in using heroin involved an otherwise 
promising career jeopardized by her addiction, in this instance, to heroin. 
The film makes the case that Holiday was self-medicating with heroin, as 
a result of the combined influences of the racist mistreatment received by 
people of color, strong feelings about what she had seen in the American 
South, and the presence and availability of heroin among jazz musicians 
during this era. No doubt, there were also gender discrimination issues that 
contributed to Holiday’s slide into addiction, both in terms of her troubled 
romantic relationships and in her career.
Although it did not win any Academy Awards, Lady Sings the Blues re-
ceived five nominations. Its box office drawing power was considerably better 

136 
❋ 
chapter five
than any other film that featured principal characters whose heroin use was 
essential to the plot. It also communicated effectively that black heroin users 
were especially vulnerable to the enforcement of drug use laws. The heroin 
withdrawal scenes in Lady Sings the Blues recapitulated the vivid sequence of 
seizures, shakes, and cold sweats shown in other biographical films, further 
building heroin’s reputation for engendering powerful body-wracking with-
drawal symptoms. In contrast, Lenny, (1974) a film about the life of Lenny 
Bruce, a white stand-up comic of the 1950s and 1960s, acknowledged his 
use of illegal drugs, but he became vulnerable to police primarily because 
of his avant-garde use of profanity on stage. An overdose of morphine killed 
Bruce in 1966, but the film about his life focused more on his controversial 
stand-up act than his drug use.
Three years after Lady Sings the Blues was released, a sequel to The French 
Connection directed by John Frankenheimer came to North American 
screens. The French Connection II followed the protagonist, Popeye Doyle to 
Marseilles, and in a truly unusual twist of plot, the drug traffickers kidnapped 
Doyle and forced repeated injections of heroin on him, making him an addict. 
After his release by the traffickers, Doyle’s character went through a harrow-
ing and histrionic withdrawal experience during which Gene Hackman, the 
actor portraying Doyle, performed cold sweats, shakes, convulsions, nonsen-
sical gibbering, and general incapacitation in what seemed a compendium of 
all of the heroin withdrawal scenes that went before The French Connection II. 
Frankenheimer seemed to have set as his objective to portray withdrawal from 
heroin addiction as the worst experience a human being can have other than 
death itself, and certainly for people who die peacefully, a much more painful 
one. The traffickers’ purposeful inflicting of addiction on Doyle, leading to 
his excruciating suffering amplified the film’s momentum toward retribution 
against Alain Charnier, the lead trafficker, and his henchmen. Nevertheless, 
the viewer wonders whether or not methadone treatment involving gradual 
downward titration of methadone doses might have eased Doyle’s withdrawal 
experience, as it has done for many thousands of addicts. Frankenheimer 
and Hackman apparently recognized an opportunity to shoot a dramatic 
scene that contributed to the film’s momentum as it barreled toward Doyle’s 
revenge against his tormentors. Whatever its merit or lack thereof, this film 
contributed the concept of forced addiction to the cinematic vocabulary of 
drug use. The concept, in fact, has been operative for years, not in making 
police detectives miserable, but in the murky world of human trafficking, in 
which addiction is a tool for enslaving young women who are forced to work 
as prostitutes as a means of gaining access to drugs.

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
137 
Three films released in the 1980s recapitulated or presented variants of 
the “young junkies in love” theme: Christiane F. —We Children of the Bahnhof 
Zoo, Sid and Nancy, and Drugstore Cowboy. Christiane F., released in 1983 with 
a sound track by David Bowie, who also appears in the movie performing 
in concert, was a biographical film based on journalist interviews with Vera 
Christiane Felscherionow. It had the most disturbing premise of the three 
1980s young junkies in love films—that children as young as age thirteen 
could become involved in heroin use and eventually become addicts. The 
fact that the protagonists were so young, about 13 years old, made Christiane 
especially upsetting for much of its viewing audience. Other than featuring 
very young addicts, the film followed the “young junkies” trajectory with 
little divergence: the couple meets in an anarchic club scene; the female 
partner learns heroin use from the male; they become addicted; they go 
through harrowing withdrawal symptoms, in this case, together; they be-
come re-addicted; the female resorts to sex work and steals money from her 
mother to get heroin. In a slight departure from the standard “young junkies” 
format, the male partner engages in sex work with an older man. Although 
13-year-old addicts undoubtedly exist in the midst of large populations of 
heroin users, most of the data available on injecting drug users indicate that 
the typical onset of self-injection behavior occurs at about 18 or 19, although 
non-injection drug use may begin as much as 5 years earlier (McCoy et al. 
1979). Therefore, Christiane F.’s experience is rather unusual. In fact, it appears 
that people over 35 are more likely to take up heroin use than people under 
17. Nevertheless, this film stimulated much discussion of drug problems in 
Germany and the rest of Europe. The notion that drugs represent a menace to 
youth has pervaded much of the cinematic material reviewed here, and this 
menace seems particularly compelling and frightening if it targets the very 
young. In the extreme, we have seen the exaggerations of Reefer Madness about 
the vulnerability of tender teens, and the case of Janet Cooke’s fabricated 
newspaper reports describing an eight-year-old addict (McGrath 1981) that 
garnered considerable public attention thirty years ago. Ms. Cooke’s Pulitzer 
Prize, which she subsequently forfeited, stands as an example of the public’s 
thirst for this kind of story and the superficial credulity of the press when this 
kind of content appears. Christiane F., in other words, on whose life the film 
was based, was relatively rare among injecting heroin addicts. As a result of 
the film’s success in Germany, a subculture of teenage girls began to imitate 
Christine F’s clothing style and to hang out at the Bahnhof Zoo station, the 
central transport facility in Western Berlin during the period when the city 
was divided. This generated considerable concern among authorities that 

138 
❋ 
chapter five
despite the dreariness of the film Christiane F. would become a cult drug-
using role model for impressionable youth.
Because so much of it appeared in the press as it was happening, the 
veracity of Sid and Nancy (1986) as a “young junkies in love” story outline 
was never in doubt. This story of two addicts, Sid Vicious, punk rocker of the 
Sex Pistols and his girlfriend, Nancy Spungen had all of the major compo-
nents of “young junkies in love.” One taught the other to use heroin (Nancy 
taught Sid). They fell deeply in love as they became seriously addicted. Sid’s 
relationship with the other members of the Sex Pistols deteriorated until the 
band broke up. The relationship between Sid and Nancy became increasingly 
destructive until it culminated in both of their deaths. Key incidents in the 
romance between Sid and Nancy bracketed the entire arc of the film, which 
opened in the aftermath of Nancy’s fatal stabbing and ended with Sid’s fatal 
overdose, laying out a sequence of retrospective scenes depicting the initiation 
and development of the pair’s troubled love affair. The story of the Sex Pistols’ 
rise and fall as a pioneering punk band hung from the love story’s framework. 
None of the other “young junkies” films has a larger, historical story (the 
rise of the Sex Pistols) that depended for its exposition on the central love 
story. Sid and Nancy rivaled any of the others in the intense unpleasantness 
of scenes in which the addicted couples are alone together.
Drugstore Cowboy (1989) was much more picaresque in tone than any 
of the films about addiction that preceded it. The protagonist and his girl-
friend recapitulated the principal features of “young junkies in love,” but as 
irresponsible white young people whose primary motivation was to get high 
and stay high at the expense of pharmacies, they gave the whole homologous 
arc of their story a sardonic edge that seemed new and different. Based on 
an autobiographical book by James Fogle, the film followed the protagonist, 
played by Matt Dillon, as he assembled a crew that set off to burglarize as many 
pharmacies as necessary to satisfy their need to get high. Set in the Pacific 
Northwest, the film had the band of drug thieves involved in misadventures 
that seemed comical and cautionary at the same time. When one of the band 
died, the tone changed drastically, not just because of the horror of death, 
but because the group began to understand the seriousness of their activities. 
Bob Hughes, the protagonist, decided to abandon the group’s drug-driven 
lifestyle at that point in the movie, inevitably encountering further difficul-
ties and eventual incarceration.
Toward the end of the film, author and noted lifelong drug user William 
S. Burroughs, as Tom, a wizened longtime junkie, held forth on the injus-
tice of government policies against drug use and expressed his own defiant 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
139 
advocacy for getting high however he chooses. The entire film communicated 
a kind of ambivalent attitude about drug use, North American drug laws, 
and the consequences of a drug-oriented lifestyle. The filmmakers obviously 
recognize that there are consequences for illegal drug use, but they appear 
to question whether or not these consequences primarily are constructed 
by the legal context in which drug use occurs. Tom’s/Burroughs’s soliloquy 
would argue for the latter conclusion, but other parts of the movie appear to 
caution the viewer that death may be an outcome for this kind of behavior. 
Our experience as anthropological researchers has involved, among other 
activities, many long conversations with drug users, both individually and in 
focus groups (e.g., Singer et al. 2001; Singer 2006). Those conversations, in 
which drug users and addicts discussed in depth their long-term relationship 
with drugs, affirm the duality of addiction as expressed in Drugstore Cowboy, 
that use of drugs can hold great wonders for some, but its risks can at any time 
overtake the user. In the end, most street drug users we have interviewed 
come to despise themselves for the damaging choices they have made and 
hold, at best, ambivalent attitudes about drugs. There are parallels between 
how some drug users talk about their addiction and the agonizing narratives 
of tenacious but unrequited lovers.
Besides introducing the international movie-going public to Ewan Mc-
Gregor, Trainspotting (1996) jarred film audiences with its unique combina-
tion of humor, horror, arresting images, and almost prankish turns of plot. In 
terms of structure, it did not bother with most of the conventions of how film 
had portrayed addiction and its process. In the film’s first few minutes, the 
protagonist (Renton, played by McGregor) is an already-established heroin 
addict, willing to plunge into the world’s most squalid toilet to retrieve opioid 
suppositories bought as a final dose before withdrawing from heroin. Rather 
than showing the audience how Renton acquired his addiction, Trainspotting 
practically began its narrative by showing how he went about preparing to 
withdraw from heroin. Renton’s preparations for the withdrawal experience 
included the collection of an array of paraphernalia, including food, buckets 
for waste, Valium, television, print pornography, and music (Boyd 2008:94) 
and nailing the door of his cheap hotel room shut with him inside. Tommy, 
a minor character, took up heroin use in the course of the film, eventually 
contracting AIDS and dying. Allison, another minor character with already-
established addiction and a baby to care for, allowed the baby to die of neglect, 
one of the most upsetting and drug-user-damning sequences in the film. 
Renton went through withdrawal twice during the course of the film, the first 
time in a light-hearted mood. The second withdrawal included the physical 

140 
❋ 
chapter five
paroxysms often shown in other films, with the addition of some truly bizarre 
hallucinations depicting Allison’s deceased baby crawling across the ceiling.
Trainspotting presented the most wildly varied view of addiction ever 
on film, up to the date of its release. When Renton explains the attraction of 
heroin, he offers the following description of the heroin “rush”: “Take the best 
orgasm you’ve ever had, multiply it by a thousand, and you’re still nowhere near 
it” (Boyd 2008:96). On the other hand, the same character described in detail 
the suffering he and others in this life endured as consequences of either per-
sonal or parental addiction. Tommy died of AIDS, Spud spent time in prison, 
and most horrifyingly, Baby Dawn died of neglect as the adults around her 
binged on drugs. Some controversy emerged when Trainspotting was released 
because it seemed to have too sympathetic a view of heroin use and addiction. 
In contrast, Boyd (2008:98) points out that no heroin user appeared in the 
film who was not either addicted or formerly addicted. Boyd also recognizes 
that Trainspotting presented addiction to heroin as a temporary condition that 
the main characters took on or shed according to their psychological states. 
This quality of temporariness seems at odds with Tom’s assessment of addic-
tion in Drugstore Cowboy during which he repeats the common phase about 
drug users, “once a junkie, always a junkie.” Our own research over years of 
observing, hanging out with, and interviewing heroin and other injecting-drug 
users testifies to the intense duality of addiction, which can be temporary, and 
in the strictest sense, under control of the users, but also tends to frequent 
recidivism (cf. McCoy et al 1979; Page 1997; Page and Salazar 1997; Singer 
1994; 2006). In truth, addicts can withdraw from heroin when they please, 
with or without assistance, and usually the withdrawal is perceived as worth 
it because going through the treatment process places the habit under better 
control, making it less demanding on the users. Furthermore, for a time after 
withdrawal, returning users get more pleasure from the drug than they did 
before withdrawal, when their tolerance for their drug of choice was high.
Another film that used humor to depict the plight of the addict who wants 
to quit, Gridlock’d (1997), played to a limited audience, but made key points 
about the barriers to access faced by addicts, even when they overdose. The 
central characters, Spoon (played by Tupac Shakur in one of his few film 
appearances), Stretch (Tim Roth), and Cookie (Thandie Newton), shared 
with biographical film protagonists, as in Lady Sings the Blues and Ray, the 
characteristic that they had talent, and, like Mark Renton in Trainspotting, 
they had the good sense to decide to kick heroin when faced with potential 
severe consequences. The comedy in Gridlock’d emerged from their at-
tempts, first to deal with an acute situation, in which Cookie overdosed and 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
141 
Stretch and Spoon tried to get an ambulance to come pick her up, and second 
when they tried to gain acceptance into a drug-treatment program. In the 
first situation, after being brushed aside by the 911 operator, they called in 
again and told 911 that they were under attack and that a white woman had 
been shot. Although they thought this story would get immediate results, 
with extra police cars, the ambulance did not come, and the pair was forced 
to take their friend to the hospital themselves. Again, after failed attempts 
to gain admission to drug treatment, Spoon and Stretch devised a plan in 
which one (Stretch, who was already shot) stabbed the other in order to gain 
admission to a hospital for both of them. This last-ditch strategy apparently 
succeeded. Gridlock’d avoided showing any of the rigors of withdrawal, and 
ended by suggesting that all three of the central characters, Cookie, Spoon, 
and Stretch had apparently withdrawn successfully from heroin and were 
playing happily in their band.
Hangover Movie Poster

142 
❋ 
chapter five
The odyssey of these two “buddies” took the audience through the often 
baffling and always frustrating process of confronting bureaucracies as ex-
perienced by addicts. In our own experience as street-drug researchers, we 
have come to realize that treatment centers often establish policies aimed at 
only admitting those addicts who have good presumption of success. In one 
of the most blatant examples of this kind of policy, a cocaine injector who 
was interested in receiving treatment laboriously (due to his hip injuries) 
walked several blocks from his home to the center that urged him to come in 
for treatment. Upon arrival, the screeners told him to come back in a week to 
“make sure he was serious about treatment.” Of course, they never saw him 
again. Repeatedly, our study participants have expressed the impression that 
treatment centers do not really want them to come in for treatment. One 
of the ways this is sometimes manifest is in having policies that work well 
for institutions but poorly for their drug-involved patients, such as refusal 
to recognize that drug users can have romantic relationships (like other 
people) or that having children is a primary reason some drug users do not 
enter or, if they enter, stay in treatment (because they are concerned about 
what is happening to their children). Gridlock’d demurred at the prospect 
of portraying withdrawal pangs one more time, perhaps because the film-
maker did not believe the previously depicted hyperboles of The Man with 
the Golden Arm or Lady Sings the Blues. Its unique success lay in its sardonic, 
but generally accurate assertions about the deep flaws of the health-care 
system in the United States, especially in the system’s interactions with poor 
and working class clientele, and that clientele’s dependence on emergency 
care (Singer 1994). Moreover, the film affirms an important aspect of our 
current treatment apparatus—that it participates in the construction of the 
drug-using Other and acts accordingly.
Requiem for a Dream (2000) used multiple story lines to focus on both 
the nature of addiction in its various forms and the dysfunctionality of a 
society that produces so many ways of being dependent on drugs. Its story 
lines include a “junky buddies” pair whose addiction, in the tradition of 
biographical cautionary tales, led to nightmarish outcomes, including am-
putation and prison-based abuse. In a tangential “young junkies in love” plot 
line, Marion, the girlfriend of one of the buddies, was cajoled and eventually 
forced into the sex trade in order to obtain drugs for the couple. Sarah, the 
mother of one of the buddies had a quiz-show addiction that led to a diet-pill 
addiction as she prepared to appear on a quiz show for which she qualified. 
Critical commentary on Requiem for a Dream expressed some skepticism 
about the terrible ends to which the main characters plummeted, noting 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
143 
that the director seemed to take pleasure in devastating people whom he set 
up initially as decent, sympathetic folks (Boyd 2008:99). This approach to 
cinematic treatment of addiction is especially reminiscent of the “disposable” 
characters in Cocaine Fiends and Reefer Madness, as Requiem for a Dream left its 
characters irredeemably crushed. Our own experience leads us to comment 
that, in long-term interaction with street-based addicts and non-addicted 
drug users, we seldom encountered people who lacked resilience, even if that 
resilience only led to recidivistic addiction. Whatever the addiction, even in 
the face of consequential disease, such as hepatitis C and AIDS, participants 
in our studies usually have been capable of recuperation, humor, and to vary-
ing degrees, redemption. No small number of them, however, die as a direct 
or indirect result of their involvement with drugs (Singer et al. 2000). Death 
of drug users comes in many forms, including disease, overdose, violence, 
exposure, automobile accidents, and fires.
The year 2000 also saw the release of a film that had a large budget, a 
heavyweight cast, with a sweeping point of view about drug use in the United 
States and its logistic partner Mexico. The movie, Traffic, featured Michael 
Douglas, Benicio del Toro, Don Cheadle, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Topher 
Grace, James Brolin, Erika Christensen, and Amy Irving, among others, 
and was directed by Steven Soderbergh. Its arenas of action included parts 
of Mexico (Tijuana, Sonora) and the borderland areas of the United States 
Southwest; Cincinnati, Ohio; Washington, DC; and San Diego and Los 
Angeles, California. Because he changed venues in the final cut of the film 
so often, Soderbergh gave each place a tint of its own (e.g., sepia for Mexico, 
bluish gray for Cincinnati). The parts of this film that focused on addiction 
to heroin involved a well-to-do young girl and her friends, a feature that is 
actually rare, but fit well into the overall story line. Caroline Wakefield’s 
pathway into addiction began in the company of bored, cynical young people 
looking for exciting things to do in Cincinnati and deciding that smoking 
heroin was the ticket to adventure. As we have said elsewhere, high-school 
age youth seldom resort to heroin injection,5 but rather graduate to it. In this 
case, because Caroline Wakefield’s father Robert (played by Michael Doug-
las) is the newly designated director of the Office of National Drug Control 
Policy (ONDCP), her acquisition of an addiction to heroin is absolutely es-
sential to the story of that office. Robert Wakefield’s journey into the role of 
parent of an addict ultimately led him to question the US policy on the War 
on Drugs. After he had the experience of discovering Caroline’s addiction, 
finding her in desperate straits, and enrolling her in treatment, he addressed a 
gathering in Washington in his capacity as director of the ONDCP by asking 

144 
❋ 
chapter five
the question, “How can we declare war on ourselves?” His realization that 
the “War on Drugs” sets drug users against non-users as adversaries within 
our “United States” brings into focus the futility of engaging in such a “war.” 
The movie, however, had little impact on the prosecution of that multibillion 
dollar war, which continues even though it still fails to achieve its ostensible 
goals. In part, this is so because advocates of this war continue (somehow) 
to convince a distressed public that it is not, in fact, a war on ourselves, but 
rather on a group of nefarious others.
Boyd (2008:137–138), vehemently criticizes Traffic on grounds of racism, 
for depicting the venal and corrupt drug traffickers as Mexican. According 
to Boyd, the scenes in which Robert Wakefield tracks Caroline down to a 
black drug dealer’s apartment also reflects the filmmaker’s racism. This criti-
cism is at odds with nearly all of the critical commentary on the film, which 
eventually won Golden Globes and Academy Awards, and various film-critic 
awards, notably including Soderbergh for best director and Del Toro for best 
supporting actor. We point out, first of all, that the most sympathetic character 
in the entire film is Javier, Del Toro’s character, who is portrayed as Mexican. 
We also note that none of the actions of the Mexican cartel leaders and hench-
men are exaggerated in the least, based on what is known about drug traffic 
across the US border with Mexico. Furthermore, we have seen repeatedly 
in our own work that when a white drug user of either sex is seeking safe 
haven from parents and/or police, the predominantly black neighborhood is 
where they go to find safe houses, people willing to take them in, availability 
of drugs, and a generally nonjudgmental attitude about their drug use. This 
does not mean that black neighborhoods are dominated by drug dealers 
and users—far from it. The majority of these neighborhoods’ inhabitants 
avoid drug use or traffic, but those houses where drug use occurs tend to 
avoid revealing their activities to neighbors (cf. Page and Llanusa-Cestero 
2006). In that low-profile setting, a white person can hide out and count on 
the discretion of the hosts. Caroline’s predicament in the Cincinnati ghetto 
is a reflection of the realities of drug use in many parts of the United States, 
not a function of racism on the part of the filmmaker. More importantly, it 
is a reflection of where society tolerates drug sales and use, the role minor-
ity neighborhoods play in servicing of the vices of suburban whites, and the 
utility of drug scenes in minority neighborhoods in anchoring stereotypes 
about drug users in society.
Boyd (2008) may have been disturbed by the large-scale processes that 
produce drug traffic, addiction, and drug enforcement. Those processes are 
incontestably racist, and have much to do with how addiction is described and 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
145 
perceived in public discourse. The gratuitously manipulative and quasi-racist 
parts of the Weatherly segments in Traffic involve the sex trade that Caroline 
uses to obtain drugs. In the film, Soderbergh made it look as though the black 
drug dealer had simply taken advantage of a white girl in trouble, but in fact, 
white women in a predominantly black environment may use their sexual 
allure to obtain the drugs they want and need. He may have been guilty of 
presenting exploitation in only one direction. We find it difficult to envision 
a presentation of Soderbergh’s material through re-alignment of ethnicities 
and racial categories. Drug traffic through Canada, although present, is far 
less of an issue than traffic through Mexico. With regard to the presence of 
inner-city ghettoes and their identification with drug use and drug traffic, 
very few cities in North America do not have that dynamic in place, even 
though people of color in the United States use drugs less than the white 
non-Hispanic population (Wallace and Murdoff 2002, Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration 2008). The image of ghetto as haven 
for drug traffic and use, we contend, is a function of its exploitable position 
as economically disadvantaged. Bourgois made this point (1997, 1998) in 
explaining the adaptive choices present in ghetto settings. To illustrate the 
exploitative nature of the ghetto environment, Topher Grace’s character 
explains to Judge Weatherly that drug markets exist in black neighborhoods 
for the convenience of white drug users. Moreover, left out of most depic-
tions like this are sectors that ultimately are part of the global drug trade, 
such as the role of “respectable” banks in the laundering of drug money. In 
his song “Jokerman,” Bob Dylan proclaims “Steal a little, they throw you in 
jail; steal a lot and they make you a king.” The truth of this assertion is seen 
in a Guardian newspaper commentary that accurately observes “global banks 
are the financial services wing of drug cartels” (Vulliamy 2008). Notably, for 
example, Britain’s largest bank, HSBC was fined $1.9 billion dollars for its 
role in money laundering for Mexican drug groups like the Sinaoloa illicit 
drug-smuggling company. While the bank admitted to violating the Bank-
ing Secrecy Act and The Trading with the Enemy Act, despite these serious 
violations, no corporate leaders from HSBC were sent to prison, a punish-
ment routinely administered to individuals charged with the possession of 
small amounts of marihuana. The HSBC incident is not an isolated case. 
Two years earlier, Wachovia was fined $50 million and made to turn over 
$11 million in drug money. In the Wachovia case, a whistle blower working 
for the bank who exposed its illegal activities was fired for attempting to alert 
his supervisors about the bank’s money laundering (although he did win a 
law suit for unfair dismissal). As with HSBC, no one from Wachovia went to 

146 
❋ 
chapter five
jail. In contrasting the treatment of often poor minority drug users with that 
of generally wealthy white money launderers we see the real face of racism 
in the world of illicit drugs.
Perhaps the most searing and difficult-to-watch piece of filmmak-
ing about drug addiction so far in the 21st century is Dope Sick Love, a 
documentary shown by Home Box Office in 2005. The camera follows two 
opioid-addicted couples through their cyclical efforts to avoid the symp-
toms of withdrawal from drugs and derive whatever pleasure they can from 
the effects of the drugs they buy. The couples’ repertoires for what drug 
researcher Michael Agar would call “copping” (procuring drugs) include 
appeals to parents to wire cash, petty thievery, and even robbery. Their 
round of activities is frenetic, as every four hours or so, the symptoms of 
withdrawal are bound to return. Activities have a frantic pace, especially as 
each cycle closes in, making the couples impatient, irascible, and increas-
ingly desperate. When they have secured the needed “dope,” the couples’ 
movements are swift and practiced, and their self-injection routines are very 
efficient. Throughout the film, the camera operator’s eye for detail gives view-
ers access to the minutiae of drug-taking behavior, including use of public 
toilets as a source of water, exclusive use of plastic diabetic syringes, use of 
mouth and teeth for handling syringes, and lighting and handling of crack 
pipes among many other details. These activities all strongly resemble the 
behaviors we have witnessed in natural settings as part of our research, with 
one notable exception: the ease with which these injectors locate and “hit” 
(i.e., inject into) veins. In our experience, this process can be laborious, time 
consuming, and painful, primarily because among long-term experienced 
self-injectors, many of their “best” peripheral veins are no longer accessible, 
due to collapse caused by over-use (Page, Smith and Kane 1990b). The 
almost-balletic efficiency of the dope sick lovers does not ring true in that 
sense, perhaps because the process of finding veins has the advantage of 
film editing. A recent dissertation completed by Jennifer Syvertsen (2012) 
presents a very different view of lovers injecting each other. Based on hours 
of observation and open-ended interviews with couples who inject together, 
the combination of mutual concern, love, sexual desire, addiction, and pain 
receives excruciating attention in this work’s narratives.
To dismiss Candy (2006) as a re-hash of the Days of Wine and Roses would 
give short shrift to fine acting by Heath Ledger, Geoffrey Rush, and Abbie 
Cornish, who have major roles in this creatively conceived Australian film. 
Although it followed the “young junkies in love” trajectory closely, Candy 
placed a framework around the standard processes of meeting, charming each 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
147 
other, teaching how to shoot heroin, compromising personal values, prostitu-
tion, thievery, withdrawal, recidivism, betrayal, and ultimately, separation. 
The first phase, during which the partners plunged into love and addiction 
simultaneously, was titled, taking a hint from Dante Allighieri, “Heaven.” The 
second phase, in which the lovers moved into a period of having to maintain 
each other’s habits, was called “Earth.” The film maker, Neil Armfield, chose 
to call the final phase of the junkie lovers’ lives “Hell,” as they attempted to 
live together, first using methadone, and finally detoxified. They eventually 
discovered that heroin was what had tied their lives together in the first place, 
and that realization led to their permanent separation.
We included this film in our review primarily because it was the only 
Australian film that focused on addiction. In addition, however, in terms of 
production values and overall quality, the film certainly meets the standards 
of the Australian film-making tradition, which has shown vitality and cre-
ativity, and this level of quality places Candy on a par with North American 
and British films focused on addiction, such as The Panic in Needle Park and 
Trainspotting. It also covers a variety of addict that has received attention in 
movies in terms of alcohol, rather than illegal street drugs—the middle class 
addict. The two lovers began their descent by cadging “loans” from friends 
and family, and eventually resorting to crime in order to feed their habits, 
but their lifestyles had none of the gritty character that dominated The Panic 
in Needle Park or The Man with the Golden Arm. Furthermore, the hell that 
eventually emerged from the couple’s addiction was not the obvious abyss 
of slavery to a drug, but the hell of realizing that what they thought to be 
durable love had been held together by addiction, and without addiction, it 
lacked a foundation. The lovers in Days of Wine and Roses came to a similar 
conclusion when the Joe Clay character rejected his wife’s overture to get back 
together, realizing that she had no intention of quitting drinking. This kind 
of ending reinforces the middle class value that sobriety must supersede all 
other priorities, including love between man and woman, which otherwise 
is celebrated in film as one of the core values of society. This review hardly 
addressed all of the films that have been produced with drug use as a core 
theme. New movies, from big productions like Flight (2012), in which Den-
zel Washington portrays a hard-drinking, heavy drug using and reckless 
airplane pilot, to lower budget, less-well-known films like Lost in the Crack 
(2012) (titled Purgatory during production), staring Rob Lutz, about the life 
of a drug addict and other characters caught in what film advertisements 
described as “a perfect storm of tragedy,” of course, continue to be made. 
This is to be expected because drug use remains an unresolved and thorny 

148 
❋ 
chapter five
issue in society, and drug users stand as outsiders to the mainstream, objects 
of curiosity and dread.
Television Series
The television series has some advantages over the feature film in terms of the 
temporal space it can occupy. Because it consists of one-hour segments that 
span as many as 25 hours in the course of a season, the television drama can 
present characters in all of their complexity, ambiguousness, and frailty. The 
series can also spend time defining the cultural context in which the action 
occurs. On the topic of addiction, two television series have distinguished 
themselves in the delineation of their characters and their portrayal of ad-
diction’s fraught cultural context: The Wire and Breaking Bad. In neither case 
were the protagonists addicts, but in both cases screenplays with well-drawn 
lesser characters gave the shows’ writers ample opportunity to make state-
ments about addiction and its consequences. In The Wire, that character was 
Reginald “Bubbles” Cousins, played by Andre Royo. The Jesse character 
played by Aaron Paul in Breaking Bad, almost a co-protagonist, is a person at 
the edge of addiction, and his social activities give the audience an up-close 
Drug arrest on T.V drama Hawaii Five-O

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
149 
view of addicts and drug producers nested within the cultural contexts in 
which they live.
The Wire had admirable structure in its portrayal of an entire system 
of managing drugs from various points of view, including the street drug 
user, street drug dealers, higher level drug suppliers, street police, police 
administrators, federal law enforcement officials, the mayor’s office, and the 
governor’s office. Bubbles interacted with parts of this structure as customer 
to the street-level dealers, informant to the police, and constituent to the 
mayor. His daily efforts to keep himself supplied with drugs and stay away 
from the police gave viewers a sense of how the drug system of Baltimore 
redistributed wealth in favor of the drug dealers and continued to operate 
despite attempts by street-level police to enforce laws against drugs. Because 
our own ethnographic experience has tended to focus on people like Bubbles, 
we found that The Wire’s treatment of his character achieved an accurate and 
humane perspective on the life of an addict. Because we do this kind of work 
with an eye toward the structural implications of what happens to people 
like Bubbles, the social panoramic view provided by The Wire had for us an 
analytic weight seldom seen in television dramas.
Breaking Bad had a different, less structural approach to placing the ad-
dict into social context, but it succeeded in establishing an atmosphere of 
disorganization and deterioration that characterizes many venues where we 
have seen drugs consumed. Jesse’s house, during a period of meth-smoking 
abandon, became populated with people who were present only for the 
drugs to be had, and in a matter of days, they converted an orderly house 
into a squalid mess. We have spent time as drug ethnographers in places 
like Jesse’s living room, and those scenes impressed us as highly authentic. 
The only things missing from this scene were the offensive smells of stale 
tobacco, dried urine, and unchecked body odor, which would have made 
it completely life like. Even more so were some of the places inhabited by 
minor characters, such as a meth-addicted couple who had stolen an ATM 
and a character who had received stolen methamphetamine. The interiors 
of these settings spoke of the director’s attention to detail, with their piles of 
unwashed clothes, scattered defunct appliances, and gaunt, spent inhabitants. 
The presence of a severely neglected child in the house of the ATM thieves 
added poignancy to a disturbing view of the human condition in the thrall 
of addiction to methamphetamine.
Breaking Bad also took a turn at “young junkies in love” as a sub-plot. In 
season two, Jesse moved into a duplex in which his neighbor (and putative 
landlady) Jane Margolis (played by Krysten Ritter) was a recovering heroin 

150 
❋ 
chapter five
addict. In this case, both young lovers had prior experience with addiction, 
and their relationship resulted in relapse for both. Because they were both 
young, white, from middle-class backgrounds, and very attractive, the charac-
ters in this subplot presented a different view of addicts’ lifestyles than those 
presented elsewhere in Breaking Bad (e.g., the ATM thieves, the guardian of 
the stash, or the members of Jesse’s crew). Rather than getting into trouble 
because they did not have enough money, they got into trouble because they 
had too much money and therefore, too much access to heroin. This condi-
tion also contrasted sharply with the lives of addict couples portrayed in The 
Panic in Needle Park and Christiane F. Rather than turning tricks at the local 
strolls to obtain heroin, Jesse and Jane went to art museums. Nevertheless, 
despite their advantages, the lovers’ romance was equally doomed.
Jane’s father Donald Margolis (played by John DeLancey) became a 
tragic figure in Breaking Bad’s second season as he imposed rules of conduct 
and attempted monitoring his daughter’s behavior. None of his efforts had 
any influence on the events, yet he struggled to the end to help his daughter 
overcome her addiction. His role was akin to that of the classic Greek pro-
tagonists, struggling against forces beyond his power to control. The entire 
viewing audience knew that despite his best efforts, things would “break 
bad,” especially because they had seen Jane conspire to obtain a seemingly 
endless supply of heroin, claiming that she and Jesse would have one final 
night with the drug before fleeing to a different life elsewhere. This particular 
representation of addiction and its consequences is perhaps more relevant to 
the national structure of the drug market than whatever happens in ghettos 
and barrios, because the young, white addicts, often from privileged back-
grounds, are the ones who drive the market into its multibillion dollar order 
of magnitude (cf. Chapter 1).
Conclusions
Interactions between pictorial media and the public can reasonably be ex-
pected to have outcomes. On the theme of addiction, the content and tone 
of pictorial representations have tended toward cautionary tales, intended 
on some level to warn the public against the lurking dangers of becoming 
addicted to drugs. Nevertheless, consumption of drugs continues. In the 
United States, for example, estimates of the total illegal drug traffic exceed 
$100 billion. The two most lethal (and yet legal) addictive drugs, alcohol 
and tobacco, account for more billions of dollars in legal production, traffic, 
and sales. Surveys on how films and television shows have influenced the 

drug users in the world of film 
❋ 
151 
consumption of mind-altering drugs have yet to be implemented, but clearly, 
the cautionary messages in films and television have gone largely unheeded by 
a substantial segment of the US population. If anything, for some, especially 
youth, the role of drugs in films has served to arouse interest, a pattern found 
among youth from both developed and underdeveloped countries.
On the other hand, how these media represent addicts and addiction 
may have exerted sufficient influence on political behavior to have helped 
to shape laws prohibiting the production, trafficking, and consumption of 
illegal drugs. Reefer Madness, with all of its fabrication, exaggeration, and 
disinformation, had a lasting impact on the attitudes and perceptions of 
millions of North Americans with regard to marihuana. Repeated depic-
tions of the throes of withdrawal and the loss of moral compass experienced 
by people who become addicted to heroin or cocaine made these drugs 
especially frightening to the viewing public. These pictorial representations 
emphasized the Otherness of drug users, especially the addicts, and they 
made addiction seem an inevitable consequence of ever trying heroin or co-
caine. The worst of the representations, such as Reefer Madness or The Speed 
That Kills treated their main characters as lost souls whose encounters with 
drugs led to their inescapable destruction. Even films of much higher qual-
ity, however, (e.g., The Panic in Needle Park, The Man with the Golden Arm, 
or Christiane F.) contributed to the image of addicts as somehow alien, with 
incomprehensible impulses, and an absence of loyalty to other human beings 
when they are in the grip of addiction. Stigma naturally follows this kind of 
demonic characterization, as people internalize the features of drug addicts 
that make them objects of both fear and fascination. To the viewer, addicts 
have completely dedicated their lives to one pursuit only—the next dose. The 
kind of life perceived by the viewers has dual valences. On one hand, it is a 
form of slavery to one single thing, mind-altering drugs; on the other hand, 
it liberates the individual (in their own mind at least) from all other social 
obligations and responsibilities. The latter component, release from everyday 
social accountability, has a kind of panache for some viewers, while others 
dismiss voluntary servitude and abdication of all interpersonal obligations 
in favor of the selfish and self-indulgent pursuit of drugs as something not 
quite conscionable, indeed, not quite human.
This review and exploration of pictorial representations of addiction 
attempts to make sense of a series of phenomena that in fact have had am-
biguous effects on the viewing publics exposed to them. The diversity of a 
mass audience, such as that attracted by films and television, assures that 
the interpretations of presented material will be varied. Unfortunately, the 

152 
❋ 
chapter five
impact of Reefer Madness and its disinformation is still palpable in the laws 
against marihuana use, possession, production, and sale. On the whole, the 
films discussed above tend to reinforce in a highly visual way the ultimate 
uselessness of drug users in society. Fortunately, the finely textured and nu-
anced representations in films and TV series like The Lost Weekend, Candy, 
and The Wire, among others, have a chance of contributing to counteracting 
reductionist and stigmatizing representations of addicts and addictions in 
the days to come.
Notes
1  During the last 40 years, Page has spent hundreds of hours in the company of long-
term marihuana users, and he has found none of them to be zombie-like in appearance 
or behavior (cf. Page and Carter 1980; Page 1983; Page, Fletcher, and True 1988).
2  Between 1930 and 1968, the MPAA assigned to all motion pictures a code that certi-
fied them under its guidelines for acceptable content.
3  The effective dose to lethal dose ratios for most barbiturates (sodium pentathol, phe-
nobarbital, Seconal, secobarbital, Tuinal) is less than 1:20, making them highly likely 
to be used for suicide attempts.
4  Non-barbiturate sedatives such as methaqualone were about to be introduced in 1968, 
and some benzodiazepines (e.g. Librium, Valium, Tranxene, Dalmane, and Xanax) were 
on the verge of FDA approval. All of these had much higher effective dose to lethal dose 
ratios than the barbiturates.
5  Some injecting drug use may have been on the rise among adolescents, as indicated 
in the review by Hopfer et al. (2002) and studies by Fuller et al. (2002) and Miller et al. 
(2006). Nevertheless, because injecting drug use itself is not widespread, that practice 
among adolescents, particularly young adolescents, is likely to be relatively rare.

153 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 153–180. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter Six
The Legal Construction of Drug Users
Policy, the Courts, Incarcerating Institutions, 
Police Practice, and the War on Drugs
T 
he United States has possibly the most convoluted, racially biased, and 
historically fragile policies regarding drug use and drug users of any 
national polity that assumes the rule of law. This chapter examines 
this policy structure and its implementation with concerns about the role 
racial prejudice, the ignoring of the best available science, the impact of how 
incarceration is applied, its expression in the War on Drugs in practice versus 
the War on Drugs as ideology, and the use of stereotypes about drug users 
to perpetuate policies laden with errors in judgment (Windsor and Dunlap 
2010). Ultimately, policies and their application comprise the compelling 
forces that render drug users enemies of society and treat them accordingly. 
Moreover, the law functions to make drug users available and useful for an 
array of social purposes. Our fundamental approach to drug laws and associ-
ated policy decisions is to interpret them, in part, as exercises in xenophobia, 
and we use this approach to delineate the relationship between the legislators’ 
perceptions of drug users and the nature and severity of the actual control 
efforts and punishments that they impose on drug users. At the same time, 
we are concerned with the ways laws and policies create social and economic 
uses for those deemed useless.
History of Policy—Prohibition: The 
Movement and the Reality.
The 19th century in the United States saw the beginnings of a massive social 
experiment in prohibiting the consumption of one drug—alcohol. Given the 
daunting task of achieving ratification in two-thirds of the states, it is aston-
ishing that such a measure could become an amendment to the Constitution. 
Nevertheless, prohibitionists mustered sufficient public animus and political 
clout to achieve this action by the federal government.

154 
❋ 
chapter six
Historical research suggests that state interest in alcohol consumption 
has undergone at least three identifiable phases. Preindustrial attention was 
primarily fueled by a fiscal motivation, alcohol being viewed as taxable com-
modity. With industrialization and the emergence of laborers as a distinct 
social class, this attitude was joined and eventually superseded by a concern 
with temperance. Originally, temperance ideology was a feature of self-disci-
pline in the upper class, but at the turn of the 20th century there emerged a 
growing alarm about the negative impact of drinking on industrial efficiency 
and employer control of the working class. Not surprisingly, the main target 
of the prohibition movement was the drinking practices of working people. 
Johnson’s account of the temperance movement in Rochester, New York, 
during the 1820s reveals that an intense class struggle ensued around the 
issue of alcohol consumption.
Temperance propaganda promised masters social peace, a disciplined 
and docile labor force and an opportunity to assert moral authority 
over their men. The movement enjoyed widespread success among 
the merchants and masters who considered themselves respectable. . . . 
Temperance men talked loudest in 1828 and 1829, years in which the 
autonomy of working-class neighborhoods grew at a dizzying rate. . . . 
Wage earners . . . now . . . drank only in their own neighborhoods and 
only with each other, and in direct defiance of their employers (John-
son 1978:81–82).
Following the Second World War, the state position toward alcohol con-
sumption again shifted, allowing and supporting the emergence of a highly 
concentrated alcohol industry with the political muscle to have significant 
influence on government policy. The current state approach to alcohol con-
sumption has been summarized by Makela and co-workers, based on a review 
of the alcohol-control policies of eight industrialized nations:
In general, the State continues to pursue restrictive policies in the non-
commercial sector of both manufacture and distribution of alcoholic 
beverages, whereas the approach toward the commercial segment of 
the market has become less restrictive and more supportive. In alcohol 
control, this has taken the form of the opening up of alcohol retail to 
market pressures and the suppression of non-commercial production 
(Makela et al. 1981:84).

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
155 
The character of the pro-industry state bias has been described in an 
investigation of the political economy of the California wine industry. The 
state was found to have played a substantial role in the development of mo-
nopoly marketing procedures and monopoly-dominated trade associations. 
By helping to secure the interests of the largest grape growers, state inter-
vention contributed to driving smaller farms out of production: “This new 
hybrid of private and state power was called agribusiness” (Bunce 1979:49).
Another glimpse at the role of the state in this arena can be seen by exam-
ining the activities of the International Center for Alcohol Policies (ICAP). 
According to its mission statement, the purpose of the ICAP is twofold: (1) 
to help reduce the abuse of alcohol worldwide and promote understanding 
of the role of alcohol in society, and (2) to encourage dialogue and pursue 
partnerships involving the beverage-alcohol industry, the public-health 
community, and others interested in alcohol policy. At first glance, the ICAP 
would seem to be a nonprofit scholarly association concerned about the 
problems of alcohol abuse. In fact, it was established and given its initial $2 
million a year operating budget by 11 titans of the global alcohol industry at 
the time of its founding, including Allied Domecq, Bacardi-Martini, Brown-
Forman Beverages, Coors Brewing Company, Foster’s Brewing Group Ltd., 
Guinness, Heineken, IDV, Miller Brewing Co., Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, 
South African Breweries, and Worldwide. While a pattern of mergers and 
buyouts has occurred in subsequent years (leading to a steady parade of name 
changes), these companies came to be well known to public-health advocates 
as pioneers in the targeted marketing of alcohol to the poor, young, and ad-
dicted in the developing world and as opponents of public-health prevention 
initiatives. Typical of the work of the ICAP (2012) is the production of the 
study entitled “Producers, Sellers, and Drinkers: Studies of Noncommercial 
Alcohol in Nine Countries.” While ostensibly an investigation of the informal 
sector of alcohol production and consumption, the underlying messages of 
the study are revealed in the opening sentences:
A significant proportion of all alcohol consumed globally is not 
reflected in official statistics, such as production, trade, and sales 
figures. These beverages fall into the general category referred to here 
as “noncommercial” alcohol. The term was chosen in order to differ-
entiate these beverages from alcohol drinks that are produced legally 
according to set standards, are regulated, and are sold commercially 
and legally (ICAP 2012:3).

156 
❋ 
chapter six
As the choice of words, especially in the last sentence suggests, affirm-
ing the legality, high standards, and government-regulated status (in the 
interest of the public good) of commercial (i.e., the corporate-controlled 
arena of alcoholic commodities) is certainly an important subtext of this 
study. This reading is supported by descriptions of the harmful effects, 
proposal for eradication, role of corruption in the existence of the noncom-
mercial sector and similar linkages of “noncommercial” (which, given the 
fact that it is often produced to be sold, is a misnomer) with criminality 
and threats to health.
The parent company of IDV (now UDV), Grand Metropolitan (now 
Diageo, which owns Burger King and Pillsbury), for example, aggressively 
promoted José Cuervo in the Islamic country of Malaysia using its “Lick, 
shoot, suck” promotion in which male drinkers were encouraged to lick salt 
from a woman’s breasts, take a shot of the tequila, then suck from the lime she 
holds in her mouth. Bacardi-Martini touted its Benedictine D.O.M. (which is 
almost 40% alcohol) in Malaysia claiming it had “health-enhancing” powers 
for new mothers.
In Great Britain, Allied Domecq, Bacardi-Martini, and Diageo are all 
members of The Portman Group, which, although claiming to be concerned 
solely with the social responsibility issues surrounding alcohol in order to in-
form public opinion and policy, actively opposed a British attempt to prevent 
drunk driving by lowering the legal blood-alcohol level for drivers. The Port-
man Group was found to be offering money to academics to write anonymous 
critical reviews of the volume Alcohol Policy and the Public Good, a book that 
was written by an international panel of alcohol researchers to provide the 
scientific foundation for the World Health Organization European Alcohol 
Action Plan. In Europe, Seagram, Allied Lyons, and Heineken belong to 
The Amsterdam Group, which sought to take court action against France’s 
policies banning the televising of sports events featuring alcohol advertis-
ing. Notably, in 1998, ICAP was able to recruit the US Center for Substance 
Abuse Prevention (CSAP) to co-issue a report that questions everything from 
the damaging effects of binge drinking to the causal relationship between 
alcohol and crime. Noted in the report is recognition that “linking anything 
with drugs is a way of demonizing it.” Thus, expressing an alcohol-industry 
perspective, the jointly issued report states:
Perhaps the only simple answer to the question whether alcohol is a 
drug, is an incomplete one: “Yes, but. . . .” Much more to the point is 
the subsidiary “Why does it matter?”

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
157 
	 In this paper, we have tried to sketch briefly the rationales that are 
given by two important constituencies, and a brief sample of other 
views from around the world. In practical terms, it will probably be far 
more fruitful for us now to collaborate in seeking ways to lessen the 
risks of excessive drinking and the harms that result from it. . . . There 
may be other words that convey similar meanings adequately, without 
the problematic use of the term “alcohol and other drugs” (CSAP/ICAP 
Joint Working Group on Terminology 1998).
Public-health advocates criticized the CSAP, which in the mid-1990s 
almost lost its federal budget as a result of heavy alcohol industry lobbying 
of Congress, for participating in issuing a report that obfuscates the scien-
tific fact that alcohol is a drug. Some interpreted CSAP’s action as caving 
in to Big Alcohol. ICAP also issued a policy statement recommending that 
governments should join with the alcohol industry and private foundations 
in researching the relationship between drinking, pleasure, and good health 
(Abramson 1998).
Critical to CSAP’s approach, indeed that of the entire alcohol industry 
was the erection of a conceptual and cultural barrier between alcohol and 
other, especially, illicit drugs. The objective was to portray alcohol as a 
necessary, normal, and valuable part of everyday life, and hence not really a 
drug at all. Public policies followed accordingly, with alcohol being treated 
as a somewhat controlled consumable commodity and illicit drugs being 
rendered as the real psychotropic threats to society. Public health statistics 
showing that alcohol consumption does far more harm to society than all 
forms of illicit drug consumption combined, underline the considerable 
social distance between the worlds of drug research and the worlds of policy 
formulation about drugs.
Banning Marihuana
Despite Prohibition’s ultimate failure, the US government, as well as the 
governments of states and local municipalities, repeatedly enacted laws 
that had the same intention: to forbid people from consuming drugs said to 
be harmful to the consumers. Among the measures taken by these govern-
ments were the 1937 Federal Marihuana Tax Act; various state and local 
laws against possession, transport, or sale of marihuana; state and local laws 
against possession of paraphernalia for consuming drugs; and more recently, 
draconian laws against possession, transport, or sale of crack cocaine. The 

158 
❋ 
chapter six
development of the legal system that now comprises the drug-control regime 
in the United States did not come into being as whole cloth, but rather in 
pieces large and small, local, state, and federal, with a focus often on specific 
drugs rather than the panoply of available psychoactive drugs. An early and 
enduring target was marihuana.
During the colonial era, marihuana or hemp was a cash crop grown to 
provide material used in the production of both clothing and rope, and it is 
still grown for these purposes. By the turn of the 20th century, marihuana 
was being sold as an over-the-counter medicine for the relief of various minor 
aches and ailments. It appeared primarily as an ingredient in corn plasters, 
in nonintoxicating medicaments, and as a component in several veterinary 
medicines. Its status for medicinal purposes was affirmed in the Pure Food 
and Drug Act of 1906, which required that any quantity of marihuana be 
clearly indicated on the labels of products sold to the public.
Then, during the 1920s, marihuana began to be used in the United 
States as a recreational drug for its mood- and mind-altering effects. This 
phase began with the transport of increasing quantities of marihuana from 
Mexico and the Caribbean into the United States after the First World War. 
As the popularity of marihuana grew, a significant social reaction occurred. 
The drug soon was labeled a dangerous narcotic and attempts were made to 
institute severe penalties for its use.
Attempts to criminalize marihuana use did not go unopposed. During 
1911 hearings on a federal antinarcotic law by the House Ways and Means 
Committee, for example, the National Wholesale Druggists’ Association 
protested the inclusion of marihuana as a dangerous drug. Efforts by the 
pharmaceutical industry to block federal legislation outlawing the sale of 
marihuana were successful until 1937, when the Marijuana Tax Act was 
passed. This legislation was directly linked to an effort to stop the flow of 
Mexican workers into the American Southwest. While these workers had 
been welcomed in the 1920s to fill the demand for farm labor, during the 
Great Depression of the 1930s they came to be seen as an unwelcome labor 
surplus. Nationalistic anti-Mexican immigration groups (not terribly dif-
ferent than those we see today) began to form with the objective of painting 
marihuana as an insidious narcotic used and distributed by an unwanted 
group of foreign residents who needed to be deported. As the editor of the 
Alamosa, Colorado, Daily Courier expressed this unabashedly racist senti-
ment in an editorial published in 1936: “I wish I could show you what a 
small marihuana cigarette can do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking 
residents. That’s why our problem is so great: the greatest percentage of our 

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
159 
population is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of whom are 
low mentally” (reprinted in Musto 1987:223). This chauvinistic campaign 
to block Mexican immigration contributed to the marihuana scare of the 
1930s and to the federal inclusion of marihuana as a narcotic despite its clear 
chemical differences from narcotizing drugs.
This process was aided and abetted by Harry Anslinger, a former railroad 
policeman and outgoing assistant commissioner of the US Bureau of Pro-
hibition, who in 1930 was appointed as the first commissioner to the newly 
created Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN). In this role, Anslinger became 
convinced that there was an alarming rise in the use of marihuana occur-
ring in the country. In response, he initiated an effort to convince Congress 
to pass legislation that would place the distribution of marihuana under 
the control of the FBN. As part of this effort, he launched a radio campaign 
against marihuana and took his anti-marihuana message on the road to his 
various speaking engagements. In effect, in 1936 Anslinger “declared war 
on marihuana” (Carroll 2004:70).
This development is noteworthy because until this point he had largely 
ignored the drug, because he did not see it as addictive or in the same cat-
egory of threat as opium or cocaine. His about face has been interpreted as 
a political move to forestall the disintegration of his job as part of the Secret 
Service Reorganization Act that was then being supported by President 
Roosevelt to increase federal-government efficiency. Marihuana, presented 
to the public as a looming danger of untold proportions, provided a target 
that justified retaining his office (Carroll 2004). In his first radio address on 
the topic, Anslinger (1937) adopted the dramatic language of moral panic 
to drive home his message:
The habit appears to be gaining ground rapidly. The gravity of this men-
ace, the pernicious effects of the use of marihuana, and the necessity for 
eradication, should be brought forcibly before the notice of our people.
Thus began a strategy of painting marihuana as a demonic substance 
linked to violent crime, loss of control of will power, and complete destruc-
tion of sexual inhibition, themes that Anslinger promoted and others read-
ily adopted in what became a mounting crusade to re-invent marihuana in 
socially useful if factually unjustifiable ways. Along the way, as the campaign 
heated up, the Secret Service Reorganization Act failed to pass Congress and 
faded from Washington’s volatile political stage. Anslinger emerged on the 
national scene as a law-and-order drug evangelist who embraced the most 

160 
❋ 
chapter six
extreme and violent stereotypes of marihuana users. In his testimony before 
Congress in 1937 in support of the Marihuana Tax Act, he stated that after 
using marihuana
Some individuals have a complete loss of sense of time or a sense of 
value. They lose their sense of place. [They] have an increased feeling 
of physical strength and power. Some people will fly into a delirious 
rage, and they are temporarily irresponsible and may commit violent 
crimes. . . . It is dangerous to the mind and body, and particularly dan-
gerous to the criminal type, because it releases all of the inhibitions. . . . 
There was one town in Ohio where a young man went into a hotel and 
held up the clerk and killed him, and his defense was that he had been 
affected by the use of marihuana. . . . In Florida a 21-year-old boy under 
the influence of this drug killed his parents and his brothers and sis-
ters. The evidence showed that he had smoked marihuana. In Chicago 
recently two boys murdered a policeman while under the influence 
of marihuana. Not long ago we found a 15-year-old boy going insane 
because, the doctor told the enforcement officers, he thought the boy 
was smoking marihuana cigarettes (Anslinger 1937).
As part of the anti-marihuana campaign, a high level Conference on 
Cannabis sativa was convened in Washington, DC in January of 1937. Con-
ferees included doctors, researchers, lawyers, and government officials like 
Anslinger. Following this meeting, a barrage of marihuana horror stories were 
printed in the media, including an article that Anslinger co-authored with 
Courtney Ryley Cooper (1937) titled “Marijuana: Assassin of Youth,” that 
appeared in American Magazine. Other articles with similar sensationalistic 
titles like “Youth Gone Loco,” “One More Peril for Youth,” “Marijuana—A 
New Menace to U.S.,” “Uncle Sam Fights New Drug Menace—Marihuana,” 
and “Marihuana: Increasing Use and Terrifying Effects” began showing up 
in magazines like the American Mercury, Scientific American, Popular Science 
Monthly, Christian Century, Survey Graphic, and Literary Digest during the 
late 1930s. The media frenzy helped to create a national climate that secured 
passage of the Marijuana Tax Act.
Following passage of the Act, popular use of the drug and general social 
concern about marihuana began to flag. Penalties for marihuana use were in-
creased periodically, but its use stabilized among certain social sectors. For the 
most part, marihuana disappeared from the front pages of newspapers and from 
other forums of public discussion. All of this changed again with the sudden 

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
161 
reemergence of marihuana in the 1960s. At this point, marihuana led a wave 
of new youth-centered drug use that continues to have impact 50 years later.
Researchers have had a difficult time understanding and classifying 
the effects of marihuana or of delta-nine tetrahydrocannabinol, its primary 
psychoactive component. Effects appear to vary based on the local setting 
and set of cultural expectations (cf. Zinberg and Weil 1969). Working-class 
Jamaicans, for example, among whom use is widespread, do not expect hal-
lucinogenic reactions to ganja, as marihuana is known on the island. There-
fore, reports of c annabis-induced hallucinations are not regularly reported 
among Jamaican ganja smokers. Rather, in Jamaica marihuana use is linked 
culturally with values of endurance, energy, problem solving, invigoration 
of appetite, and relaxation. As the anthropologists Vera Rubin and Lambros 
Comitas (1983:214) indicate,
Ganja use is integrally linked to all aspects of working-class social struc-
ture; cultivation, cash crops, marketing, and economics; consumer-
cultivator-dealer networks; intraclass relationships and processes of 
avoidance and cooperation; parent-child, peer, and mate relationships; 
folk medicine; folk religious doctrines; obeah and gossip sanctions; 
personality and culture; interclass stereotypes; legal and church sanc-
tions; perceived requisites of behavioral changes for social mobility; 
and adaptive strategies.
Among participants in the ganja subculture, affording and acquiring the 
drug, anticipating the next use, efforts to avoid detection by the police, and 
the sense of community among fellow users all contribute to the importance 
of ganja at the individual and small-group levels. Moreover, regular users 
strongly dispute allegations that use leads to crime, violence, apathy, physical 
and mental health problems, or an antisocial attitude. Based on their field 
study in Jamaica, Rubin and Comitas (1983:217) concluded, “There is no 
evidence of any causal relationship between cannabis use and mental dete-
rioration, insanity, violence or poverty; or that widespread cannabis use in 
Jamaica produces an apathetic, indolent class of people.”
This kind of finding populates the academic drug literature, often to the 
disgruntlement of government funders of marihuana research. The federal 
classification of cannabis and its organic compounds as Schedule I prohibited 
drugs (a designation reserved for the most inebriating drugs that are seen as 
having no medical value) is seen by many drug researchers as scientifically un-
supportable, as expressed in a government-sponsored review of the literature 

162 
❋ 
chapter six
published in The Open Neurology Journal (Grant et al. 2012). Investigators at 
the University of California at San Diego and the University of California, 
Davis, reviewed the results of several recent clinical trials assessing the safety 
and efficacy of inhaled or vaporized cannabis and concluded that “Based on 
evidence currently available the Schedule I classification is not tenable; it 
is not accurate that cannabis has no medical value, or that information on 
safety is lacking” (Grant et al. 2012). As this statement suggests, key elements 
of US drug policy are neither based on nor informed by empirical research.
Available research notwithstanding, the criminalization of marihuana 
use and the extensive incarceration of those caught with even small amounts 
of marihuana remains in full force—constituting what many have come to 
view as a real incarnation of “reefer madness”—although challenges of various 
sorts, from a push for legalization for medicinal purposes (such as the 1996 
passage of legislation in both California and Arizona, and the passage thus 
far of similar legislation in 17 states and Washington, DC) or the passage of 
state laws and referendums decriminalizing possession of small quantities 
of marihuana (as occurred in two states, Colorado and Washington, in the 
2012 national elections), are growing.
The response of the federal government during the Obama administra-
tion to the legalization movement has been consistent opposition to any 
form of legalization and a repeated commitment to the enforcement of the 
Controlled Substances Act. As the Office of National Drug Control Policy 
(2012) reiterated on its webpage
 
• Marijuana use is associated with dependence, respiratory and 
mental illness, poor motor performance, and impaired cognitive 
and immune system functioning, among other negative effects.
 
• Marijuana intoxication can cause distorted perceptions, difficulty 
in thinking and problem solving, and problems with learning and 
memory.
 
• Studies have shown an association between chronic marihuana 
use and increased rates of anxiety, depression, suicidal thoughts, 
and schizophrenia.
 
• Marijuana smoke contains carcinogens and is an irritant to the 
lungs. Marijuana smoke, in fact, contains 50–70 percent more 
carcinogenic hydrocarbons than does tobacco smoke.
Consequently, the US Department of Justice is likely to file lawsuits chal-
lenging efforts to legalize marihuana in Colorado and Washington.

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
163 
One significant product of this view of marihuana as a looming threat 
is that incarceration rates have dramatically increased even though crime 
rates have remained stable or even declined (Smith 2004). What has gone 
up, however, is arrest rates for marihuana violations. In 2009, for example, 
according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s annual Uniform Crime 
Report, police around the country prosecuted 858,408 persons for marihuana 
violations, a 1.3 percent increase in the number of such arrests reported for the 
prior year (Armentano 2010). According to the report, marihuana arrests now 
comprise over half (approximately 52 percent) of all drug arrests reported in 
the United States. A decade ago, by contrast, arrests for marihuana violations 
comprised only 44 percent of all drug arrests. Moreover, of those individuals 
charged with marihuana violations, approximately 88 percent were charged 
only with possession, not with the sale or manufacture of the drug.
How are we to understand the explosive increase in the arrest and in-
carceration of people for the possession of marihuana since the mid-1970s? 
According to Smith’s (2004:925) analysis,
[R]ather than crime or a structural response to citizen attitudes, incar-
ceration rates have increased because of Republican electoral successes 
at the state level, the nature of executive elections, and the continuing 
legacy of a racial social rift. It is politics in their most basic form, and 
in particular specific and identifiable state-level policies and political 
processes that explain why incarceration rates in the 1980s and 1990s 
became increasingly disconnected from crime rates.
Lubricating this political process has been the aggressive public demoni-
zation of the marihuana user. For the Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA), this has meant continued stress on the image of the marihuana user 
as a criminal, apt to be involved in various nefarious activities. As noted in 
The DEA Position on Marijuana (DEA 2011) posted on the DEA website,
Marijuana is known to contribute to delinquent and aggressive behav-
ior. . . .  Moreover, early use of marijuana, the most commonly used drug 
among teens, is a warning sign for later criminal behavior. Specifically, 
research shows that the instances of physically attacking people, steal-
ing property, and destroying property increase in direct proportion to 
the frequency with which teens smoke marijuana.
In other words, research be damned, what is still needed is a strict law-and-
order approach that emphasizes an orientation that favors getting tough on 

164 
❋ 
chapter six
crime and no coddling drug criminals, as the latter are threats to society that 
can only be controlled through long and painful incarceration.
The Evil Couple: Heroin and Cocaine
While marihuana is the most widely used illicit drug, the two most signifi-
cant hard drugs throughout US history have been cocaine and the opiates 
(including heroin). Both of these in their various forms have a long and 
colorful history of use. Cocaine, derived from the leaves of the coca plant 
(Erythroxlon coca), has long been chewed among the Indians of the Andes as a 
mild stimulant that has various positive effects at high altitudes and produces 
no health or social consequences. The Spanish invaders at first attempted to 
eliminate the chewing of coca leaves, in part because of its pagan religious 
connections, and because they perceived coca chewing as unsightly and un-
sanitary, rather than because of an antidrug sentiment. When they discovered, 
however, that coca use facilitated the hard labor performed by indigenous 
people in Spanish mines, they began to distribute it to workers daily. Western 
interest in drugs like cocaine began with the discovery of quinine as a treat-
ment for malarial fever. That a substance derived from a plant could be used 
with great effect in the treatment of a specific health problem generated an 
intense curiosity about discovering other new plant-based medicinals. This 
drive led to the identification and refinement of the psychotropically active 
ingredient in coca and its production and use in an array of legal consumer 
products including wines, soft drinks, and so-called patent medicines (none 
of which actually held a government patent).
Social valuing of cocaine, however, ran head on into attitudes about 
cocaine (as well as heroin and other opiates) colored by racist prejudice. 
Throughout the American South, for example, there developed a fear that if 
blacks had access to cocaine they “might become oblivious of their prescribed 
bounds and attack white society” (Musto 1987:6). Thus, in 1903, the New 
York Tribune quoted Colonel J. W. Watson of Georgia asserting “many of the 
horrible crimes committed in the Southern States by colored people can be 
traced directly to the cocaine habit” (quoted in Goode 1984:186). Similarly, 
the New York Times published an article entitled “Negro Cocaine Fiends Are a 
New Southern Menace” that described blacks as “running amuck in a cocaine 
frenzy” (quoted in Goode 1984:186). That African Americans were on the 
receiving end of most of the racially motivated horrible crimes committed 
in the South during this period was of little consequence, as facts rarely get 
in the way of strong or useful belief. As Musto (1987:7) notes,

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
165 
The fear of the cocainized black coincided with the peak of lynchings, 
legal segregation, and voting laws all designed to remove political and 
social power from [blacks]. . . . One of the most terrifying beliefs about 
cocaine was that it actually improved pistol marksmanship. Another 
myth, that cocaine made blacks almost unaffected by mere .32 caliber 
bullets, is said to have caused southern police departments to switch 
to .38 caliber revolvers. These fantasies characterized white fear, not 
the reality of cocaine’s effects, and gave one more reason for the repres-
sion of blacks.
Ironically, these politically motivated fears were not only misguided with 
respect to cocaine’s effects, they were motivated by erroneous ideas about 
African American access to cocaine. In fact, the cost of the drug (twenty-five 
cents per grain in 1910) prohibited most African Americans in the South, the 
majority of whom were sharecroppers and conspicuously poorer on average 
than whites, from purchasing the drug during this period. A study by E. M. 
Green (1914), who examined admissions to Georgia State Sanitarium at the 
time, showed that rates of cocaine use by blacks in the South were significantly 
lower than rates of white use. Nonetheless, to insure that cocaine in any form 
did not reach African Americans, it was dropped as an ingredient in Coca-
Cola in 1903 and replaced by another stimulant, caffeine. Also that year, the 
British Committee on the Acquirement of Drug Habits described cocaine 
users as typically “bohemians, gamblers, high- and low-class prostitutes, night 
porters, bell boys, burglars, racketeers, pimps, and casual laborers” (quoted 
in Feiling 2010). Reflecting this social trend, the Pure Food and Drug Act 
required the listing of cocaine as an active ingredient in consumer goods 
beginning in 1906.
In short order, the federal Harrison Narcotics Tax Act passed in 1914, 
leading to the eventual (but far from immediate) outlawing of the sale and 
distribution of cocaine in the United States. In an effort to secure tax revenue 
from the importation and sale of cocaine, and reduce the number of the 
American populace that were addicted to opium, those supporting passage of 
the Harrison Act, like Representative Francis Burton Harrison of New York 
who proposed it, appealed to the fears of “drug-crazed, sex-mad negroes” and 
made references to Negroes under the influence of drugs murdering whites, 
degenerate Mexicans smoking marihuana, and “Chinamen” seducing white 
women with drugs. In providing testimony in support of passage of the Har-
rison Act, Christopher Koch of Pennsylvania’s State Pharmacy Board made 
often repeated racial innuendos about blacks and cocaine explicit when he 

166 
❋ 
chapter six
stated that, “Most of the attacks upon the white women of the South are 
the direct result of a cocaine-crazed Negro brain” (quoted in Feiling 2010). 
Similarly, Dr. Hamilton Wright testified that drugs made blacks uncontrol-
lable, gave African Americans superhuman powers and caused them to rebel 
against white authority.
Yet cocaine was not considered a controlled substance until 1970, when 
the US government listed it as such in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse 
Prevention and Control Act. Until that point, the use of cocaine was only 
rarely prosecuted in the United States. The shift in attitudes about cocaine 
constituted the long brewing development of a moral panic in an anxious 
social body conflicted about its attitudes about drugs but ever fearful of the 
angered rise of subordinated and potentially vengeful social groups known 
to be the victims of exploitive abuse.
The other long-standing hard drug in use in the America pharmacopeia, 
opium “was one of the products Columbus hoped to bring back” from his 
voyages to his benefactors, the royalty of Spain (Scott 1969:11). While opium 
was not to be found in the New World that Columbus stumbled upon on 
his way to Asia, the drug would eventually be imported to meet a growing 
demand. When the use of opiates actually began in what became the United 
States is not entirely clear, but it is known to have been sometime during the 
colonial period. Critical to its introduction was the work of one of the best-
known British doctors of the 17th century, a man named Thomas Sydenham. 
A founder of clinical medicine, Sydenham advocated the use of opium as 
“one of the most valued medicines in the world [which] does more honor to 
medicine than any remedy whatsoever” (quoted in Musto 1987:69). In his 
view, without opium, “the healing arts would cease to exist” (Scott 1969:114).
During the 1800s, opium use was widespread in the United States; it was 
treated as a normal behavior that was both legal and integrated into every-
day activities. People of all walks of life became addicted, especially a large 
number of urban middle-class housewives who were often the targets of the 
first generation of media advertising efforts. Addiction, however, was usually 
not recognized as such, since the drug was readily available and widely used 
(and those who were addicted could easily treat their withdrawal symptoms 
through continued drug consumption). Thus, regular use of opium in powder 
or tincture form was not defined socially as a significant problem. Users were 
not labeled criminals or deviants, although heavy use certainly was frowned 
on and behaviors now associated with addiction did carry a certain level of 
social disapproval.

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
167 
By contrast, a behavior that was labeled as a drug problem was the smok-
ing of opium in opium dens, primarily run, as we have seen in literary refer-
ences discussed in Chapter 4, by Chinese immigrants (who were brought to 
the United States to do the hard labor of laying railroad rails, digging mines, 
and building levees). The first anti-opium law in the nation was passed locally 
in San Francisco in 1875, home to a large Chinese population. Smoking was 
labeled deviant and debilitating, but the real problem appears to have been 
racism. The primary concern was not drug use per se but who was using the 
drugs. This interpretation is supported by a temporally related case tried in 
Oregon and reviewed in an Oregon district court. The defendant in the case 
was a Chinese man convicted of selling opium. In the review, the district 
court noted: “Smoking opium is not our vice, and therefore, it may be that 
this legislation proceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the ‘Heathen 
Chinese’ in this respect, than to protect the people from the evil habit” 
(quoted in Bonnie and Whitebread 1970:997).
From this moment forward, US societal reaction to drug use and negative 
attitudes about particular ethnic groups have been closely intertwined. In the 
case of Chinese opium smoking, an essential factor in social condemnation 
was the depression that began in the 1860s and the resulting redefinition of 
the Chinese as surplus labor. Originally, imported to perform labor that was 
unappealing to many US workers, the Chinese later became scapegoats of 
class frustration as the economy collapsed. Lines were drawn, distinctions 
made, particular behaviors embellished or invented, and harshly judged, 
resulting in the Chinese being defined as existing outside the social bound-
aries of American society (followed shortly by efforts to drive them beyond 
the geographic borders of the nation). This example reveals an important 
aspect of US experience with illicit drugs that is often hidden behind well-
publicized events like so-called wars on drugs or media hype about crack 
babies. As Helmer (1983:27) has argued, “the conflict over social justice is 
what the story of narcotics in America is about.”
The place of opium use in American society took a dramatic turn in 
1803 with the discovery of the means of making morphine water soluable. 
Ten times more potent than raw opium, morphine was quickly realized to 
have tremendous powers as a painkiller; morphine, in fact, remains the 
strongest chemical pain reliever available. This fact became significant during 
the American Civil War, an enormously bloody conflict that threatened to 
overwhelm the capacity of the mid-19th century medical system. Physicians 
turned eagerly to morphine as a means of handling the incredible number of 
war-inflicted wounds and amputations they faced. This process was facilitated 

168 
❋ 
chapter six
by the invention of the hypodermic needle, which allowed the rapid intro-
duction of the drug to areas of pain within the body. One product of wide-
spread morphine use during and after the Civil War was the emergence of a 
new medical condition called either “soldier’s disease” or “army disease.” Its 
primary symptom was morphine craving by those who had been medically 
treated with the drug. The treatment adopted by physicians was to continue 
morphine injections for those who presented with this disease.
Passage of the Harrison Act also had a big impact, of an increasing nature 
on opium users. But legal moves against this drug by the federal government 
actually began in the international arena. In 1909 and 1911, the United States 
convened an international opium conference, which produced a document 
called the Hague Convention of 1912, aimed at restricting international traffic 
in opium. Under the leadership of William Jennings Bryan, Congress followed 
up with provisions in the Harrison Act that placed restrictions on the sale of 
over-the-counter opium preparations. Congressional debate about passage of 
these measures did not center on the negative health effects of opium or the 
threat of the opium user to society, nor even on the rising rate of addiction in 
the US population, but rather on issues of international relations and profit. 
In particular, the discussion focused on the fact that the British were gaining 
an economic windfall from their ability to press opium sales on China and 
thereby achieve a competitive edge against US businesses globally.
The ultimate social effect of the new federal anti-drug law, however, was 
the labeling of the drug user as undesirable and criminal. In the aftermath of 
this moral cataloguing, drug use came to be synonymous with deviance, lack 
of control, violence, and social decay. By the 1920s, “the public image of the 
addict had become that of a criminal, a willful degenerate, a hedonistic thrill-
seeker in need of imprisonment and stiff punishment” (Goode 1984:218).
Physicians were exempt from the Harrison Act, and they continued 
to treat their addicted patients with opium (as well as cocaine); as a result, 
thousands of people continued legal drug use in this way for five years after 
passage of the Harrison Act. In the aftermath of the Harrison Act, physi-
cians set up clinics around the country to dispense mind-altering drugs to 
addicted patients. In the New York clinic, which was the one best known to 
the public, drugs were handed out widely to those who claimed addiction. 
Some people eventually began to take their dose plus additional doses for 
resale on the street to other newly recruited addicts. Thus began the under-
ground narcotics industry.
Before long the US Treasury Department, which was assigned to enforce 
the Harrison Act, began to press against the legal prescription of psychoactive 

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
169 
drugs even by doctors. Central to this drive was the growing concern, en-
ergized by a kind of trickle-up theory, that drug use would spread from the 
working class “into the higher social ranks of the country” (Helmer 1983:16). 
In 1919, in the Supreme Court case of Webb versus the United States, it was 
decided that a physician could not prescribe a narcotic to an addict simply to 
avoid the pain of withdrawal. In 1922, in a second Supreme Court case, the 
United States versus Behrman, the court ruled that narcotics could not be 
prescribed even as part of a cure. The effect was to make it now impossible for 
addicts to gain legal access to drugs: “The clinics shut their doors and a new 
figure appeared on the American scene—the pusher” (McCoy et al. 1986:110).
At first, physicians resisted these new legal developments. In the 12 
years after passage of the Harrison Act, at least 25,000 physicians were ar-
rested on narcotics-selling charges, and 3,000 served time in jail as a result. 
Thousands more had their licenses revoked. By 1923, all of the drug clinics, 
even those that had been fairly successful in weaning addicts off drugs, were 
shut down. By 1919, there were 1,000 addicts brought up on federal drug 
charges. By 1925, there were 10,000 arrests per year. The end result of these 
developments was the emergence and continued existence of an underground 
drug subculture that functioned to enable addicts to gain access to drugs and 
drug injection equipment and to avoid arrest. Ultimately, this population was 
targeted by the War on Drugs.
The Longest War
The United States war in Vietnam lasted from 1956 (the date of the first 
US casualty) until 1975, and thus has gained the designation as being the 
longest war in US history. Although a different kind of war, the War on 
Drug began (officially) with President Richard Nixon’s declaration in 1971. 
Nevertheless, the policies that his administration implemented as part of the 
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act were a continua-
tion and enhancement of drug-prohibition policies dating to the Harrison 
Act. Thus the War on Drugs (terminology officially dropped by the Obama 
administration, without much other change in actual practice) is truly, and 
by far, the oldest war in US history.
Particularly since the Korean War, there has been a consistent and grow-
ing federal effort to implement new policies and programs designed to stop 
the use of some drugs. These efforts significantly intensified in response to 
the radical increase in drug use that occurred, especially among youth and 
young adults, beginning in the mid-1960s. As Musto (1987:253) comments, 

170 
❋ 
chapter six
“The use of illegal drugs increased astoundingly in the 1960s. Drugs thought 
safely interred with the past, marihuana and heroin, rapidly resurfaced at the 
same time that new drugs such as LSD materialized and attained tremendous 
popularity.” Ultimately, the movement of drugs onto primarily white college 
campuses and among other white middle-class youth culminated in Richard 
Nixon labeling drugs “public enemy number one” (use among youth of color 
dating to the post–Second World War period never roused such concern).
War or no war, it is apparent that once it is established drug supply-and-
demand chains are not easy to eradicate, although patterns change over 
time as do user populations. As journalist, magazine editor, and political 
commentator H. L. Mencken (1917) wrote, “There is always an easy solution 
to every human problem—neat, plausible, and wrong.” He might have been 
talking about the War on Drugs. Thus, as Nadelmann (2007:1) observes, 
“global production and consumption of drugs are roughly the same as they 
were a decade ago; meanwhile, many producers have become more efficient, 
and cocaine and heroin have become purer and cheaper.” This point, he 
elaborates (Nadelman 2007) by asserting,
Looking to the United States as a role model for drug control is like 
looking to apartheid-era South Africa for how to deal with race. . . . And 
yet, despite [its] dismal record [in the War on Drugs], the United States 
has succeeded in constructing an international drug-prohibition regime 
modeled after its own highly punitive and moralistic approach. It has 
dominated the drug-control agencies of the United Nations and other 
international organizations, and its federal drug-enforcement agency was 
the first national police organization to go global. Rarely has one nation 
so successfully promoted its own failed policies to the rest of the world.
Over the last 40 years, the price 
tag for US War on Drugs has been 
in the neighborhood $1 trillion 
and hundreds of thousands of lives. 
Every 20 seconds, someone in the 
United States is arrested for a drug 
violation, and at the rate of one per 
week, a new prison is erected to 
house the unprecedented throng 
of inmates that are kept behind 
bars in the world’s largest and most 
Drug use preparation in Denver (Photo 
by Robert Booth)

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
171 
populated penal system (Singer 2004). In New York State, for example, the 
Rockefeller Drug Laws of 1973 radically restricted judicial discretion in utiliz-
ing alternatives to incarceration as a response to drug offenses. The result of 
the enactment of these laws was that while 11 percent of the total state prison 
population in 1980 were individuals incarcerated for drug-related offenses 
by January of 2008, that figure was 33 percent (Correction Association of 
New York 2011). Although it has only 5 percent of the world’s population, 
25 percent of the world’s prison population is behind bars in US jails and 
prisons. Further, more African Americans today are under criminal justice 
supervision—either in prison, on parole or probation—than were enslaved 
10 years before the Civil War (Alexander 2012). Additionally, more than 10 
percent of black men between 20 and 35 years of age are incarcerated, which 
separates them from their families and children. The War on Drugs, in short, 
has been experienced in minority communities as a savage War on People. As 
Klieman and colleagues (2012) conclude, “The U.S. has reached a dead end 
in trying to fight drug use by treating every offender as a serious criminal.”
Policies, Laws, and Practices that 
Add Value to the Useless
Revelations over the years have shown that government and international 
efforts to control drugs often are colored by political motives that have little 
to do with curbing the harmful effects drugs might have. Indeed, one com-
mon argument about why such a failed war and the failed policies it reflects 
continue is that it reaps a set of secondary gains for those who promote it 
(Blackman 2010). Such gains involve the use of the useless by others with a 
political, economic, or alternative self-interest in the Othering and control 
of drug users.
The starting point for amplified efforts to put drug users to use lies in a 
deeply engrained perception of drug users even among those who have never 
met one in their lives, although they certainly have encountered them by way 
of the books, movies, news reports, or other venues discussed in previous 
chapters. Noted Peretti-Watel (2003:321),
[T]he stereotype of the “dopefiend” seems useless, since heroin users 
remain unfamiliar to most people. Nevertheless, conceiving a perfect 
stranger as a devil who concentrates all the vices (the “dope fiend” is 
supposed to steal, to lie or even to kill, without being able to control 
himself . . . ) can prove useful in order to reassure our values, to draw a 

172 
❋ 
chapter six
clear boundary between good and evil: our moral universe is inhabited 
by many stereotypes which are clearly either good or bad, and which 
provide us with models to follow as well as with scarecrows to avoid.
Not only are drug users good to moralize with, always available to hold up 
as negative role models and hapless scape goats, they have other, often hidden, 
values as well, that are covered over and made possible by the War on Drugs. 
In addition, as Chambliss (1994) argued, the War on Drugs has “produced 
another war as well: it is the war between the police and minority youth.” 
African Americans, who comprise about 12 percent of the US population, 
make up 55 percent of those convicted on drug charges. Rarely addressed 
in the War on Drugs is any systematic assessment of why socially marginal-
ized working-class youth turn to drug use or involvement in the drug trade 
(mostly at lower levels of street distribution). The answer, however, appears 
to be that the illicit drug trade is “the biggest equal opportunity employer” 
(Bourgois 2003b:320) for inner city youth, males and females alike.
Fourth, by creating an exploitable pariah group of low-cost drug-dependent 
workers, and by allowing the development of a revolving system for ware-
housing segments of the labor force behind prison bars, the War on Drugs 
lowers production costs and increases corporate profits. As Alisse Waterston 
(1993:241) pointed out, “As a special category, addicts are politically weak and 
disconnected from organized labor, thereby becoming a source of cheap, easily 
expendable labor.” The existence of this group drags down wages for everyone, 
because each layer of the labor force enables employers to lower the wages paid 
to layers above it (because cheaper workers are portrayed as ready and willing to 
take their jobs for lower wages and fewer benefits). Prisoners arrested on drug 
charges wind up as part of an incarcerated labor pool for private corporations 
(e.g., in assembly) for very low wages and society, rather than the employer, pays 
the cost of sustaining this work force (e.g., food, clothes, medical care, shelter). 
Further, as Chien and colleagues (2000:19) indicate, employers of prisoners 
“can freely dismiss and recall workers [and] need not deal with unions.”
Fifth, beginning in the mid-1980s, the United States began to outsource 
prison construction and operation. The first private prison contract was 
awarded in 1984 to Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), which re-
mains the largest for-profit prison company in the country. Seeking locations 
that would not reject the presence of a prison, private prisons often selected 
communities hard hit by corporate flight and the globalized economy. Heav-
ily subsidized by taxpayer money even before receiving public contracts, 
private companies were able to build prisons throughout the country. For 

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
173 
every convicted individual sent to one of its prisons, the CCA or other private 
prison operator receives approximately $122 a day. Based on this revenue 
flow, the CCA reported $1.7 billion in gross income in 2011, about half from 
government contracts (Carlsen 2012). But this was a time of falling crime 
rates. The real challenge for private prisons became filling all the cells in 
their newly erected prisons with convicted offenders. To drum up business, 
the private prison industry turned to lobbying in order to win stiff drug and 
immigration policies. The CCA 2010 Annual Report straightforwardly lays 
out the need for criminalization by warning its investors:
The demand for our facilities could be adversely affected by the relax-
ation of enforcement efforts, leniency in conviction or parole standards 
and sentencing practices or through the decriminalization of certain 
activities that are currently proscribed by our criminal laws. For in-
stance, any changes with respect to drugs and controlled substances 
or illegal immigration could affect the number of persons arrested, 
convicted and sentenced, thereby potentially reducing demand for 
correctional facilities to house them (quoted in Riggs 2012).
To insure a steady stream of new prisoners, while doing little if anything 
to boost public safety, private prison companies over the last decade spent over 
$45 million lobbying law makers. Whenever new bills that increased police 
power to detain suspected criminals, criminalize behaviors (such as adding 
new drugs to those that are illegal to sell or use) or extending prison sentences, 
private prisons could be found making significant campaign contributions 
to office holders. For example, lobbyists for the private prison industry have 
pushed for passage of “three strikes” and “truth-in-sentencing” laws across the 
country. Both of these types of laws adversely impact drug users. Some of the 
tactics employed by private prison companies, or individuals affiliated with 
them, to gain influence or acquire new contracts or inmates flows included: “the 
use of questionable financial incentives; benefitting from the “revolving door” 
between public and private corrections; extensive lobbying; lavish campaign 
contributions; and efforts to control information” (ACLU 2011). As a result of 
such labors, as the ACLU (2011) points out, “the crippling cost of imprisoning 
increasing numbers of Americans saddles government budgets with rising debt 
and exacerbates the current fiscal crises confronting states across the nation.”
A set of citizens that are readily amenable to mobilization in support of 
campaigns for new laws or new prisons are prison employees. Prison-guard 
unions have a strong vested interest in keeping people incarcerated in high 

174 
❋ 
chapter six
numbers. In 2008, the California Correctional Peace Officers Association, 
for example, spent $1 million to defeat a measure that would have reduced 
sentences and parole times for nonviolent drug offenders while emphasizing 
drug treatment over imprisonment (Fang 2012). Additionally, police depart-
ments throughout the country have become dependent on federal drug war 
grants to finance their budgets. To keep this money flowing, police unions 
see it in their best interests to lobby against drug legalization. For example, 
the successful campaign in 2010 against Proposition 19 in California, a bal-
lot measure to legalize marihuana, was coordinated by a police-union lob-
byist. These efforts helped insure that the police department would collect 
tens of millions in federal marihuana-eradication grants. Federal lobbying 
disclosures reveal that other police-union lobbyists around the country also 
pushed for stiffer penalties for marihuana-related crimes.
Sixth, civil-asset-forfeiture laws have been passed that empower the sei-
zures of private property even without charging anyone with violation of a law, 
and hence without having to prove illegal behavior beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Seized property, such as fast boats used to smuggle illegal drugs, is presumed 
to be illicitly gained or used, and can be confiscated by a police department or 
other government body based solely on hearsay evidence, such as a tip supplied 
by a government informant who stands to gain up to 25 percent of the forfeited 
assets. Confiscation may occur without an arrest because it is defined legally 
as an arrest of property, rather than an arrest of a person, and the necessity of 
proving a party guilty is not required. Numerous police, sheriff, and related 
law-enforcement departments around the country have embraced forfeiture 
laws to boost their departmental budgets significantly, and their various budget-
related perks. A study involving 90 interviews with law-enforcement officials, 
prosecutors, and forfeiture attorneys around the nation (Burnett 2008) sug-
gested that police agencies that reported they were seizing property or drug 
money to help finance the War on Drugs appeared to be mainly doing so to 
help increase their own departmental budgets. Also, existing evidence shows 
that some officers use their badges to take cash from drivers stopped on the 
road for alleged drug-related suspicions without any evidence. Researchers 
have identified numerous examples of questionable purchases made with seized 
money or from money made by selling off seized assets, including:
 
• Albany, New York, Police Department: Was found to have spent 
$7,711 from confiscations on photographs of police officers and 
artwork for administrative offices, and $16,190 on food, gifts, and 
entertainment.

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
175 
 
• Colorado State Patrol: Was found to have paid from confiscated 
funds $832 for knives as incentive awards; $599 on embroidered 
polo shirts; $907 for tickets to minor-league baseball games; 
$1,410 for fleece vests and bomber jackets; $107 for poker chips; 
$234 at Bath & Body Works for various items.
 
• St. Louis County Police Department: Used confiscation money in 
the amount of $144,689 to reimburse employees for courses taken 
at local colleges and universities to complete bachelor’s or mas-
ter’s degree programs, such as English Composition, Advanced 
Contract Law, and Introduction to Astronomy.
 
• Fulton County, Georgia, District Attorney’s Office: Paid $5,000 
in forfeited money for an annual Christmas party, including a 
red cape printed with “Super Lawyer,” $6,650 on dinners, college 
football tickets, fundraisers, and galas.
 
• Boston Police Department: Spent $2.6 million in confiscation 
funds to lease SUVs, sedans, and other vehicles for eight years. 
The Department says the vehicles were assigned to undercover 
officers trying to fit into drug scenes.
As these examples suggest, confiscation laws have turned the War on 
Drugs into a plentiful font of easily gained funds, allowing, in some cases, for 
law enforcement offices to be completely financed through seized property 
and cash, primarily from alleged drug dealers (many of whom were never 
brought to trial). We cite just a few examples, but given the pervasiveness of 
drug consumption and the traffic that serves it, we can safely assume that 
many more police departments and sheriff’s offices have availed themselves of 
the “system’s” advantages. One result of these windfalls has been a collapse of 
public oversight of police because taxpayers have afforded decreasing support 
for law enforcement. The windfalls from confiscation laws gained the War on 
Drugs a large cadre of law-enforcement supporters who benefited from seized 
assets, both legally and through local corruption. Concluded Blumenson 
and Nilsen (1998), forfeiture laws and practices and other components of 
the War on Drugs have undermined rather than enhanced law enforcement:
During the past decade, law enforcement agencies increasingly have 
turned to asset seizures and drug enforcement grants to compensate 
for budgetary shortfalls, at the expense of other criminal justice goals. 
We believe the strange shape of the criminal justice system today—the 
law enforcement agenda that targets assets rather than crime . . . the 80 

176 
❋ 
chapter six
percent of seizures that are unaccompanied by any criminal prosecu-
tion . . . the plea bargains that favor drug kingpins and penalize the 
“mules” without assets to trade . . . the reverse stings that target drug 
buyers rather than drug sellers . . . the overkill in agencies involved 
even in minor arrests . . . the massive shift towards federal jurisdiction 
over local law enforcement . . . —is largely the unplanned by-product 
of this economic incentive structure.
The Personal Impact of Policy—
Effects on the Lives of Drug Users
The effects of stringent drug laws on the people who use prohibited drugs 
often seem to exacerbate the effects of the drug use in unintended ways. For 
example, the crackdown on script doctors (those physicians who readily write 
psychotropic drug prescriptions for their patients) and possession of injection 
paraphernalia were intended to prevent people from self-injecting opioids. 
In fact, opioid users found street-based sources for their drug of choice, but 
had to inject it intravenously to get the desired effect. Intravenous injection 
led to contamination of the needle and syringe with often infectious blood, 
and because access to injection equipment was limited, the users adapted 
by re-using already contaminated equipment previously put to use by other 
people. These processes led to risks associated with self-injection, including 
local abscesses (due to use of well-worn and dull needles), hepatitis B, hepa-
titis C syphilis, and HIV infection. Causal sequences like this one abound 
in the experience of drug ethnographers but do not dissuade policy makers 
from continuing to place heavy restrictions on injecting drug use. In closing 
this chapter, we examine how unhealthy health-related laws, policies and 
practices worsened the suffering of illegal drug users.
The starting point in assessing the adverse impacts of the law and policies 
on drug users is the criminalization of drug use and the use of incarceration 
as a means of addressing this behavior. The Report of the Global Commission 
on Drug Policy (2011), for example, identifies several ways that the War on 
Drugs fuels the HIV pandemic:
 
• Fear of arrest drives drug users underground and away from HIV 
testing and prevention services into high-risk environments.
 
• Restrictions on the provision of sterile syringes without a doctor’s 
prescription result in increases of multiple-person use of syringes, 
a known route of HIV and other infectious disease transmission. 

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
177 
The staunch opposition of supporters of the War on Drugs to sy-
ringe exchange to prevent the spread of HIV in addicts delayed 
implementation in many parts of the United States for years. A 
federal ban on funding for these programs was not removed until 
2009. Barriers to the funding and operation of syringe-exchange 
programs, which have been proven to lower incidence rates of HIV 
infection, constitute a significant risk on injection drug users.
 
• Prohibitions or restrictions on opioid substitution programs and 
other evidence-based treatment result in out-of-treatment drug 
user populations and the spread of HIV disease.
 
• The heavy costs of the War on Drugs rob monies needed for drug 
treatment and HIV-prevention programs. As Dwight Eisenhower, 
who warned of the ever-growing threat of the military-industrial 
complex, also aptly noted almost 60 year ago, “Every gun that is 
made, every warship launched, every rocket fired, signifies in the 
final sense a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those 
who are cold and are not clothed” (Eisenhower 1953); to this, he 
could have added every dollar spent on eradication, interdiction, 
and arrest related to drug flows is a theft from those in need of 
drug treatment.
According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the institute within 
the National Institutes of Health that supports scientific research on drug 
issues and reports its intramural and extramural findings to Congress and 
the American people:
Addiction is defined as a chronic, relapsing brain disease that is char-
acterized by compulsive drug seeking and use, despite harmful con-
sequences. It is considered a brain disease because drugs change the 
brain; they change its structure and how it works. These brain changes 
can be long lasting and can lead to many harmful, often self-destructive, 
behaviors (National Institute on Drug Abuse 2012).
Whether or not one believes this is an adequate definition, it is certainly 
noteworthy that drug-research scientists view addiction as a public-health issue 
involving a compulsive disease that seems most inappropriately “treated” by 
incarceration. Incarceration, in fact, is harmful to the mental and physical health 
of drug users, promoting depression, exposure to stress and trauma, and increas-
ing the risk for multiple diseases and disorders (Bingswanger 2010). Ironically, 

178 
❋ 
chapter six
the physical-health and mental-health risks of incarceration, including risk of 
violence, have been heightened by the increase in conviction for drug-related 
violations resulting in severe overcrowding in the American penal system.
While drug treatment is available to (some) inmate populations, pris-
oners commonly endure long waits to begin drug therapy because of staff 
shortages and limited resources according to research by the Government 
Accountability Office (2012). Furthermore, assessment of prison-based drug 
treatment programs reveals significant limitations, including inadequate 
staffing, wide variation in staff competence and commitment, poor screening 
practices, comingling of individuals with quite different drug-abuse problems 
and degrees of drug dependency, lack of prioritization of individuals most in 
need of drug treatment, inconsistency in program content, significant limits 
on access to individual one-on-one counseling, wide variation in staff/par-
ticipant relations, the inclusion of treatment staff with a negative attitudes 
toward inmates and toward drug treatment, lack of perceived trust among 
inmates about sharing personal information in group counseling sessions, 
widespread concern among participants that they can be removed from 
treatment for small infractions of prison rules, and failure to develop post-
release aftercare programming in the community (Correctional Association 
of New York 2011). The overall adverse impact of incarceration is suggested 
by findings from a study by Weaver and Lerman (2010) on the relationship 
between contact with the criminal justice system and social attitudes. They 
found that even after controlling for other important variables, interaction 
with the criminal-justice system was a significant predictor of civic and 
political disengagement and mistrust of government.
Outside of the incarceral setting, access to drug treatment, as a result of 
government funding and other policies is a fundamental issue in drug-user 
health. Most drug-treatment programs incorporate 12-step programming, 
even though they have been found not to be effective for many people. 
Methadone and buprenorphine maintenance, which have comparatively 
good track records as drug-treatment methodologies for opioid addiction, are 
usually isolated from mainstream health care in resource-limited (and often 
somewhat hidden) opioid replacement clinics (Bourgois 2003a). If addiction 
were seen and actually treated as a disease like any other, its care would be 
integrated into health-care systems generally rather than isolated and treated 
as if the people who suffer from it were contagious or a social risk. Moreover, 
drug treatment would be comprehensive, low threshold, and be focused on the 
full reintegration of patients back into the community, features that tend to 
be lacking in the existing underfunded, under supported treatment “system.”

the legal construction of drug users 
❋ 
179 
Existing policing practices in many cities involve the confiscation of 
syringes from drug users. As a result, syringes may not be available at a time 
of drug craving, and drug injectors may avoid carrying their “works” with 
them, resulting in the multiple-person use of drug equipment. In our respec-
tive interviews with drug injectors, we have found this pattern of policing 
behavior reported by many drug injectors. Multiple-person use of syringes 
is known to be a primary source of HIV transmission as well as the spread of 
other infectious diseases among injection drug users. A similar pattern occurs 
with crack pipes as well, which, when used by more than one individual, can 
transmit hepatitis C (Tortu et al. 2004). In a similar vein, condoms, a proven 
preventive for HIV transmission, may be treated when found on a person by 
the police as evidence for involvement in commercial sex, leading to a loss of 
condom availability at times of need among commercial sex workers, who 
have disproportionate rates of HIV infection. In a report issued by Human 
Rights Watch (2012) based on detailed interviews with more than 300 com-
mercial sex workers and transgendered people in San Francisco, New York, 
Los Angeles, and Washington, D.C. (among the urban areas hardest hit by 
HIV disease) found frequent reports that police officers regularly harassed, 
threatened, and arrested them for carrying condoms, which police used as 
evidence of involvement in prostitution. In San Francisco, this practice oc-
curred despite a city law that explicitly banned the use of condoms as evidence 
of criminal activity. Our own studies in Miami (cf. Needle et al. 2003) found 
similar police practices on a male sex worker stroll in East Little Havana.
Drug overdose has surpassed HIV infection as a cause of mortality 
among drug users. There is, however, a safe, nontoxic drug, naloxone, that can 
quickly reverse opioid overdose and prevent most overdose fatalities. The War 
on Drugs interferes with saving overdose victims in two ways. First, because 
witnesses to overdose, usually other drug users, fear prosecution, they often 
avoid calling for help until it is too late to save the overdose victim. Second, 
because the War on Drugs reinforces the idea that making naloxone available 
over-the-counter or with opioid prescriptions would somehow encourage 
drug use, the antidote is available only through harm-reduction programs 
like syringe exchanges or in some state programs targeted at drug users. 
Underlying the War on Drugs approach is a war on harm-reduction strate-
gies that could lower the risk of disease, injury, and death among drug users.
Although it is widely assumed that the popularity of more potent stimu-
lants like crack cocaine and crystal methamphetamine lead to the police 
crackdowns on these drugs as part of the larger War on Drugs, some research 
has suggested that the appeal of these drugs may have been a product of the 

180 
❋ 
chapter six
War on Drugs. When law enforcement targets the drug supply, the most 
powerful and highly concentrated forms of drugs become more attractive 
to sellers and users alike, as smaller quantities are easier to hide from police 
inspection. This pattern also was seen during Prohibition, with stronger 
forms of alcohol like moonshine displacing weaker drinks like beer. More 
potent drugs, as we have indicated in Chapter 2, however, increase the risk 
for overdose and addiction.
Conclusion
As we have seen, the health of drug users has not been a primary concern of 
legal and criminal-justice institutions. On the contrary, these institutions 
have promoted the darkest images of drug users, portraits that justify their 
marginalization, arrest, and incarceration. The law, in short, in its many 
expressions from drug bans, sentencing structures, the War on Drugs, and 
policing practices has been a primary force in the Othering of drug users in 
society. Various laws and policies, which appear to critics to be expressions 
of an attitude of judgment and condemnation, or at least hostile indifference, 
have burdened the lives of drug users helping to insure high rates of illness, 
shorter than average life spans, and ongoing social suffering. At the same 
time, these laws and policies and the availability of drug users as objects 
of opprobrium and blame provides social justification for multiple social 
institutions and their employees’ social roles, public and private, as well as 
the considerable expenditure of public funds. The usefulness of the useless is 
deeply etched in all aspects of the criminal justice and public policy apparatus.

181 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 181–204. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
Chapter Seven
Drug Users in Social Science
The Others We’ve Made
L 
ike prohibitionists, politicians, writers, correctional-institution admin-
istrators, movie directors, television producers, and law-enforcement 
officials, social scientists also have had uses for the Cultural Others 
who use drugs. This chapter describes how social and behavioral scientists 
use addicts and drug users under three broad domains: (1) studies of the use 
of exotic drugs, (2) studies of drug use in social deviance, and (3) studies of 
people at risk of health problems because of drug use. These arenas of study 
may overlap, although, for example, the investigation of exotic patterns of 
drug use tends to be separate from the other two, and the actual number of 
studies is far less numerous. We address these domains in this order. The 
first involves discovery of the range of human variation through seeking out 
extremely distinctive cultural traditions of drug use—very much the province 
of anthropology, with famous proponents including Richard Evans Schultes, 
Weston La Barre, and Marlene Dobkin de Rios. Their contributions have 
given drug researchers perspective on how variable the use of drugs can be in 
the full breadth of the human condition, including unusual uses of seemingly 
familiar drugs such as alcohol and tobacco. The drug studies of the second 
domain, in which the focus is on deviance in social context, have attempted 
to explain why people use drugs that are socially disapproved or illegal. 
These studies attend to questions of etiology of drug use and the contextual 
conditions that appear to nurture it. Notable quantitative proponents of this 
area of research include Kandel, Brook, Johnston, and O’Malley. Qualitative 
proponents include Agar, Sterk, and many others. The third domain of drug 
studies concentrates on the health risks and other risks incurred by drug 
users, attempting to find ways to prevent the ill effects of drugs. Proponents 
of this pathway include Booth, McCoy, and numerous others. Each domain 
will receive attention in this chapter, with some commentary on the political 
economy and its influence on the direction of research since the inception 
of the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

182 
❋ 
chapter seven
Drug Research Other than Treatment Studies
In studies of people who use drugs in culturally distinctive contexts, social 
science use of the Cultural Other involves emphasizing the myriad ways that 
humans seek and interpret altered states. Such studies form distinctive cases 
that reflect the universal quest among human beings to find meaning and 
predictability in life through ritual that involves drug use. The second social 
science use of the Cultural Other serves highly varied agendas, from defining 
deviance to determining how best to deal with the existence of drug users in 
society (e.g., issues of policy, criminality, etc.). The last social science use of 
the Cultural Other focuses on public health and delineates the epidemiol-
ogy and etiology of diseases that co-occur with drug use (or, in the case of 
overdose, are directly caused by drug use), and how to respond effectively 
to them. In short, the social sciences construct three somewhat different but 
overlapping drug-using Cultural Others: the drug user as cultural actor and 
knowledge seeker; the drug user as a deviant threat to society; and the drug 
user as a vulnerable person in need of unforced harm-reduction intervention. 
Critical to the alternative construction of drug users within particular social 
sciences has been the intersection of place of use and drugs being consumed, 
as discussed in the following sections.
Exotic Drug Use
More than the other social sciences, anthropology has dominated the 
literature on drugs not commonly used in Western society (Singer 2012). 
Because anthropologists go to out-of-the-way places to study the full range of 
variability of the human condition, the likelihood of finding people in those 
places who use lesser-known drugs is high. This likelihood is especially great 
in ecological zones where there is significant biodiversity. Consequently, 
anthropologists who study people in jungle habitats often have seen people 
using drugs that would be deemed exotic from a Western experiential per-
spective. Schultes (1993), for example, purposely sought people in deep 
Amazon and its tributaries because he recognized the limitless potential 
for discovery of new drugs. Anthropological training helps to assure that 
the observant fieldworker will fully describe encountered drug use and the 
physical setting and social environment in which it occurs. Moreover, his-
torically, anthropologists were trained to pay special attention to cultural 
behaviors that differed from Western patterns, making “exotic drug use” an 
immediate object of interest.

drug users in social science 
❋ 
183 
In their focus on the relatively rare and exotic patterns of how humans 
use drugs, investigators such as Peter Furst, Johannes Wilbert, Richard Evans 
Schultes, Marlene Dobkin de Rios, and Weston LaBarre adhered to anthro-
pological modes of observation in which they reported cultural context as 
they saw it from their own respective vantage points and, in light of cultural 
relativist sentiments within the discipline, generally avoided judging whether 
what they saw was good or evil. The tone of their publications, however, is 
not just a product of the culturally nonjudgmental position taken during 
their time in the field, but in most instances, the people studied by these 
anthropologists were using drugs that are not associated with addiction or 
other notable signs of individual or social harm. For example, the peyote use 
studied by LaBarre (1975 [1938]) took place in the context of a pan-Native 
American religious movement. In that cultural context, congregants chewed 
peyote buttons (Lophophora williamsii) in order to enter into the visions that 
allowed them to speak to spirit helpers. In many groups, spirit helpers are 
essential to receiving spiritual guidance in both mundane and special life cir-
cumstances. The mescaline in peyote facilitates these visions as the devotees 
seek them in the course of ritual, but, in the view of Native American Church 
members, to have such visions outside of this specific context is highly unde-
sirable. Furthermore, not all congregants are in need of immediate contact 
with their spirit helpers on the occasion of a specific church service. The 
peyote experience itself has little to recommend it other than the visions it 
can produce. The buttons have a violently bitter taste, and the most common 
immediate reaction to ingesting peyote is to vomit. LaBarre’s defense of the 
Native American Church and its use of peyote in ritual began a decades-long 
struggle to legitimize use of the drug in this very specific context in response 
to government efforts to ban peyote as part of broader drug-prohibition ef-
forts. A later statement, published in Science, reiterated LaBarre’s support 
of the Native American Church’s ritual use of peyote (LaBarre et al. 1951). 
In this announcement, LaBarre and several other anthropologists who had 
studied peyote use ethnographically stressed that within the context of the 
Native American Church peyote
does not excite, stupefy, or produce muscular in-coordination; there 
is no hangover; and the habitual user does not develop any increased 
tolerance or dependence. As for the immorality that is supposed to ac-
company its use, since no orgies are known among any Indian tribes of 
North America, the charge has as much validity as the ancient Roman 
accusation of a similar nature against the early Christians.

184 
❋ 
chapter seven
Notably, as a result of such efforts, in 1970, the Comprehensive Drug 
Abuse Prevention and Control Act specifically excluded bans on peyote use 
by members of the Native American Church:
The listing of peyote as a controlled substance in schedule I does not 
apply to the nondrug use of peyote in bona fide religious ceremonies 
of the Native American Church, and members of the Native American 
Church, so using peyote are exempt from registration. Any person who 
manufactures peyote for or distributes peyote to the Native American 
Church, however, is required to obtain registration annually and com-
ply with all other requirements of the law (Knipe 1995:402).
Nevertheless, a ruling written by Antonin Scalia in 1990 reflecting a 6 
to 3 vote by the US Supreme Court stated that two Native American Church 
members could be denied unemployment benefits because they had been fired 
for using peyote. Legal protections that apply to ritual use apparently do not 
extend to the arena of keeping a job (Knipe 1995). LaBarre’s advocacy, and 
the contributions of other anthropologists who have studied peyote use and 
defended this behavior by members of the Native American Church, while 
ultimately largely successful, constitutes a rare example of drug users’ use of 
drugs being the beneficiary of social-science writing.
Peter T. Furst (1972, 2006) very thoroughly characterized the patterns 
of peyote use as practiced among the Huichol of central Mexico. For a period 
of 35 years, Furst focused largely on Huichol practices related to the ritual 
use of this drug. While his intent was to describe and analyze this practice, he 
unintentionally created the opportunity for people presenting themselves as 
Huichol shamans to charge new-age tourists who read or heard about his work 
a fee to replicate the Huichol version of the peyote experience. His vivid and 
convincing accounts of the process of hunting and collecting peyote buttons, 
performing required ceremonies of administration, and taking the drug have 
led many adventure- and spiritual-growth hungry North Americans to seek 
the insights experienced by Furst’s Huichol informants. This phenomenon 
has re-occurred in several instances where shamanistic practices attracted 
attention because they were associated with use of little-known psychotropic 
drugs (e.g., ayahuasca use in Peru).
Although Schultes (1938) also weighed in on the issue of peyote, most of 
his output simply helped to communicate to the rest of the world the variable 
and elaborate ways of using drugs practiced by people living outside the thrall 
of Western civilization (cf. Schultes 1976; 1993). By the time of his death 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
185 
in 2001, he had become the foremost ethnobotanical expert on patterns of 
mind-altering drug use in non-Western societies. His focus in these endeavors 
was on the plants and their properties, rather than the cultural contexts in 
which they were used, but he still succeeded in documenting ceremonial rites 
and customs surrounding the use of plant medicines and psychotropic drugs 
in various cultural settings. His writings, like Furst’s for peyote, may have 
contributed to the eventual development of touristic quests to experience 
the effects of ayahuasca, but there is no evidence of direct linkage between 
Schultes’ work and these quests. His own use of exotic drugs during his field 
research, however, is well documented.
Much more immediate links between drug tourism and specific publica-
tions can be found in the case of Marlene Dobkin de Rios’s writings about 
ayahuasca as a tool for healing (Dobkin de Rios 1970; 1971; 1972a; 1972b; 
2005). In describing the healing ceremonies conducted by mestizo curan-
deros, Dobkin de Rios cited the most important city in the region, Iquitos. 
In present-day Iquitos, tourists who arrive from North America or Western 
Europe have many options for experiencing the effects of concoctions made 
of the Banisteriopsis caapi vine, either recruiting a “guide” on the street who 
for a fee will introduce a tourist to a “shaman,” or pre-arranging a “shaman-
ism program,” consisting of four days of activities in which the tourist may
Discover shamanism in the Peruvian Amazon. Learn about the amaz-
ing healing power of medicinal plants and be part of the magic rituals 
performed by the Master Shaman. [And, describing a photo on the 
web site:] The Ayahuasca Rite participants gather at Master Shaman’s 
to prepare the magic circle (Paseos Amazónicos 2013).
Page’s former students have made the trip to Iquitos and either enlisted 
a “shaman” to guide them through an experience of using ayahuasca, or 
observed other tourists in the process of recruiting a guide for the purpose 
of finding a “shaman.” In Iquitos, Singer has seen brochures for ayahuasca 
experiences displayed along with other “things to do” information in local 
hotels and observed lacquered slices of Banisteriopsis caapi vine for sale by 
souvenir vendors.
These activities of experience-seeking by people whose interest in drugs 
is far from academic seem to be unexpected consequences of serious anthro-
pologists’ work. Schultes or Dobkin de Rios would hardly have encouraged 
people to seek out their informants and take the drugs being studied. The 
fact that shamanistic tourism has evolved in the vicinity of Iquitos indicates 

186 
❋ 
chapter seven
that some drug uses are taken on voluntarily by the users in collaboration 
with the experience seekers. In these specific cases, the form taken by the 
“shamanism program,” which includes explanations and enactments of the 
rituals surrounding ayahuasca use, speaks to a desire by the experience-
seeking consumer to learn something about the cultural context in which the 
congregants drink the potion. Authenticity of this cultural experience may 
not be high, but it leaves the customer satisfied that he/she has attained new 
insights by means of drug use in an appropriately nurturing environment. 
The teacher, in turn, makes money, although it is not clear just how lucrative 
these activities are over time. Economics aside, in transcultural exchanges, 
ayahuasca instructors encounter what in the past would have been seen as a 
very unexpected use of drug users.
With regard to the anthropologists’ own uses of diverse drug-using 
populations, it is evident that they profit in several ways from their encoun-
ters with drug users:
	
1.	They publish books (which usually bring in modest royalties) and 
articles that help to establish their reputations as experts on the 
human behaviors surrounding the use of mind altering drugs..
	
2.	They use their books and articles as justification to obtain further 
funding for more research, raising their prestige and credibility 
as researchers on exotic drug use.
	
3.	They are invited to and attend conferences around their respec-
tive homelands and beyond to share their findings with academic 
audiences.
	
4.	They obtain gainful employment on the strength of their research 
expertise in a relatively rare specialty.
	
5.	Their ongoing productivity in reporting on drug users’ activity 
provides their employers with justification for raising these re-
searchers’ salaries.
	
6.	The dissemination of their work to students helps to attract gradu-
ate students who wish to pursue related lines of research. This well-
educated and highly motivated workforce helps the investigators 
conduct more research, write more publications, and gain further 
prestige, funding, and raises in salary.
Clearly, from the informants’ point of view, the impact of the data pro-
vided to the researchers bestowed on those researchers multiple advantages 
to which the informants did not necessarily have access. We do not know, 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
187 
in most cases, whether or not the researchers of exotic drug use “gave back” 
to their informants, although we can surmise that Furst, for example, in his 
long-term relations with the Huichol,1 as is the wont of most anthropologists 
who re-visit people they have studied, effectively engaged in gift-giving and 
receiving as long-term relationships developed. Perhaps, as also is common, 
he provided assistance with community initiatives or health problems. The 
most enmeshed relationship between anthropological drug researcher and 
informant is Marlene Dobkin de Rios’s long-lasting marriage with her key 
informant, first encountered in the 1960s during her initial field research on 
ayahuasca (Dobkin de Rios 1970). Unlike key informants of other anthro-
pological researchers, Mr. Rios has had ample opportunity to avail himself 
of the benefits accrued by his spouse. Nevertheless, regardless of the kind 
and intensity of reciprocity between researcher and informant, the anthro-
pological researchers on drugs have tended to handle these relations with 
respect and fairness. Otherwise, they would not have been sustainable for 
as long as they have endured.
Another anthropologist, Michael Harner, apparently became so 
enthralled with the role of shamanism in the life of many different small 
communities that he focused on how shamans approached the spirit world, 
including in his inquiries the uses of drugs in the practices of shamanism. His 
early publications (Harner 1973a, 1973b ) provided ethnographic reports on 
how shamans used drugs to gain access to the spirit world, but as his interest 
in shamanism increased, he published on shamanism as a concept (Harner 
1990) and established an institute for the study of shamanism with the idea 
that people living in modern societies could benefit from shamanistic teach-
ings about the human condition. One of the attractions of this advocacy in 
favor of shamanism was undoubtedly the appeal of having complete freedom 
to seek contact with the spirit world by means of drugs. Because in many of 
the cultural contexts where shamans practice their arts, the shamans are the 
only people encouraged to use drugs, Harner’s particular approach to these 
people qualifies as a use of drug users.
Not “Exotic,” but Different
Some researchers have focused on drugs that are well known to the Western 
world, but have very different applications and meanings in non-Western 
cultural contexts. Johannes Wilbert (1972), for example, characterized the 
use of tobacco among the Warao of Venezuela in a shamanic tradition of 
healing and divination. Far from being an everyday drug for general public 

188 
❋ 
chapter seven
consumption, tobacco as it was used among the Warao at the time of his 
field studies was wrapped into large potent cigars and the smoke inhaled. 
Shamans were the individuals entrusted with the power imparted by tobacco 
intoxication to have visions. Elaborate ritual supported by origin legends 
in which tobacco had a role provided context for the use of potent tobacco 
preparations to elicit mystical visions.
This pattern of use contrasts so radically with the forms of tobacco con-
sumption found in most of the rest of the world, dominated by industrially 
produced cigarette smoking, that it raises the question: how did tobacco use 
become a widespread addictive drug if its putative origins were so ritually 
restricted? First, the process of diffusion from Native Americans to Europe-
ans took the approach of transmitting a trade good that the recipients were 
free to use however they pleased. The Native Americans who shared the first 
twists of tobacco with European newcomers did not bother to explain how 
the Europeans should use it in ritual terms. Techniques of smoking, chewing, 
and snuffing were demonstrated briefly, and the Europeans soon understood 
that they had been taught the basics about the ultimate consumer good—one 
that you not only have to use up as you use it, but one that also makes the 
consumer want more. The traditional ritual accompaniments to tobacco 
smoke, whether or not the Native Americans tried to teach them, were largely 
ignored. The subsequent three centuries saw the rapid diffusion of tobacco 
throughout the known world (Page 1999:54). The tobacco preparations that 
spread so rapidly, however, tended to demand caution on the part of the con-
sumer. A pipe or cigar smoker had to avoid inhaling the potent fumes of these 
apparatuses so as not to become nauseous. A tobacco chewer had to spit out 
the juice regularly to avoid overdose of nicotine. Snuff, because of the tiny 
amounts used at a time, provided something of a model for mundane tobacco 
use, but it was inconvenient in some ways—it induced sneezes and generated 
the need to manage the production of excess mucus—among others. As we 
mentioned in Chapter 2, tobacco underwent a process of toning down the 
amounts of nicotine imparted to the consumer in order to provide a regular, 
comforting effect without danger of inadvertent overdose. The first hand-
rolled, mass produced cigarettes emerged in 1802 in Spain (Goodman 1993), 
and the future of tobacco consumption was set. Cigarettes took a form that 
carried little risk of overdose, but delivered a solid dose of addictive nicotine 
in a convenient, easy-to-use package. Billions have been manufactured since 
then, and the medical consequences of their consumption have been stagger-
ing, with millions of human beings dying of the cancer, emphysema, heart 
disease, and other ills directly caused by cigarette smoking.

drug users in social science 
❋ 
189 
It is difficult to imagine such a complex of consumption and death arising 
from a ritually circumscribed pattern of tobacco use such as that practiced by 
the Warao, or for that matter by the Crow (Lowie 1919; 1983) in the context of 
their highly ritualized cultivation, harvesting, and smoking of tobacco. In the 
latter case, the use of tobacco smoke among the Crow was also exclusive and 
confined to ritual contexts, although “ordinary” non-shamans were permitted 
to smoke on special occasions. What happened with tobacco was the historic 
and political economic alteration of a drug initially used for controlled ritual 
objectives into a highly profitable commodity, with users being transformed 
by Big Tobacco from participants in culturally meaningful ritual practice into 
addicted and increasingly diseased sources of vast profit. While it does not 
involve othering (indeed it is driven by themes of drug use normalization), 
the contribution of cigarette and other tobacco product consumers to the 
acquisition of great wealth by tobacco corporations is historically the most 
glaring misuse of drug users.
Alcohol, by far the most ubiquitous of drugs, received the attention of 
ethnographers in many parts of the world. In both the highlands and the low-
lands of Bolivia, however, Heath (1958; 1976; 1991; 2004) and Carter (1977) 
have focused on consumption of an alcohol preparation of high potency that 
tests at 178 proof, or 89 percent ethyl alcohol by volume (Heath 1958), more 
than twice the potency of the gin that aroused so much commentary in 18th 
Century England. Bolivians call this preparation alcohol (in Spanish, the h 
is silent), and it is the only drink associated with rituals and fiestas. Both 
among the Aymara, who occupy much of the high country in Bolivia, and 
among the Camba, a mestizo group that occupies the lowlands near Santa 
Cruz, people consume this preparation beyond the point of drunkenness in 
the context of religious and social rituals. Nevertheless, despite the potency 
of the preparation and the fact that the rituals during which the drinking 
occurs inevitably lead to drunkenness, neither Carter nor Heath could find 
any evidence of drunkenness that was not related to ritual.
Both the Camba and the Kolla (terms used respectively for lowland-
ers and highlanders) avoided any drunkenness outside of ritual contexts. 
Furthermore, the two anthropologists found the rituals in which people 
drank to be infrequent. Heath (1958) did not report the periodicity of fi-
estas in which the Camba drank alcohol, but considering the Camba who 
drank were Catholic (Protestants tended to be teetotal abstinent), and the 
liturgical calendar would place religious celebrations not less than six weeks 
apart (e.g., Epiphany to Lent, and Lent to Easter), the likelihood of back-to 
back, fiesta-driven bouts of drunkenness would be low. Key saints’ days and 

190 
❋ 
chapter seven
local holidays might change these intervals somewhat, but Heath’s original 
descriptions imply that the fiestas were separated from each other by sub-
stantial intervals of time. Wakes could occur at any time, but the Camba did 
not drink on those occasions, perhaps to avoid interfering with the fiestas’ 
timing (Heath 1958:74). Carter commented that it was fairly common in the 
highlands to see Aymara- or Quechua-speaking people drunk on the road or 
in the town plaza, leading casual observers to conclude that there existed a 
population of Kolla drunkards. Further investigation, however, revealed that 
from week to week, these drunks were different people. Follow-up studies of 
people involved in specific drinking-linked rituals showed that most people 
only drank heavily two or three times a year (Carter 1977:105), depending 
on what rites of passage and other drinking occasions took place in their 
respective social environments. In neither the Camba nor the Kolla cultural 
contexts could the two anthropologists discern any chronic drunkenness, 
alcoholism, or other health sequelae resulting from the heavy drinking seen 
during fiestas or other celebrations, although Carter (1977:104) allowed 
that more rigorous investigation was needed to ascertain the validity of that 
assessment.
The importance of these investigations in terms of “Othering” addicts lies 
in their questioning of the concept of addiction as an inevitable consequence 
of overuse. Lowie (1919; 1983) and Wilbert (1972) observed highly ritualized 
consumption of tobacco that was not associated with addiction. Heath (1958; 
1976; 1991; 2004), and Carter (1977) forwarded a view of human plasticity 
that rejected the inevitability of chronic drug-related problems, despite heavy 
consumption of the most potent preparation—178 proof alcohol. To this day 
the latter view is controversial, but it hinges on an under-investigated aspect 
of the human condition—ritual circumscription of drug taking behavior. 
These anthropologists used a point of view—cultural relativism—that led 
them to question the assumptions made in various forms of public discourse, 
including biomedical literature, on how humans consume drugs and what 
consequences result from that consumption.
As Carter’s observations indicate (1977:104), it is possible for inattentive 
observers to mistake highly visible public drunkenness for highly prevalent 
public drunkenness, when at any given time, a relatively low proportion of 
the population is drunk, but somebody somewhere is having a wedding or 
some other ceremony that requires heavy drinking of alcohol. The driver 
of that particular phenomenon in highland Bolivia was not addiction to 
alcohol among Aymara people, but the meaning given to drunkenness in a 
cultural context involving a wide variety of rituals that occurred in the lives 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
191 
of individuals infrequently. The majority of these personal rites required 
participants to become drunk because the alcohol was a ritual object, and 
its full consumption signified that the ritual had been properly observed. 
Therefore, the host at such a ritual did everything possible to make sure that 
all of his/her guests were drunk (Carter 1977:102). In that same cultural 
tradition, the Aymara viewed drunkenness outside of the ritual context as a 
social impropriety.
When we recall the social commentary on the English gin epidemic of 
the 1700s and early 1800s, we might question those observations of public 
drunkenness through Carter’s same lens, asking the question, “Were these 
observable drunks always the same people?” The attribution of alcohol addic-
tion to a large segment of the poor population of London failed to take into 
account whatever social processes drove drinking and drunkenness in those 
cultural contexts. The view held by the higher classes in England of drink-
ing behaviors among the poor was, like the view taken by non-indigenous 
Bolivians of their Aymara countrymen, based on superficial observation and 
insufficient social characterization. Moreover, such observations, and the 
moral conclusions they feed, commonly are driven by underlying tensions 
that concentrate at points of social inequality.
Cannabis as a Case in Point
In reaction to the Shafer Report, a government commission document that 
supported ending marihuana prohibition and adopting other methods to 
discourage use (Shafer et al. 1972), the executive branch of the United States 
Federal Government initiated studies of Cannabis use in countries where 
the populations that consumed the drug had done so for decades prior to the 
initiation of the study. The reasoning (commonly attributed to John Mitchell) 
that led to this initiative held that if people have been using a drug for a very 
long time, they are very likely to have experienced negative consequences. 
In the United States, the widespread use of Cannabis had only six years’ time 
depth in 1972. Therefore, the population of users in the United States did not 
have enough experience with the drug to have incurred the serious adverse 
effects that surely (according to Mitchell) accompanied long-term use. Thus, 
to learn about those effects, investigators had to study populations that had 
been using Cannabis for at least ten years. The National Institutes of Health 
issued an announcement in 1972 that was aimed at funding at least three 
studies of populations that had used Cannabis for a minimum of ten years. 
Three investigators at the University of Florida, William E. Carter, Wilmer J. 

192 
❋ 
chapter seven
Coggins, and Paul L. Doughty, proposed to conduct a study of the effects of 
Cannabis among male users in San José, Costa Rica. This project began in 
the summer of 1973.
In studying the consequences of long-term marihuana use among 
working-class men in Costa Rica, some of the same inter-class dynamics like 
those seen in Bolivia and 18th century England became evident (Carter et 
al. 1980). Newspaper accounts, conversations with health and law enforce-
ment officials, and the political discourse portrayed marihuana users as 
denizens of the underworld, where questionable morals and illegal activi-
ties held sway. When the research team in Costa Rica encountered active 
marihuana smokers in the working-class barrios, they found a mix of steady 
skilled workers and small business owners, as well as shady characters and 
street men who lived by their wits (True et al. 1980). There was a grain of 
truth in the stereotypic descriptions of marihuana users as they appeared in 
Costa Rican public discourse of the 1970s, because some marihuana users 
and dealers encountered by the field team admitted making their living by 
sneak thievery, small-scale marihuana sales, and a variety of swindles. As 
the research progressed, however, the networks of informal social relations 
among the users and dealers led to individuals who were gainfully employed 
in legitimate endeavors, including building construction, taxi driving, veg-
etable vending, shoemaking, bread baking, and manufacture of clothing, 
among other working-class occupations (True et al. 1980). Furthermore, the 
“stable smokers,” as they were labeled in research-team publications, were 
more numerous than the “street movers.” Thus, the planned “Othering” of 
marihuana users in Costa Rica broke down under ethnographic scrutiny. 
Again, William E. Carter had conducted an anthropological study of a pat-
tern of drug use that received much social disapproval and found that the 
rationale for that disapproval had little basis in fact.
The deconstruction of Costa Rican prejudice against working-class 
marihuana users was not simply a product of the research team’s working so 
closely with study participants that the process affected how the study team 
perceived marihuana users and marihuana use. The entire Costa Rica study 
of marihuana use was designed to uncover negative effects on health and 
well-being of very long-term marihuana users. Consequently, most of the 
study’s research procedures were selected and designed to test hypotheses 
in the areas in which long-term Cannabis use was suspected to cause prob-
lems with, specifically lung function, vision, sleep electroencephalography, 
serum testosterone, psychomotor function, and cognitive function. Local 
physicians and technicians conducted all tests, and were blinded to whether 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
193 
or not the study participants used or did not use marihuana. Results of users 
were unproductively compared with results of matched controls.2
Despite the findings of the Costa Rica (Carter et al. 1980) and Jamaica 
(Rubin and Comitas 1975) studies, both of which, like the Shafer report (Sha-
fer et al. 1972), failed to find causal relations between marihuana smoking and 
criminality or health problems, the popular press and political discourse con-
tinued to assert that marihuana use should be banned in the United States and 
marihuana users should be punished and vilified (Nahas 1973).3 The reason 
for this persistence of negative perception of marihuana is based not at all on 
new scientific findings about the acute and long-term effects of marihuana use. 
Rather, the negative perception was attributable primarily to the fact that in 
1975, the North American voters who opposed changing marihuana laws still 
outnumbered (albeit narrowly) advocates of changing these prohibitory laws. 
Combined with a factor that Page (1997) has called “strongly held beliefs,” 
that is especially rampant among politicians who do not bother with scientific 
findings, the voters’ negative opinions about marihuana still carried the day 
in 1975. Moreover, treating marihuana use harshly emerged as a political 
strategy that politicians could use to show voters they were “tough on crime” 
or were helping to protect society from a slide into moral iniquity, a strong 
fear among a vocal segment of the American population.
Alcohol treatment in Mexico (Photo by Elyse Singer)

194 
❋ 
chapter seven
In the case of anthropologists’ studies of Cannabis smokers, the investiga-
tors set out to make one use of them (i.e., negative models to support US drug 
policies) but found that use—to provide evidence that marihuana smoking is 
bad for marihuana smokers—failed to yield the “desired” evidence.4 Instead, 
the participants in the Costa Rica study gave evidence on just how difficult 
it was to find adverse effects of long-term use, even with the best detection 
equipment and expertise.
Policy against Science
The Costa Rica case exemplifies a tension that has exerted influence on 
the pursuit of scientific understanding in the field of drug use and its conse-
quences. The government’s desire to declare that drugs (meaning everything 
except the “legal” ones) are harmful has led to intensified pursuit of scientific 
evidence that consuming drugs, especially illegal ones like cocaine and 
heroin, is bad for the consumers. In its highest forms, however, science is not 
designed to fulfill what is essentially a political agenda. In principle, science 
seeks explanations of phenomena based on close, unbiased examination of 
those phenomena. During the latter half of the 20th and early 21st centuries, 
the tension between policy, apparently formulated on the basis of accumu-
lated attitudes, class and racial prejudices, political stratagems, and some 
clinical anecdotes, and science continued. Not surprisingly, policy based on 
bad or misinterpreted information has held sway most of the last 60 years.
Ironically, the politicians who posture as “tough on crime” and “anti-
drug” warriors have had a major influence on the availability of funding 
for scientists seeking to understand drug use. This process has been dis-
cernible as a trend since the inception of the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse (NIDA), the United States’ principal agency that funds studies of 
drug use. The funding available in support of NIDA had a sharp upward 
trajectory since its inception in 1974, beginning with a few million dollars, 
reaching $800 million by 2001, and peaking at $1.06 billion in fiscal year 
2011 (NIDA Appropriations Table 2013). This figure has hovered around 
the $1 billion mark since 2003. In the 1980s and 1990s, when most of the 
major increases in NIDA’s budget occurred, either the sitting president was 
Republican or key Republican members of the House and Senate were in 
position to exert influence on those appropriations. Apparently, they saw 
it as in their interest to give generous appropriations to NIDA in pursuit 
of knowledge about drug use, because that activity gave them credibility 
as anti-drug warriors.

drug users in social science 
❋ 
195 
The irony of this circumstance derives from the fact that the scientists 
who successfully competed for the funds made available by drug warriors 
produced findings that did not necessarily reinforce the drug warriors’ 
ideology of drug abuse. Furthermore, the people who helped NIDA decide 
who received research funding were predominantly scientists whose politi-
cal sympathies often went to the side of liberal Democrats. Consequently, 
the formulators of drug prevention programs and community organization 
programs who had attracted the attention of Nancy Reagan, for example, 
such as Daytop Village in New York, had difficulty getting favorable scores 
from initial review groups at NIDA who found these applicants’ science weak. 
Nevertheless, NIDA kept on receiving increased budgets between 1980 and 
2001. One consistently funded researcher, James Inciardi, despite being a 
lifelong Democrat, sheepishly confessed that he had voted for G.H.W. Bush 
in 1988 in order to assure adequate funding for research on drug use (per-
sonal communication to Bryan Page (1989). His thinking, shared to varying 
degrees by other funded investigators in sociology, anthropology, psychol-
ogy, and economics, perceived the Republicans as a little more mystified and 
frightened by illegal drug users than were the Democrats. The Republicans’ 
fear and bewilderment with regard to these threatening Others seemed to 
produce fatter research budgets than the Democrats’ humanitarian view of 
addicts and addiction. The advent of AIDS and funding to address the epi-
demic among intravenous drug users (IDUs) changed the funding dynamic 
somewhat, although the tone of that time was not so much concern for IDUs’ 
health but rather fear of them serving as an HIV “bridge” to “normal” people.
As apparently generous as Republicans were to drug research, however, 
they were even more so to interdiction and enforcement. Their investment in 
those efforts, including border patrol, Coast Guard, customs, and AWACS, 
plus an extravagant “Plan Colombia” costing billions throughout the 1980s 
and ’90s. The DEA alone received a little over twice as much money as NIDA 
during the budget years of 2008–2012 (Drug Enforcement Agency 2013). 
“Plan Colombia,” a collaboration between the US and Colombian govern-
ments to stop traffic in cocaine and heroin, cost over $500 million per year 
all by itself between 2001 and 2005. Without question, the appropriations 
for interdiction have been far greater than for research on drug abuse and 
one product of that distribution of funds is the demonization of drug users 
as menacing threats that merit the considerable expenditure of tax dollars.
This point aside, it is clear that monies for research on drug use and drug 
users were available on a fairly steep growth curve before 2004. When com-
pared to other institutes in the National Institutes of Health, NIDA between 

196 
❋ 
chapter seven
2000 and 2012 had larger allocations than 14 of the 26 other institutes, some 
of which dealt with much more widespread and serious problems than drug 
abuse. For example, the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcohol-
ism received about half as much money per year as NIDA during that period 
(National Institutes of Health 2013). Given the massive negative impact of 
alcohol on the population of the United States, this disproportion seems 
counterintuitive. The NIDCR, an agency for dental and craneo-facial health 
received only about $400 million in 2012, about 40 percent of what NIDA 
received in the same year. The National Institute on Aging (NIA) receives 
roughly the same allocation that NIDA receives to attend to the scientific 
investigation of aging, the most pervasive health issue of all.
To say that social and behavioral scientists, including both authors of this 
book, have benefitted disproportionately from NIDA’s rapid growth in alloca-
tions would be an understatement. One of the most striking features of socio/
behavioral research is its cost, and because the principal nexus of drug use as 
a health problem is human behavior, the scientific questions about drug use 
that arise from the social/behavioral area are myriad. Much of the research 
conducted under NIDA’s auspices has been, therefore, expensive. Whether 
one is trying to understand patterns of drug-using behavior or attempting 
to prevent uptake of drug use or seeking to improve addiction treatment, 
research on drug use is costly. People being tested, interviewed, or intervened 
with often require extensive contact with professional interviewers, medical 
staff, field recruiters, and participant observers, all of whom require salary 
or wages to perform their research functions. These salaries constitute the 
bulk of very large budgets that successful grant applications contain. A grant 
funded by NIDA to conduct social and/or behavioral research can easily 
cost $200,000 or more per year in direct costs, with indirect costs adding 50 
percent to the grant’s total budget. Grants costing $500,000 per year (direct 
cost) in this context are not uncommon, and often 90 percent or more of 
those costs go to paying the collectors and analysts of data. Research grants 
in which most of the investigation takes place in a laboratory, because staff-
ing needs are not heavy, tend not to cost nearly as much as social/behavioral 
field-based studies.
A successful applicant for NIH funds to conduct a study of drug-using 
behavior can find him- or herself managing large sums of grant funding, 
which enhances the investigator’s status in his/her home institution, and, 
as the study’s results are published, the scientific community at large. The 
availability of drug users in various states—active users in street environ-
ment, active users who are seeking treatment for addiction, recovering users 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
197 
in treatment, or post-treatment recovering users—determines whether or 
not the investigator can propose and conduct the projects that bring money, 
employees, prestige, and academic fame. Social/behavioral scientists, then, 
have considerable incentive to put drug users of all sorts to use as study 
participants. How the investigators write about these participants is highly 
variable in terms of descriptors, analytic conclusions, emergent information, 
and living context. Writers such as Denise Kandel and Judith Brook, who spe-
cialized in cross-sectional and longitudinal surveys that included both drug 
users and non-users, wrote in broad terms of risk and vulnerability over time:
The findings that drug use continued to be a predictor of psychiatric 
disorders—independent of overlapping variance with the subjects’ 
initial psychiatric disorders—adds [sic] considerable important in-
formation. First, it helps to rule out the possibility that the drug use 
was epiphenomenal, in the sense of being a reaction to, or otherwise 
determined by the individual’s psychiatric disorder. It is likely that the 
adverse effects of drug use on psychiatric disorders tend to accumulate 
during the individual’s development (Brook et al. 1998:328–329).
Our study examined predictors of smoking initiation among nonsmok-
ers and progression to daily smoking among smokers over a 1-year 
interval by race/ethnicity in a national longitudinal sample of adoles-
cents (mean age = 15 years). A distinguishing feature of our investiga-
tion was the simultaneous consideration of individual characteristics, 
proximal social influences, and broader contextual factors that index 
both school characteristics and state policies toward cigarette smoking 
as predictors of smoking behaviors within a statistical approach that 
took the hierarchical nature of the data into account. This approach 
identifies potential interdependence among adolescents within schools 
and within states that would be ignored in more traditional single-level 
approaches (Kandel et al. 2004:133).
In both of these brief excerpts, the investigators are using discrete 
variables collected from both drug users and non-users that they hypoth-
esize to be related to each other. Their goal is to predict co-occurrence of 
variables of interest. These uses of drug users contrast in terms of method 
and style with the writings of those whose research focused on developing 
an understanding of why people use drugs, using a participant observation 
methodology:

198 
❋ 
chapter seven
Since he excelled at everything within his reach and had too much 
energy to keep off the streets, it was only a question of time before 
Tito [pseudonym] began abusing the drugs that flood U.S. inner cities. 
Youths embracing street culture often bond with one another around 
drugs. It is almost impossible to escape them (Bourgois 1997:28).
The study participants testified that intense social pressure played no 
more than a moderate part in their decisions to use illegal drugs. Most 
(two-thirds of all illegal drug users) said that their principal reason for 
beginning a specific drug was that their friends made it look attractive 
to them. This evidence does not confirm the notion that unscrupulous 
street denizens lure good children into the world of drug use. Those 
who use are already motivated to do so, and those who give them op-
portunities to use for the first time do not necessarily have anything 
to gain by these invitations (Page 1990:182).
If nothing else this book [a life history of a street drug user] seeks to 
present Tony [one active user] as I have come to know him—a man like 
myself with heartfelt hopes and fears, struggling to make it in a world 
that is often harsh, regularly indifferent, and at times life threatening. 
If Tony as a living, breathing, thinking, and hurting person were kept 
in mind in every policy discussion about what to do about the “drug 
problem,” I suspect that we would come up with far better “solutions” 
than those that guide contemporary actions from the failed War on 
Drugs to the far less than adequate (and far less than systematic) drug 
treatment “system” (Singer 2006:11).
All three of these narratives reflected perspectives on the phenomenon 
of drug use and drug users based on a combination of participant observation 
and in-depth interviewing. Rather than citing an array of discrete contextual 
factors, they relied for their perspective on drug use on a contextual gestalt 
derived from hours spent with drug users by researchers on street corners, 
alleyways, and abandoned buildings in inner city locations.
However these investigators approached the phenomena associated with 
drug use, they all depended at their core on access to people who used drugs. 
In that sense, every kind of social/behavioral scientist who studies drug-use 
etiology, epidemiology, treatment, or prevention has a use for drug users. These 
individuals, equipped with advanced degrees in their disciplinary specialties, 
have built careers based on their access (and ability to gain access) to populations 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
199 
of drug users, win grants to recruit them into studies and get raises and promo-
tions on the basis of the reports published about the users’ entry into drug use, 
treatment for addiction, support of drug-using networks, and inculcation of new 
drug users, among other topics. This statement is not intended to pass judgment 
on the people who study drug users as exploitative users of drug users (carrying 
out such research is our own profession too after all), but rather it emerges from 
an examination of uses in various endeavors. We, as authors, came through 
the process of characterizing other forms of use, to the realization that we are 
included in the group of people who have use for drug users as participants in 
our studies and by extension, providers of wherewithal to further our careers.
In most instances of social/behavioral scientists’ use of drug users, the 
efforts of the researchers were dedicated to discovering principles that could 
help addicts in their struggles with addiction, or prevent young people from 
becoming addicted, or reduce the risk of health consequences of drug use. Some 
studies have resulted in direct benefits to the participants, as in Singer’s work on 
mitigating risk and harm among IDUs in Hartford’s Puerto Rican Community 
(Singer 1993; 1996a) or addressing other health risks of drug users (Grau et al. 
2009, Singer 1996b) or Page and colleagues’ (2006) classification of injection 
implements by measurement of contamination. In the latter study, the field team 
shared the findings from the laboratory that cookers (receptacles for mixing 
drugs with water) had very high levels of HIV contamination (counts in excess 
of 100,000 copies per mm3) as soon as the results were available.
The examples cited above, however, are relatively small in scale and in-
volve relatively few drug users compared to the large-scale studies in schools 
conducted by Gilbert Botvin (Epstein and Botvin 2002; Lynne-Landsman et 
al. 2011) and his colleagues or Howard Kaplan (Liu and Kaplan 2001). Stud-
ies of this nature are very costly because of their scale, and their results are 
featured in reports of the responsible funding agencies. They in fact receive 
much more attention than the smaller studies that use ethnographic meth-
ods to characterize drug use. The quintessential large-scale study in NIDA’s 
portfolio is the perennial series of surveys conducted by Lloyd Johnston and 
colleagues called Monitoring the Future (e.g. Johnston et al. 1985,1986). 
The results of this survey often become fodder for political statements about 
success or failure of national drug policy.
The Bureaucratic Landscape
How social and behavioral science uses drug users has a landscape that was 
shaped in the early 1970s as the National Institutes of Health configured 

200 
❋ 
chapter seven
agencies specializing in alcohol problems, drug abuse, and mental health. 
Most of the bureaucrats in those agencies at the level of project officer or 
higher have advanced background in social/behavioral science, and they 
also have uses for drug users. The studies that populate their portfolios for 
extramural funding focus on drug users who must be identified, character-
ized, and/or treated as part of their investigations. The present array of agen-
cies, including NIAAA, NIDA, and NIMH, can trace its configuration to 
a paper published by Robert Dupont (1974) the first director of NIDA. He 
was faced with an already entrenched institute (NIAAA) that focused on 
alcohol and another (NIMH) that focused on mental health. Furthermore, 
the recognized most dangerous drug, tobacco, was a major focus of the Na-
tional Cancer Institute. In order to be able to discuss alcohol, tobacco, and 
drugs in the same discourse, Dupont chose to refer to all of them at once as 
“substances”:
Alcoholism and drug abuse budgets did not make a significant impact 
until the 1970s. Because of large increases over the last three years, 
substance abuse programs taken together now exceed the Federal 
investment made in all other mental health programs. Initially the 
Federally funded substance abuse programs were components of the 
community mental health centers, but recent experience has con-
vinced most experts in these fields that substance abuse programs 
are sufficiently unique to require separate administrative structures 
(DuPont 1974:1).
In so doing, Dupont asserted the need for specialization in NIH’s ap-
proach to “substances.” Thereafter, all scientific investigation of “substance” 
related questions occurred within the framework that Dupont outlined. After 
2000, NIDA began providing some funding for tobacco research, primarily 
in the social/behavioral area, but this has been one of only a few variations 
from that scientific structure.
Importantly, this domination of drug-research activity is made possible 
by the effectiveness of NIDA officials in presenting their case to the arms of 
government that control funding. That case has involved a massive “Othering” 
of drug users to the Congress and to the general public through self-published 
monographs with titles such as Use of Licit and Illicit Drugs by America’s 
High School Students 1975–1984 (Johnston, O’Malley, and Bachman 1985), 
Drug Abuse among Minority Youth: Methodological Issues and Recent Research 
Advances (De la Rosa and Adrados, eds. 1993), PCP Phencyclidine Abuse: An 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
201 
Appraisal (Petersen and Stillman, eds. 1978), and Young Men and Drugs in 
Manhattan: A Causal Analysis (Clayton and Voss 1981). These and many 
similar publications suggest that NIDA has sought, ever since its inception, 
to use the existence of drug users and addicts in furtherance of its agenda to 
dominate drug research, and establish a kind of hegemony over drug users.5
NIDA has demonstrated particular interest in research on networks 
of informal relations among drug users (cf. Needle et al. 1995). In its 151st 
research monograph, the agency presented studies that reflect the utility 
of tracing networks of informal social relations among drug users. NIDA’s 
support of this kind of research, with an orientation toward gaining access 
to and intervening in the populations of interest to change their behavior, 
sounds like a parallel with the British Colonial Administration’s support of 
Evans-Pritchard’s studies of the Nuer and Dinka in southern Sudan—study 
of warlike and unruly tribes under British colonial rule to understand better 
how to “pacify” them. The literature on users of illegal drugs (e.g., Agar 1973; 
True et al. 1980) suggested that networks among the individuals who rely 
on friends and acquaintances to identify sources and supplies of drugs could 
serve as a conduit for identifying active drug users in order to recruit them into 
studies or otherwise learn about their drug-using behavior. Ongoing access to 
these networks was also seen by NIDA officials as a potentially valuable way 
of keeping up with emerging trends in the use of illegal drugs. Subsequent 
to Monograph #151, further research funded by NIDA (e.g., Koester et al. 
2005; Needle et al. 1998) investigated the connections between networks 
and infection by HIV and Hepatitis C. Although the concept of studying 
networks started out resembling the British Colonial Authority’s target-
ing of the Nuer in its desire to bring a difficult-to-govern group under heel, 
most of its applications since 1995 have focused on preventing the spread of 
blood-borne pathogens. Evans-Pritchard was commissioned by the Colonial 
Authority to learn as much as he could about the structure of Nuer society 
and the motivations within that structure for going to war. His inquiries led 
to an insight about conflict in the context of segmented patrilineages that 
proved somewhat useful to the Colonial Authority (Evans-Pritchard 1940). 
Where Evans-Pritchard’s studies clearly accrued power to the State (in this 
case, the British Empire) through improved governing of the Nuer, studies 
by Trotter, Needle, Koester, and others, led to improvement of health, even 
though that improvement involved people considered marginal to the State.
None of the preceding assertions would presume to accuse NIDA of 
having bad intentions toward drug users and addicts. NIDA’s interest in drug 
users’ personal networks, for example, stems from a strong desire to prevent 

202 
❋ 
chapter seven
the torment of drug abuse in vulnerable populations, or at least prevent some 
of the most severe consequences. With regard to HIV/AIDS, knowledge of 
interpersonal networks can identify key individuals whose position in the 
network makes them ideal participants in intensive interventions to prevent 
the spread of HIV among peers who self-inject drugs. Efforts to study net-
works among drug users can identify the pathways for preventing drug use 
and/or referring users to treatment. Nevertheless, there is more than a taint 
of hegemonic thinking in the desire to use network studies to find a remedy 
for the problem of drug use in the United States. Understanding of drug us-
ers and their heterogeneity, as delineated by scores of ethnographic studies, 
guides us toward a rejection of categories of social distinction such as “drug 
users,” or “addicts,” or “alcoholics,” as an implicitly hegemonic set of terms. 
Drug users, by definition, use drugs. But some of them also are movie stars, 
sports celebrities, business executives, social scientists, or stay-at-home par-
ents. Drug use only trumps other social categorizations for some people and 
not others. Moreover, as noted above, drug use research does not necessarily 
support our dominant cultural models of drug users or of long-term drug 
effects. In making this case, social scientists, in fact, actively seek to counter 
some of the abusive uses of drug users that they witness in society.
Ironically, the steady gains in understanding how people become drug 
users and the process of addiction as a health phenomenon have tended to 
blur the lines of demarcation among institutes in NIH. Illegal drug users often 
commit their most serious crimes under the influence of alcohol (Goldstein 
et al. 1990). Cocaine users often resort to alcohol to mitigate the “crash” as-
sociated with cocaine withdrawal (Page and Míguez-Burbano 1999). Drug 
users and alcoholics commonly smoke tobacco in conjunction with their use 
of the other drugs (Singer et al. 2006). What the bureaucratic structure of 
NIH went to great pains to separate does not remain separate in the real-life 
encounters between social/behavioral scientists and humans engaged in the 
behaviors of interest. In the process of training young scientists to conduct 
funded studies of drug-using behavior, we have repeatedly seen difficulties in 
conceptualizing proposals and deciding on their most appropriate destina-
tions, because the already-recognized relations among alcohol, tobacco, and 
other drugs are very enmeshed in the field, but the funding agencies prefer to 
keep other drugs separate from alcohol. In terms of the study of populations, 
investigators are asked to keep alcoholics separate from other addicts. It is 
possible to step across these bureaucratic boundaries, and the phenomenon 
of the AIDS pandemic represents a good example of this process, with agen-
cies including NIMH, NIDA, NIAAA, and NIAID cooperating and sharing 

drug users in social science 
❋ 
203 
resources in furtherance of understanding and restricting the spread of HIV 
infection (see Page and Singer 2010: 70-85).
Conclusion
The processes that formed the relationship between social and behavioral 
science and the populations that consume drugs inevitably led to some forms 
of hegemonic thinking, regardless of the noble intentions of the social and 
behavioral scientists. This kind of thinking appears to be less prevalent among 
those researchers who conduct street-level ethnography than among those 
who organize longitudinal surveys. Both varieties of research are important 
in understanding content and prevalence of the behaviors that trouble and 
fascinate us. The first generation of research that combined ethnographic 
and survey approaches to studying drug users had considerable difficulty 
in achieving mutually acceptable findings (Page and Singer 2010), but in-
vestigators have, under the general rubric of “mixed methods” (e.g., Heckel 
and Moore 2009; Boeri et al. 2008; Singer et al. 2005) achieved increasingly 
seamless marriages of the two approaches. This trend appears to us to be 
the wave of the future in social-science research about drug use. Readers of 
research results will no longer be satisfied with purely qualitative studies that 
cannot comment on prevalence of the characterized behaviors, or cannot ad-
equately characterize the behaviors that they quantify. This kind of research 
will have built into it the perspective that individual human beings, with their 
contradictions, idiosyncrasies, strengths and frailties inhabit the categories 
”drug user,” or “addict.” We hope that this kind of perspective moves all of 
us—writers, reporters, politicians, bureaucrats, movie-makers, and social/
behavioral scientists—to use caution when we speak of these categories.
Notes
1  See Furst (2006:1) for an explanation of his using this gloss rather than the people’s 
own Wixáritari term to denote themselves.
2  See Carter (1980) for a full description of the study design. Given the primitive state 
of computers in 1973, the study team opted for a matched pair-design to determine the 
effects of long-term marihuana smoking. A design involving comparison of populations 
of users and nonusers would be appropriate nowadays, using statistical controls, rather 
than matching users and nonusers for key variables.
3  We include Nahas (1973) under popular press because his books about marihuana sold 
fairly well in the early 1970s. He had a pretense of science, as he was an anesthesiologist. 
Nahas did not, however, gain acceptance in the endeavor of determining the actual effects 

204 
❋ 
chapter seven
of marihuana. He failed repeatedly to win funding from NIH review panels, based on 
his faulty, agenda-laden science.
4  Of course, none of the scientists “desired” a specific result from their studies, but the 
original funding impetus had identified the government’s agenda in these studies—to 
find as many as possible negative effects of smoking marihuana. The story circulating in 
Washington at the time of this initiative was that John Mitchell, in answer to Richard 
Nixon’s distress over the recommendations of the Shafer Report (Shafer et al. 1972), 
suggested that conducting studies in countries where people had been using Cannabis 
for a long time would yield convincing negative effects, which in turn would justify 
keeping marihuana criminalized.
5  This agenda received attention in a paper presented by Page at the AAA meetings in 
1993: “To Own the Streets: Implications of Approaches to Studying Drug Use in Dade 
County, Florida.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Anthropo-
logical Association, November 17–21, 1993, Washington, DC.

205 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 205–218. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
Conclusion
From the Making and Using of the Useless to 
Social Integration
I 
n his introduction to Polish journalist Ryszard Kapuściþski’s book The 
Other, Neal Ascherson (2008:8), observes that “The perception of Other-
ness, leading to the treatment of the Other as less than human, has been an 
intra-European habit for millennia, even though it has only just been given a 
title.” Taking this idea a step further, it is probable that the perception of Oth-
erness is a requirement of maltreatment of fellow human beings; the greater 
the injury inflicted the more demonic the image of the Other. The making of 
Otherness as social process, as this suggests, is packed with coveting, guilt, 
and excuse. Our capacity to see fellow human beings as an Other, quite dif-
ferent from “us” or “our” people (with a built-in privileged sense of being the 
good people, the right and proper people, the intelligent and well-mannered 
people, the civil and civilized people, the only real people), holds within it 
the seeds of the grosses forms of inhumanity, as well as diverse varieties of 
everyday insult, indignity, and insensitivity. Othering, which constitutes a 
form of social exclusion, is often characterized, by symbolic violence and the 
naturalization of disadvantage, exploitation and structural, if not outright 
physical, violence. While it may begin with callousness, Othering can end 
in holocaust, ethnic cleansing, and genocide.
Kapuściþski, who, influenced by the ideas of Polish anthropologist 
Bronislaw Malinowski (1922), including the notion that “to judge something, 
you have to be there,” spent his career among Others outside of his native 
land, outside of Europe, and in, from the Euro-centric perspective, the deni-
grated regions of the world among people of color. In his travels, Kapuściþski 
(2008:14) found that each of the individuals he met around the world, “like 
the rest of us, . . . has his joys and sorrows, his good and bad days; he is glad 
of his successes, does not like to be hungry and does not like it when he is 
cold; he feels pain as suffering and misery, and good fortune as satisfying and 
fulfilling.” Additionally he stressed, “We treat the Other above all as a stranger 
(yet the Other doesn’t have to mean a stranger), as the representative of a 
separate species, but the most crucial point is that we treat him as a threat” 

206 
❋ 
conclusion
(Kapuściþski 2008:58). In other words, Kapuściþski experienced the com-
mon humanity, the recognized sense of shared experience, and mutual fear 
and desire in such encounters, a capacity that runs counter to the tendency 
to construct Others, and especially to engage in Othering with adverse and 
painful consequences. As Sabelli (2013:19) points out,
Kapuściński clearly presents the concept of separation as an unjust, 
outdated approach to encountering otherness. He believes that we 
must look for ways of cooperation due to the evolving, multicultural 
character of today‘s world.
While Kapuściński has been criticized for essentialism, especially with 
reference to his book The Shadow of the Sun, his writings reflect a commit-
ment to obtaining firsthand experience rather than relying on prevailing 
stereotypes. Unfortunately, Ascherson emphasizes, in his empathic approach, 
Kapuściński swam upstream; glumly the flow of human judgments and ac-
tions often have been in the opposite direction, as drug users well know from 
personal everyday experience as outsiders.
Kapuściński’s effort to avoid negative Othering was rooted in his affec-
tion for the work of philosopher Emmanuel Levinas. Levinas’s life overlapped 
with one of the most grotesque Otherings of history, the Holocaust. Observes 
Kapuściński (2008:34), “It is . . . indifference towards the Other, which creates 
an atmosphere capable in particular circumstance of leading to Auschwitz. . . .” 
Otherness, in short, is of consequence, it is the first step on the road that can 
lead to the kind of massive destruction of human life that characterized the 
crooked pathway of the 20th century, a period overpopulated with efforts to 
segment humanity, mislabel some as less than or other than fully human, or 
not completely sane, or not having any worth or reason for being and hence 
authorizing their elimination in some fashion. In the case of drug abusers, it 
has been used to justify and fund an elaborate system of social control that 
has made the United States the incarceration capital of the world, with four 
times the historic average penal population of the period before the 1970s 
and seven times greater than in Western Europe. More precisely, it has been 
used to rationalize why one-third of African American males under the age 
of 40 who did not complete high-school are currently locked away behind 
bars. In America, drug-abuse Othering and mass incarceration have gone 
hand-in-hand.
As we have tried to show in this book, Othering does not just happen 
automatically or naturally, it must be manufactured and reinforced across the 

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
207 
institutions and communication vehicles within society. To have impact, it 
must be reproduced and become embedded in the weft and warp of the fabric 
of society. In this way, it is naturalized and its social construction disguised. 
A common strategy in this process is the blaming of disparity on the depre-
cated. In the case of drug users, victim-blaming is routine and enshrined in 
public policy. Rather than drug abuse being seen and responded to socially 
as a faulty coping response to discrimination, abuse, or other forms of struc-
tural or symbolic violence, as has been suggested by a considerable body of 
research, it is popularly portrayed (despite its notable social patterning) as an 
act of individual choice, personal deviance, lack of moral direction, or other 
deficit of character and punished accordingly.
Additionally, we have suggested, Othering is purposeful; it has practical 
benefits. Specifically, it serves interests and rewards its perpetrators. Other-
ing, in short, has its advocates, its operators, its benefactors. On whatever 
avenues of distinction Otherness flows, be they real or invented, grand or 
miniscule, or even nonexistent (prior to the Othering), or have as their foun-
dation cultural, language, behavioral, ethic, regional, social, or other asserted 
or actual difference, Otherness is not caused by dissimilarity. Humans can 
live with and even celebrate differences and distinctions. Hence, Othering 
as a social process need not invent dissimilarity; rather it must assign dis-
similitude a meaningful social value. This is achieved by ordering groups of 
people hierarchically and “continuously producing and re-creating symboli-
cally marked ‘cultural’ [or other] distinctions among them” (Wolf 1982:380).
Reproduction across time and place, as Saïd (1978) stressed, entails 
identifying and magnifying the alleged weaknesses of the Other, or even a 
largely imaginary construction of such deficits. In no small measure, Othering 
also requires forgetting, not seeing, projection, and invention. Conversely, it 
involves an opposite set of elevations of self that are no less imaginary, embel-
lished, blinded, and colored by advantageous misremembering. As noted in 
the Introduction, these tasks are achieved through the manipulation of words 
(i.e., drugspeak and the language of oppression) (Gordon 1994, Bosmajian 
1983) and images (i.e., circulating visual texts) (Adrian 2003). And they 
are enforced through policies and actions (e.g., incarceration, shake-downs, 
street sweeps) that tie image to oppression.
Othering often entails a self-fulfilling prophecy. That which is claimed 
is created. Rejection by others, for example, is known to cause chronic 
stress leading in some individuals to the adoption of coping strategies that 
involve withdrawal and isolation (Link et al. 1997). In this sense, the act of 
Othering, and what it portends for the object of ridicule and abuse affirms 

208 
❋ 
conclusion
the “soundness” of discriminatory assessment. In the words of Cornel West 
(1993), Othering inflicts “ontological wounds” on the ostracized, leading to 
low self-esteem and self-derogation as it is internalized and accepted as valid. 
As ethnographic researchers, we often encounter very harsh assessments of 
drug users among drug-using populations. Internalization, the end state of 
symbolic violence, is fostered by the images and messages of express by the 
mass media, the courts, the entertainment sector, and other institutions in 
society.
As we have seen, the Othering process is never uniform nor without 
sites of contradiction; rather, Othering structures tend to be burdened, in 
ways small and large, by pieces that do not fit the larger destructive pattern. 
The existence of contradiction or even resistance, unfortunately, does not 
necessarily lead to halting the damaging process of Othering. For example, 
even though racists may have fond feelings for individual denigrated Oth-
ers in their lives, this does not block them from holding racist sentiments 
about particular groups or engaging in acts of racial oppression; similarly, 
the McCarthy-era witch hunt had its vehement critics, and McCarthy him-
self was not without remarkable contradiction, but people were publically 
Othered and suffered nonetheless. In the case of drug abusers, it is evident 
that there are literary, cinematic, social scientific, and other sources that 
present alternative understandings that call into question the assertions that 
undergird stigmatization and demonization. This book, of course, has that 
very intention. The alternative view of drug users stresses several key points:
1. Cultural messages about drug users in the media reflect a simplified 
worldview of binary opposites composed of the healthy mainstream and its 
malignant deviants.
2. Public pronouncements about drug users are routinely sensationalized 
and rely, as Harry Anslinger did in his testimony before the US Congress in 
support of the Marihuana Tax Act and in his “Marijuana, Assassin of Youth” 
article, on the cherry picking of extreme cases to typify general patterns of 
drug-user behavior (Anslinger et al. 1937).
3. Empirical studies of drug users, like those carried out by Carl Hart 
(2013) and numerous other medical and social science researchers, pro-
duce findings that challenge conventional stereotypes about drug users but 
evidence-based understandings rarely inform public policy on drug use.
4. The public is systematically and purposefully misinformed by the me-
dia, other mainstream institutions, and the public statements of politicians 
and media pundits about drug users and their behavior.

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
209 
5. Moral panics about new drug scourges sweeping the land or particular 
vulnerable populations, are revealed, as time passes, to occur independent 
of actual increases in drug use or strong evidence of significant increases in 
drug-related threats to health and social welfare.
6. Social crusades targeting particular groups of drug users commonly 
reflect points of social apprehension and serve to enhance the social control 
and exploitation of subordinated ethnic, class, gender, or other groups char-
acterized as a threat to the status quo (which although presented as normal 
and natural is more appropriately typified as the prevailing structure of 
privilege and social inequality).
The assessment offered in previous chapters is intended to identify some 
of the ways and cultural places drug users become Others. But the goal is 
not simply to understand the calculated making of the useless but to imagine 
and bring into being an alternative to the contemporary pariah status and 
social misuse of drug users. Our argument is that the starting points for 
addressing the adverse sides of drug use lies in embracing the Levinasian 
de-demonization of drug users and their re-incorporation into a more just 
mainstream society through the investment of resources and the mobiliza-
tion of human compassion, harm reduction, treatment, and linkage with 
the resources for sustainable lives. The benefits to society of this dramatic 
transition, we believe, include an end to the ineffective (at least in terms of 
official goals) but enormously costly War on Drugs, re-acquisition of for-
feited rights and freedoms, enhanced social equality, and diminished (real 
and imagined) threat from drug consumers. It is not the degree to which we 
marginalize and condemn drug users that we address “our drug problem” 
but, on the contrary, the degree to which we avoid such behaviors that we 
create the social space for achieving this goal. Several studies come to mind 
that support this assertion.
With funding from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Singer and 
colleagues (Dushay et al. 2001) implemented a comparison of two HIV risk 
reduction intervention models for drug users. One model (which existed in 
two ethnically specific versions and was implemented by ethnically matched 
NGOs) was designed, in conjunction with community members, to be cultur-
ally targeted to African American and Puerto Rican drug users. The other 
model was ethnically neutral and was implemented through a drug-treatment 
program. Findings of the study showed that contrary to our expectations 
the ethnically targeted models were not particularly more effective with 
their respective ethnic populations than was the ethnically neutral model 

210 
❋ 
conclusion
with these same populations. Why? Review of these programs in operation 
suggested that the ethnically neutral model placed a significant degree of 
emphasis on sensitivity, remaining non-judgmental, and communicating 
authentic caring for their project clients. This kind of treatment, the inver-
sion of Othering (which can certainly be found at some drug-treatment 
programs), had a powerful effect: it convinced long-term drug users to change 
their behaviors to a degree that matched paying keen attention to their eth-
nic identity in reducing HIV infection risk. In the second study, Singer and 
co-workers (2001) collected the narratives drug users told each other in the 
course of daily life acquiring and using drugs. Known on the street as “war 
stories,” these tales cover various topics, such as “learning the ropes” of drug 
use or making “unexpected valuable discoveries” (e.g., of lost cash or drugs). 
Among the themes found in this repertoire is one that might be labeled “acts 
of surprising kindness,” in which the storyteller relays an occasion in which 
someone treated them personally with far greater compassion than they 
had learned to ever expect on the streets. These events touched their hearts 
and became part of their cherished and, when the opportunity arose, shared 
memories. Suggested by these two studies—indeed unanticipated findings 
of them—is the degree to which people—all people—cherish kindness and 
respond positively to it. Othering, not surprisingly, has the opposite effects 
and can, if the opportunity arises, as seen in war zones, produce escalating 
exchanges of Othering and atrocity.
Although often labeled and treated as useless, if not as incarnations of 
evil or as threatening burdens on society, drug users, in fact, serve many uses: 
for others. These include the following:
In the labor pool, drug users constitute a reserve army of easily expend-
able labor, filling niches in daily labor markets, construction, environmental 
clean-up and other areas of needed but poorly remunerated and socially deval-
ued toil. In need of immediate cash, they are willing to take jobs with minimal 
wages and few worker protections. As Alysse Waterston (1993:241) pointed 
out, “As a special category, addicts are politically weak and disconnected 
from organized labor, thereby becoming a source of cheap, easily expendable 
labor.” The existence of this group drags down wages for everyone, because 
at each layer of the labor force employers are able to lower the wages paid 
to layers above it (because other workers are said to be ready and willing to 
take their jobs for lower wages and fewer benefits). Given their involvement 
in illicit activities, drug users are less likely to contact the government about 
labor abuses or unsafe working conditions. Moreover, common media images 
of drug users as people of color promote divisive racist stereotypes that help 

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
211 
create a controlled and internally fragmented labor force, with limited class 
consciousness and reduced ability to challenge actions by company owners 
(e.g., getting legislatures to pass so-called “right to work” laws).
Beginning in the mid-1980s, the United States began outsourcing both 
prison construction and the operation of prisons. The first private prison 
contract was awarded in 1984 to Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), 
which remains the largest for-profit prison company in the country. Seek-
ing locations that would not reject the presence of a prison, private prisons 
often selected communities hard hit by corporate flight and the globalized 
economy. Heavily subsidized by taxpayer money even before receiving pub-
lic contracts, private companies were able to build prisons throughout the 
country. For every convicted individual sent to one of its prisons, the CCA 
or other private prison operator receives approximately $122 a day. Based 
on this revenue flow, the CCA reported $1.7 billion in gross income in 2011, 
about half from government contracts (Carlsen 2012). But this was a time of 
falling crime rates. The real challenge for private prisons became filling all 
the cells in their newly erected prisons with convicted offenders. To drum up 
business and coveted profits, the private prison industry turned to lobbying 
in order to win stiff drug and immigration policies. The CCA 2010 Annual 
Report straightforwardly lays out the need for criminalization by warning 
its investors:
The demand for our facilities could be adversely affected by the relax-
ation of enforcement efforts, leniency in conviction or parole standards 
and sentencing practices or through the decriminalization of certain 
activities that are currently proscribed by our criminal laws. For in-
stance, any changes with respect to drugs and controlled substances 
or illegal immigration could affect the number of persons arrested, 
convicted and sentenced, thereby potentially reducing demand for 
correctional facilities to house them (quoted in Riggs 2012).
To insure a steady stream of new prisoners, while doing little if anything 
to boost public safety, private prison companies over the last decade spent 
over $45 million lobbying law makers. Whenever new bills were introduced 
that increased police power to detain suspected criminals, criminalized 
behaviors (such as adding new drugs to those that are illegal to sell or use) 
or extending prison sentences, private prisons could be found making sig-
nificant campaign contributions to office holders. For example, lobbyists 
for the private prison industry pushed for passage of “three strikes” and 

212 
❋ 
conclusion
“truth-in-sentencing” laws across the country. Both of these types of laws 
adversely impact drug users. Some of the tactics employed by private prison 
companies, or individuals affiliated with them, to gain influence or acquire 
new contracts or inmate flows included: “the use of questionable financial 
incentives; benefitting from the ‘revolving door’ between public and private 
corrections; extensive lobbying; lavish campaign contributions; and efforts 
to control information” (ACLU 2011). As a result of such labors, as the ACLU 
(2011) points out, “the crippling cost of imprisoning increasing numbers of 
Americans saddles government budgets with rising debt and exacerbates the 
current fiscal crises confronting states across the nation.”
A set of citizens that may be readily mobilized to support campaigns for new 
laws or new prisons are prison employees. Prison guard unions have a strong 
vested economic interest in keeping people incarcerated in high numbers. In 
2008, the California Correctional Peace Officers Association, for example, 
spent $1 million to defeat a measure that would have reduced sentences and 
parole times for nonviolent drug offenders while emphasizing drug treatment 
over imprisonment (Fang 2012). Additionally, police departments through-
out the country have become dependent on federal drug war grants to fully 
finance their budget. To keep this money flowing, police unions see it in their 
best interests to lobby against drug 
legalization. For example, the suc-
cessful campaign in 2010 against 
Proposition 19 in California, a ballot 
measure to legalize marihuana, was 
coordinated by a police-union lobby-
ist. These efforts helped insure that 
the police department would collect 
tens of millions in federal marihuana-
eradication grants. Federal lobbying 
disclosures reveal that other police 
union lobbyists around the country 
also pushed for stiffer penalties for 
marihuana-related crimes. Prisoners 
arrested on drug charges wind up as 
part of an incarcerated labor pool for 
private corporations (e.g., in assem-
bly) for very low wages.
Once behind bars, in private or 
public prisons, drug users become 
Cannabis Legalization marcher

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
213 
available to corporate employers who seek to profit from the super-exploitation 
of an incarcerated and disenfranchised workforce. They are barred from union-
izing and from striking for higher wages, are silenced from protesting working 
conditions, and are paid bargain-basement salaries (Chien et al. 2000). Rather 
than the employer, the state pays the cost of sustaining this work force (e.g., 
food, clothes, medical care, shelter, health insurance, paid sick days or vaca-
tion time). In this system, prison guards provide unpaid (by the corporations) 
muscle to control the prison labor force. Prison factories, where inmates are 
contracted out to major corporations, operate as multibillion-dollar industries 
throughout the state and federal prison systems. In the agricultural sector, 
prison labor has become a critical labor source. In a particularly noteworthy 
re-writing of the rationale for the prison-industrial complex, it has been justi-
fied on the grounds that it provides inmates an opportunity to build their skills 
and improve their chances of post-incarceration employment.
In recent years, civil asset forfeiture laws have been passed that empower 
the seizures of private property even without charging anyone with violation 
of a law, and hence without having to prove illegal behavior beyond a reason-
able doubt. Seized property, such as fast boats used to smuggle illegal drugs, 
is presumed to be illicitly gained or illicitly used, and can be confiscated 
by a police department or other government body based solely on hearsay 
evidence, such as a tip supplied by a government informant who stands to 
gain up to 25 percent of the forfeited assets. The same applies to a drug user’s 
car or any other assets. Even medical marihuana dispensaries in California 
have been raided, their assets seized (e.g., ATM machines) and liquidated 
for cash flow to law enforcement. Confiscation may occur without an arrest 
because it is defined legally as an arrest of property, rather than an arrest of a 
person, and the necessity of proving a party guilty is not required. Numerous 
police, sheriff, and related law-enforcement departments around the coun-
try have embraced forfeiture laws to significantly boost their departmental 
budgets and budget-related perks. A study involving 90 interviews with 
law-enforcement officials, prosecutors, and forfeiture attorneys around the 
nation (Burnett 2008) suggested that police agencies that reported they were 
seizing property or drug money to help finance the War on Drugs appeared 
to be mainly doing so to help increase their own departmental budgets. Also, 
existing evidence shows that some officers use their badge to take cash from 
drivers stopped on the road for alleged drug-related suspicions without any 
evidence. Confiscation laws have turned the War on Drugs into a War for 
Funding by police and other law enforcement departments with a possibility 
of collapse of public oversight of these institutions.

214 
❋ 
conclusion
Through various drug-money-laundering schemes—from those impli-
cating banks to those involving the purchase of items (e.g., jewels or other 
durable goods) that are then sold to acquire “clean” money—the profits made 
from drug purchases help fund various sectors of the formal economy. As 
part of this hidden world of finance, global banking institutions like Bank of 
America, JP Morgan Chase & Co, Citigroup, and Wachovia among numer-
ous others avoid compliance with American anti-money laundering policies. 
In 2010, for example, Wachovia (now Wells Fargo) orchestrated a “deferred 
prosecution” agreement with the US government and agreed to pay a $160 
million fine following exposure of the bank’s heavy involvement (to the 
tune of $378.4 billion over several years) in a massive money-laundering 
scheme. Not a single banker involved in the illegal operation was prosecuted 
for playing a key role in the illicit drug trade even though money laundering 
is absolutely vital to this global underground business. Similarly, in 2012, 
the US Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-
fairs released a detailed report itemizing a catalog of “criminal” behavior 
by London-based HSBC Bank, a company with a long history of citations 
for its weak anti–money-laundering policies. The list of offenses committed 
by HSBC—a corporation that boasts on its website of having a firm “com-
mitment to complying with the spirit and letter of all laws and regulations 
wherever we conduct our business”—includes washing over $881 billion for 
the Mexican Sinaloa Drug Cartel and for the Norte del Valle Drug Cartel in 
Colombia. Again, the US Department of Justice decided to cut a deal with 
HSBC involving a record $1.9 billion fine, which amounts to only a tiny share 
of the bank’s annual profits of $22 billion. No company officials directly 
involved in illegal activities were required to spend a moment behind bars. 
According to Assistant US Attorney General Lanny Bauer:
Had the U.S. authorities decided to press criminal charges, HSBC 
would almost certainly have lost its banking license in the U.S., the 
future of the institution would have been under threat and the entire 
banking system would have been destabilized (Murphy 2013).
Meanwhile, small-time drug dealers and drug users routinely go to prison 
for long sentences, the communities they come from are destabilized, and 
the issue of why the poor are punished but the wealthy are not disappears 
from public discussion.
Moreover, purchases made to facilitate drug transport (from airline 
tickets, to commodities used to hide drugs in, to fast boats) adds additional 

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
215 
input to the formal economy. Luxury expenditures by the kingpins of the drug 
trade, individuals who may live lavish lifestyles rich in material possessions, 
add further cash inflow to the formal economy. The ultimate importance of 
drug money in the formal economy was suggested in 2009 when Antonio 
Maria Costa, then head of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime Drugs, reported 
that billions of drug dollars were used to keep the financial system afloat at 
the height of the global economic crisis. Claimed Costa
In many instances, the money from drugs was the only liquid invest-
ment capital. In the second half of 2008, liquidity was the banking 
system’s main problem and hence liquid capital became an important 
factor. . . . Inter-bank loans were funded by money that originated from 
the drugs trade and other illegal activities. . . . There were signs that 
some banks were rescued that way. . . . That was the moment . . . when 
the system was basically paralysed because of the unwillingness of 
banks to lend money to one another (Syal 2009).
Even legal drug profits are impacted by the purchases of drug abusers, as 
people with an alcohol dependency or addiction are an important source of 
revenue for the alcohol industry (as are illegal drinkers like underage youth). 
In a report entitled “The Commercial Value of Underage and Pathological 
Drinking to the Alcohol Industry,” the Columbia University’s Center on 
Addiction and Substance Abuse (2006) estimated that, at a minimum, 
pathological drinkers and underage drinkers accounted for approximately 38 
percent of alcohol-industry sales, which amounts to $50 billion, an amount 
that calls into question the sincerity of the frequent industry “drink respon-
sibly” pronouncements in their advertisements and webpages.
At the bottom of the economic structure of society, drug users, through 
their involvement in burglaries, break-ins, muggings, and shop-lifting, and 
the sale of ill-gotten goods in the discounted informal economy (e.g., street 
sales of stolen items, sales to small stores of shop-lifted items, sale of frozen 
meat taken from supermarkets to small restaurants), promote a kind of trickle-
down economics and a degree of wealth redistribution. Goods reach the poor, 
in part, because some drug users are always on the prowl for salable items 
that can be converted rapidly into drug money. Indeed, some have speculated 
that were it not for this underground redistribution of wealth the material 
quality of the lives of the poor would be even below current abysmal levels, 
although, of course, they too are subject to being stripped of their material 
possessions as drugs and goods flow through the street economy.

216 
❋ 
conclusion
Another theme of this book is that the world of drug use, real or imagined, 
or some blending of the two has become a reservoir of culturally salient im-
ages, ideas, and settings harvested as a source of entertainment for everyone 
else. Diverse entertainment venues offer viewers and readers vicarious escape 
into murky, drug-driven domains of fast-paced adventure, intrigue, human 
suffering, comedic relief, conflict and intense aggression. Books, movies, 
videos, video games, music, and television dramas that feature drug users 
provide actors, writers, producers, directors, production company CEOs, 
game designers, and a host of others not only with a means of livelihood but 
in some cases considerable wealth. Filmmaker Matthew Cooke has even di-
rected a how-to documentary entitled “How to Make Money Selling Drugs.” 
While the ultimate—if not at first evident—purpose of the film is to call into 
question stereotypical depictions of drug users and to point out the reasons 
why demonization tactics are counterproductive, it is part of an educational 
industry that also feeds on the world of drug users.
Further, we argue in this book that the drug trade and international 
drug tracking is used to front initiatives designed to achieve national geo-
political and geo-economic goals (Boville 2004) in cases in which direct 
action would be illegal or embarrassing, or would not be popular with vot-
ers. Attacking drug use can be a convenient cover for the achievement of 
objectives that have nothing to do with drugs, such as transferring military 
technology to another country to combat the drug trade (armaments that 
are then used to suppress social unrest and keep a “friendly” government 
in power). Claims of government involvement in drug trafficking were used 
to accuse the Chavez regime in Venezuela and the Castro Regime in Cuba 
of engaging in illicit drug activities, depicting these governments of illegal 
and immoral behavior, often with little or limited evidence, while ignoring 
blatant violations by friendly governments. Attacking drug producers and 
distributors has provided cover for other geopolitical stratagems as well. 
In the mid-1970s, for example, the country of Burma was the recipient of 
US State Department International Narcotics Control funding ostensibly 
to eliminate narcotics production. House Select Committee on Narcotics 
investigators, however, found “convincing evidence that [the] . . . antinar-
cotics campaign is a form of economic warfare aimed at subjugation of . . . 
Minority Peoples (U.S. Congress 1977:225). In short, drugs often have 
served as a Trojan Horse for the accomplishment of other aspirations. Ex-
ploiting drug use and production in the service of advancing international 
power is an example of what Chomsky (1988:169) has referred to as “the 
reality that must be effaced.”

from using the useless to social integration 
❋ 
217 
Targeting drug users as prime disruptors of urban social harmony caus-
ing our streets and homes to feel unsafe, our sense of community to be a 
pale reflection of earlier times, and our inner cities to become eyesores that 
should be avoided by suburbanites, moreover, helps to render less visible 
structural factors that have driven urban transformation, such as the role 
the transnational globalization of capital has played in robbing cities of jobs 
with descent salaries. For example, hidden by efforts to indict drug users as 
the ultimate cause of multiple social problems are factory closings and their 
shift from right to unionize to “right-to-work” states, the further movement 
of production out of US cities to less expensive, less safety-focused overseas 
locations, rampant buy-outs and mergers that eliminate jobs and the controls 
imposed by competition, downsizing of a skilled and better paid work force, 
increasing employment of American workers in low-paying and part time jobs 
with limited benefits, shrinking of corporate public giving, and widening gaps 
between the salaries and life styles of CEOs and their employees. It is of note 
that when adjusted for inflation, the hourly wages of Wal-Mart employees’ 
real salaries and standard of living have decreased steadily over time while the 
Walton family’s wealth has increased to more than $100 billion, making them 
one of the wealthiest families in the United States (Wal-Mart Watch 2012).
More generally, drug users are a convenient scapegoat when things of 
various sorts go wrong or even when other threats to society emerge (e.g., 
efforts begun by the federal government in 2002 with advertisements during 
the Superbowl to link drug users and terrorism). Suggestions that a com-
paratively high rate of drug use among the poor may, in part, be a response 
to structurally imposed hyperghettoization, structural violence, and social 
suffering caused by the detachment of capital from social responsibility to 
society is dismissed as “class warfare” (Singer 2008).
Even in death, drug users are useful. Cadavers used in medical-school 
training and in certain kinds of research are procured through established 
state systems from the pool of bodies of deceased individuals who are not 
claimed by family members or otherwise provided with means of burial. 
Drug users, under current social conditions, often die poor and they die often 
(i.e., have a high mortality rate). We have been struck in our own research 
by the number of deaths in our samples of drug-using study participants. 
Their bodies, however, provide material for the gross anatomy lessons of 
doctors in training, doctors who primarily will be providing their services 
to people—whatever their consumption patterns—not deemed by society 
to be drug abusers.

218 
❋ 
conclusion
Given all the uses of the useless made possible by the Othering of drug 
users, the question must be raised: if drug user Others did not exist, would 
we have to invent them? Indeed, isn’t this just what has happened? Based on 
many years of working with active, not-in-treatment consumers of mind-
altering drugs, as well as being steady observers of the imagery of and at-
titudes about these individuals in the various cultural venues examined in 
this book (and the consequences of these on people’s lives), our objective is 
to fracture imagined conception of drug users. Drug users, after all, are not 
really a distinct population or group of different people from us; they are our 
friends, relatives, colleagues, neighbors, our police officers and other first 
responders, our sports heroes, our warriors, our entertainers, our students, 
and our children.

219 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 219–242. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
References
Abel, Ernest. 1999. “Was the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Recognized by the Greeks and 
Romans?” Alcohol and Alcoholism 34(6):868–872.
————. 2001. “Gin Lane: Did Hogarth Know About Fetal Alcohol Syndrome?” Alcohol 
and Alcoholism 36(2):131–134.
Abramson, Hilary.1998. “Big Alcohol’s Smokescreen.” Newsletter of the Marin Institute for 
the Prevention of Alcohol & Other Drug Problems 13:1.
ACLU. 2011, “Banking on Bondage: Private Prisons and Mass Incarceration.” Available 
online at: http://www.aclu.org/prisoners-rights/banking-bondage-private-prisons-
and-mass-incarceration.
Addams, Jane.1911. Twenty Years at Hull-House. New York: MacMillan.
Adrian, Bonnie. 2003. Framing the Bride: Globalizing Beauty and Romance in Taiwan’s Bridal 
Industry. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Agar, Michael. 1973. Ripping and Running: A Formal Ethnography of Urban Heroin Addicts. 
New York: Academic Press.
————. 1977. “Ethnography on the Street and in the Joint.” In R. S. Weppner, ed., Street 
Ethnography: Selected Studies of Crime and Drug Use in Natural Settings, pp.143–156. 
Beverly Hills: Sage.
Aiken, Kristina. 2012. “Victorian Women on Drugs, Part 2: Female Writers.” Points: The Blog 
of the Alcohol and Drugs History Society. Available on line at: http://pointsadhsblog.
wordpress.com/2012/04/11/victorian-women-on-drugs-part-2-female-writers/.
Alcindor, Yamiche. 2012. “States Consider Drug Testing Welfare Recipients.” USA 
Today. Available online at: http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/nation/sto-
ry/2012-02-17/welfare-food-stamps-drug-testing-laws/53306804/1.
Alexander, Michelle. 2012. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblind-
ness. Reprint Edition. New York: New Press.
Anderson, Margaret, and Patricia Collins, eds. 2012. Race, Class, & Gender: An Anthology. 
Independence, KY: Centage Learning.
Anonymous. 1845? The Temperance Movement. The University of London: Goldsmith’s 
Library. http://find.galegroup.com/mome/infomark.do?&contentSet=MOMEArt
icles&type=multipage&tabID=T001&prodId=MOME&docId=U106531100&sou
rce=gale&userGroupName=miami_richter&version=1.0&docLevel=FASCIMILE.
Anselmi, William, and Kosta Gouliamos. 1998. Elusive Margins: Consuming Media, Ethnicity, 
and Culture. Toronto, Canada: Guernica
Anslinger, Harry. 1937. “The Need for Narcotics Education.” National Broadcasting Network, 
Anslinger Papers, Box 1, File 7. Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania Historical 
Collections and Labor Archives, Pattee Library.
————. 1937. “Statement of H. J. Anslinger to the U.S. Congress.” Available online at: 
http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/hemp/taxact/anslng1.htm. Accessed June 
14, 2013.
Anslinger, Harry, and Courtney Ryley Cooper. 1937. “Marijuana: Assassin of Youth.” The 
American Magazine. Anslinger Papers, Box 1, File 11. Pennsylvania State University, 
Pennsylvania Historical Collections and Labor Archives, Pattee Library.

220 
❋ 
references
Anytown Housing Authority. 2000. “One Strike and You’re Out Policy.” Available online 
at: www.wahaonline.org/One_Strike_And_You_re_Out_Policy.docShare.
Armentano, Paul. 2010. “Incarceration Nation—Marijuana Arrests For Year 2009 Near 
Record High.” Available online at: http://blog.norml.org/2010/09/15/incarceration-
nation-marijuana-arrests-for-year-2009-near-record-high/.
Arsenault, Chris. 2012. “Mexican Official: CIA ’Manages’ Drug Trade.” Al Jazeera. 
Available online at: http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2012/07/ 
2012721152715628181.html.
Ascherson, Neal. 2008. “Introduction.” In Ryszard Kapuściński,. The Other. London: Verso.
Baer, Hans, Merrill Singer, and Ida Susser. 2013. Medical Anthropology and the World System: 
A Critical Perspective. Third Edition. New York City: Bergin and Garvey.
Baker, Frank, and Frank Isaacs. 1973. “Attitudes of Community Caregivers Toward Drug 
Users.” The International Journal of the Addictions 8(2): 243–252.
Ball, Philip. 2006. The Devil’s Doctor: Paracelsus and the World of Renaissance Magic and 
Science. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Bandstra, Emmalee, Connie Morrow, Anthony James, Veronica Accornero, and Peter Fried. 
2001. “Longitudinal Investigation of Task Persistence and Sustained Attention in Chil-
dren with Prenatal Cocaine Exposure.” Neurotoxicology and Teratology 23:545–559.
Bass, L. and Kane-Williams, E. 1993. “Stereotype or Reality: Another Look at Alcohol and 
Drug Use among African American Children.” Public Health Reports 108 (Supple-
ment 1): 78–84.
Baudelaire, Charles. 1971 [1857]. The Flowers of Evil. New York: The Heritage Press.
————. 2004 [1885]. The Poem of Hashish. New York: Kessinger Publishing Company.
Becker, Howard. 1953. “Becoming a Marihuana User.” American Journal of Sociology. 
59:235–242.
————. 1955. “Marihuana Use and Social Control,” Social Problems 3:35–44.
————. 1963. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance. New York: The Free Press.
Behr, Edward. 2011. Prohibition: Thirteen Years That Changed the World. New York: Arcade 
Publishing
Benavidez, Edward. 2013. Getting High: The Effects of Drugs. Bloomington, IN: Xlibris 
Corporation.
Benet, Sula. 1975. “Early Diffusion and Folk Uses of Hemp.” In Vera Rubin, ed. Cannabis 
and Culture, 39–50. The Hague: Mouton.
Bennett, Linda and Stephen Wolin. 1990. “Family Culture and Alcohol Transmission.” In 
Lorraine Collins, Kenneth Leonard, and John Searles, eds, Alcohol and the Family: 
Research and Clinical Perspectives, 194–219. New York: The Guilford Press.
Bepko, Claudia 1991. “Introduction.” In Claudia Bepko, ed. Feminism and Addiction,, 1–6. 
Binghamton, NY: The Haworth Press.
Besharov, Douglas. 1989. “Crack Babies: The Worst Threat Is Mom Herself.” Washington 
Post, 1, August 6.
Bingswanger, Ingrid. 2010. “Chronic Medical Disease among Jail and Prison Inmates.” Cor-
rections.com. Available on line at: http://www.corrections.com/news/article/26014-
chronic-medical-diseases-among-jail-and-prison-inmates.
Blackman, Shane. 2004. Chilling Out: The Cultural Politics of Substance Consumption, Youth 
and Drug Policy. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
————. 2010. “Drug War Politics: Governing Culture through Prohibition, Intoxicants 
as Customary Practice and the Challenge of Drug Normalization.” Sociology Compass 
4(10): 841–855.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
221 
Blake, John. 2012. “Return of the ‘Welfare Queen,’” CNN Politics. Available online at: http://
www.cnn.com/2012/01/23/politics/weflare-queen/index.html.
Blumenson, E., and E. Nilsen. 1998. “Policing for Profit: The Drug War’s Hidden Economic 
Agenda.” University of Chicago Law Review 65:35–114.
Boardman, Jason, Brian Finch, Christopher Ellison, David Williams, and James Jackson. 
2001. “Neighborhood Disadvantage, Stress, and Drug Use among Adults.” Journal of 
Health and Social Behavior 42:151–165.
Boeri, Miriam W., C. E. Sterk, M. Bahora, and K. Elifson. 2008. “Poly-drug use among 
ecstasy users: Separate, synergistic, and indiscriminate patterns.” Journal of Drug Is-
sues 38 (2):517–541.
Bonnie, Richard, and Charles Whitebread. 1970. “The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree of 
Knowledge: An Inquiry into the Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition.” 
Virginia Law Review 56(6): 971–1203.
Booth, Martin. 2003. Cannabis: A History. New York: Thomas Dunne Books, St. Martin’s 
Press.
Bosmajian, Haig. 1983. The Language of Oppression. Lanham, MD: University Press of 
America.
Bourgois, Philippe. 1997. “Overachievement in the Underground Economy: The Life Story 
of a Puerto Rican Stick-up Artist in East Harlem.” Free Inquiry in Creative Sociology 
25(1):23–32.
————.1998. “Just Another Night in a Shooting Gallery.” Theory, Culture and Society 
15(2): 37–66.
————. 2003a. “Disciplining Addictions: The Bio-politics of Methadone and Heroin in 
the United States.” Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 24(2): 165–195.
————. 2003b. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Bovard, James. 1999. “Prison Sentences of the Politically Connected: Justice Has a Double 
Standard.” Playboy. Online at: http://www.jimbovard.com/Bovard_Playboy_1997_
Prison_Sentences_of_Politically_Connected.htm. Accessed June 11, 2013.
Bovard, James. 2008. “McCain’s Forgotten Drug Fix.” Online at: http://jimbovard.com/
blog/2008/02/23/mccains-forgotten-drug-fix/. Accessed June 11, 2013
Boville, Belan. 2004. The Cocaine War in Context: Drugs and Politics. New York: Algora 
Publishing.
Boyd, Susan C. 2008. Hooked: Drug War Films in Britain, Canada, and the United States. 
New York: Routledge.
Brissett-Chapman, S. 1998. “Homeless African-American Women and Their Families: Cop-
ing with Depression, Drugs, and Trauma.” In C. Wetherington and A. Roman, eds., 
503–516. Drug Addiction Research and the Health of Women. Rockville, MD: National 
Institutes of Health, US Department of Health and Human Services.
Brook, J., Cohen, P., and Brook, E. 1998. “Longitudinal Study of Co-occurring Psychiatric 
Disorders and Substance Use.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry 37(3): 322–330.
Brown, Claude. 1965. Manchild in the Promised Land. New York: Touchstone.
Buchanan, David, Susan Shaw, Amy Ford, and Merrill Singer. 2003. “Empirical Science 
Meets Moral Panic: An Analysis of the Politics of Needle Exchange.” Journal of Public 
Health Policy 24(3/4): 427–444.
Bunce, R. 1979. “The political economy of California’s wine industry. Manuscript prepared 
for the International Study of Alcohol Control Experiences Project.” Addiction 

222 
❋ 
references
Research Foundation, Toronto.Burchard, R. 1992. “Coca Chewing and Diet.” Current 
Anthropology 33:1–24.
Burchard, Roderick 1976. “Myths of the Sacred Leaf: Ecological Perspective on Coca 
and Peasant Biocultural Adaptation in Peru.” PhD dissertation, Indiana University.
Burnett, John. 2008. “Sheriff under Scrutiny over Drug Money Spending.” National 
Public Radio. Available online at: http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.
php?storyId=91638378.
Burns, Ken and Lynn Novick. 2011. Prohibition.
Burroughs, William. 1953. Junkie. New York: Ace Books.
————. 1959. Naked Lunch. New York: Grove Press.
————. 1961. The Soft Machine. Paris: Olympia Press.
————.1962. The Ticket that Exploded. Paris: Olympia Press.
————. 1964. Nova Express. New York: Grove Press.
Burston, B., D. Jones, and P. Roberson-Saunders. 1995. “Drug Use and African Americans: 
Myth versus Reality.” Journal of Alcohol and Drug Education 40:19–39.
Burton, Robert. 2000 [1621]. The Anatomy of Melancholy. Oxford, England: Clarendon 
Press; New York: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, Nancy. 2000. Using Women: Gender, Drug Policy, and Social Justice. New York: 
Routledge.
Carlsen, Laura. 2012. “How Private Prisons Profit from the Criminalization of Immigrants.” 
Counterpunch, December 28–30. Available online at: http://www.counterpunch.
org/2012/12/12/how-private-prisons-profit-from-the-criminalization-of-immi-
grants/.
Carroll, Rebecca. 2004. “Under the Influence: Harry Anslinger’s Role in Shaping America’s 
Drug Policy.” In Jonathon Erlen and Joseph Spillane, eds. Federal Drug Control: The 
Evolution of Policy and Practice, 61. Binghamton, NY: Pharmaceutical Products Press.
Carter, Henry. 1933. The English Temperance Movement: A Study in Objectives. London: 
The Epworth Press.
Carter, William. 1977. “Ritual, the Aymara, and the Role of Alcohol in Human Society.” 
In B. M. DuToit, ed. Drugs, Rituals, and Altered States of Consciousness, 101–110. Rot-
terdam: Balkema.
Carter, William, and Mauricio P. Mamani. 1986. Coca en Bolivia. La Paz: Editorial Juventud.
Carter, William, Wilmer Coggins, and Paul Doughty, eds. 1980. Cannabis in Costa Rica. 
Philadelphia: ISHI Press.
Carter, William, J. Bryan Page, Paul Doughty, and Wilmer Coggins. 1980. “Marijuana in 
Costa Rica.” In William Carter, Paul Doughty, and Wilmer Coggins, eds. Cannabis in 
Costa Rica. 12–40. Philadelphia: ISHI Press.
Chambliss, William. 1994. “Don’t Confuse me with Facts: Clinton ‘Just Says No.’” New 
Left Review (March/April). Online at: http://newleftreview.org/I/204/william-j-
chambliss-don-t-confuse-me-with-facts-clinton-just-says-no.
Chen, C., M. Dufour, and H. Yi. 2003. “Alcohol Consumption Among Young Adults Ages 
18–24 in the United States: Results From the 2001-2002 NESARC Survey.” Alcohol: 
Research and Health 28(4): 269–280.
Chesney-Lind, Meda, and Lisa Pakso. 2004. The Female Offender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chien, Arnold, Margaret Connors, and Kenneth Fox. 2000. “The Drug War in Perspective.” 
In Jim Kim, Joyce Millen, Alec Irwin, and John Gershman. 293–327. Monroe, ME: 
Common Courage Press.
Chiricos, T. 1996. “Moral Panics as Ideology: Drugs, Violence, Race and Punishment in 

REFERENCES 
❋ 
223 
America.” In M. Lynch and E. Britt Patterson, eds. Race with Prejudice: Race and Justice 
in America. 19–48. New York: Harrow and Heston.
Chomsky, Noam. 1988. The Culture of Terrorism. Boston: South End Press.
Christie, Agatha. 1924. Poirot Investigates. New York: Penguin Group.
Clayton, Richard R., and Harwin L. Voss. 1981. Young Men and Drugs in Manhattan: A 
Causal Analysis. Monogaph #39. Rockville, MD: NIDA.
Cloward, Richard, and Lloyd Ohlin. 1960. Delinquency and Opportunity: A Theory of De-
linquent Gangs. New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
CNN.com. 2005. “New Orleans Mayor Lashes Out at Feds.” Available at http://www.cnn.
com/2005/US/09/02/katrina.nagin/index.html.
Cohen, Albert. 1955. Delinquent Boys: The Culture of the Gang. New York: The Free Press 
of Glencoe.
Cohen, Stanley. 1972. Folk Devils and Moral Panics. London: MacGibbon and Kee Ltd.
Columbia University’s Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse. 2006. The Commercial 
Value of Underage and Pathological Drinking to the Alcohol Industry. New York: CASA.
Community Epidemiology Work Group. 2011. Epidemiologic Trends in Drug Abuse, Volume 
II. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Cook, Christopher C.H. 2006. Alcohol, Addiction, and Christian Ethics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Cooke, Janet. 1980. “Jimmy’s World.” Washington Post, September 28, A1. http://www.
uncp.edu/home/canada/work/markport/lit/litjour/spg2002/cooke.htm.
Coomber, Ross, ed. 1994. Drugs and Drug Use in Society: A Critical Reader. Dartford, UK: 
Greenwich University Press.
Coomber, Ross, Craig Morris, and Laura Dunn. 2000. “How the Media Do Drugs: Qual-
ity Control and the Reporting of Drug Issues in the UK Print Media.” International 
Journal of Drug Policy 11:217–225.
Correction Association of New York. 2011. Treatment Behind Bars: Substance Abuse 
Treatment in New York State Prisons, 2007-2010. New York: Correctional Associa-
tion of New York.
Courtwright, David. 2001. Forces of Habit: Drugs and the Making of the Modern World. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Courtwright, David, Joseph, Herman and Des Jarlais, Don. 1989. Addicts who survived: 
An oral history of narcotic use in American, 1923–1965. Knoxville, TN: University of 
Tennessee Press.
Covington, J. 1997. “The Social Construction of the Minority Drug Problem.” Social Justice 
24:117–147.
Cressey, Donald R. 1962. “Role Theory, Differential Association, and Compulsive Crimes,” 
In Arnold M. Rose, ed. Human Behavior and Social Processes, An Interactionist Approach. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co. pp. 444–467.
Crowley, Aleister. 1922. Diary of a Drug Fiend. New York: Ordo Templi Orientis.
CSAP/ICAP Joint Working Group on Terminology. 1998. “Working Papers.” Online 
at: http://www.icap.org/portals/0/download/all_pdfs/Other_Publications/
CSAP_ICAP_Terminology.pdf.
Dallas Morning News. 2009. Editorial: Drug Users Share the Blame in officer’s death. 
Available at http://nl.newsbank.com/nl-search/we/Archives?p_product=DM&p_
theme=dm&p_action=search&p_maxdocs=200&s_hidethis=no&p_field_label-0= 
Author&p_field_label-1=title&p_bool_label-1=AND&p_text_label-1=Drug%20
Users%20Share%20Blame%20in%20Officer’s%20Death&p_field_label-2= 

224 
❋ 
references
Section&p_bool_label-2=AND&s_dispstring=headline(Drug%20Users%20Share 
%20Blame%20in%20Officer’s%20Death)%20AND%20date(01/10/2008%20to%20
01/10/2009)&p_field_date-0=YMD_date&p_params_date-0=date:B,E&p_text_
date-0=01/10/2008%20to%2001/10/2009)&p_perpage=10&p_sort=YMD_
date:D&xcal_useweights=no
Daly, Kathleen. 1998. “Gender, Crime, and Criminology.” In The Handbook of Crimes and 
Justice, Michael Tonrey, ed., 85–108. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Davenport-Hines, Richard. 2002. The Pursuit of Oblivion: A Global History of Narcotics. 
New York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Davidson, J. 1999. “The Drug War’s Color Line: Black Leaders Shift Stances on Sentenc-
ing.” The Nation 269(8): 42–43.
Davies, Paul, Howard Iams, and Kalman Rupp. 2000. “The Effect of Welfare Reform on 
SSA’s Disability Programs: Design of Policy Evaluation and Early Evidence.” Social 
Security Bulletin 63(1): 3–11.
Davis, J. Francis. 1992. “Power of Images: Creating the Myths of Our Time.” Media and 
Values 57(Winter). Available online at: http://www.medialit.org/reading-room/
power-images-creating-myths-our-time. Accessed April 30, 2011.
DAWN—Drug Abuse Warning Network. 2009. “Emergency Presentations for Drug Re-
lated Problems.” Available at: https://dawninfo.samhsa.gov/default.asp.
De La Rosa, Mario R., and Juan-Luis Recio Adrados, 1993. Drug Abuse among Minority 
Youth: Methodological Issues and Recent Research Advances. NIDA Monograph 130. 
Rockville, MD: NIDA.
de Quincey, Thomas. 1822. Confessions of an English Opium Eater. New York: F. M. Lupton.
DEA. 2011. The DEA Position on Marijuana. Washington, DC: DEA.
Diala, C., C. Muntaner, and C. Walrath. 2004. “Gender, Occupational, and Socioeconomic 
Correlates of Alcohol and Drug Abuse among U.S. Rural, Metropolitan, and Urban 
Residents.” American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 30(2), 409–428.
Dingelstad, D., R. Gosden, B. Martin, and N. Vakas. 1996. “The Social Construction of 
Drug Debates.” Social Science and Medicine 43: 1829–1838.
Dobkin de Rios, Marlene. 1970. “Banisteriopsis Used in Witchcraft and Folk Healing in 
Iquitos, Peru.” Economic Botany 24(35): 296–300.
Dobkin de Rios, Marlene.1971. “Ayahuasca, the Healing Vine.” International Journal of 
Social Psychiatry 17(4): 256–269.
Dobkin de Rios, Marlene.1972a. “Curing with Ayahuasca in a Peruvian Amazon Slum.” In 
M. J. Harner, ed. Hallucinogens and Shamanism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dobkin de Rios, Marlene. 1972b. Visionary Vine: Psychedelic Healing in the Peruvian Amazon. 
San Francisco: Chandler Publishing Company.
Dobkin de Rios, Marlene 2005. “Interview with Guillermo Arrevalo, a Shipibo Urban Sha-
man by Roger Rumrrill.” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 37 (2): 203–207.
Doctor, Ronald, and Nicholas Sieveking. 1973.” A Comparison of Attitudes among Heroin 
Addicts, Policemen, Marijuana Users, and Nondrug Users about the Drug Addict.” 
The International Journal of the Addictions 8(4): 691–699.
Donnelly, Taylor. 2012. “‘Just One Step Away’: The Mad Other on the Contemporary 
Stage.” Otherness: Essays and Studies 2(2):1–28.
Douglas, Susan, and Meredith Michaels. 2004. The Mommy Myth: The Idealization of Moth-
erhood and How It Has Undermined All Women. New York: Free Press.
Downes, D. 1977. “The Drug Addict as Folk Devil.” In P. Rock, eds. Drugs and Politics. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
225 
Drake, St. C., and Horace Cayton. 1970. Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern 
City, Vol. 2. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Dreher, M. C. 1982. Working Men and Ganja: Marihuana Use in Rural Jamaica. Philadel-
phia: ISHI Press.
Drug Enforcement Administration. 2009. “Think Drug Use Doesn’t Hurt anyone? Think 
Twice.” Available at http://www.justthinktwice.com/costs/.
Drug Enforcement Agency. 2013. “Appropriations Table.” Available at http://www.justice.
gov/dea/about/history/staffing.shtml.
Drug Policy Alliance. 2002. “Police, Drugs and Corruption: A Review of Recent Drug-
War Related Scandals in Five States and Puerto Rico.” Available online at: https://
www.google.com/search?sourceid=navclient&aq=&oq=Police%2C+Drugs+and+ 
Corruption%3A+A+Review+of++Recent+Drug-War+related+Scandals+in+Five+ 
States+and+Puerto+&ie=UTF-8&rlz=1T4GGLL_enUS400US400&q=Police%2C+ 
Drugs+and+Corruption%3A+A+Review+of++Recent+Drug-War+related+Scanda
ls+in+Five+States+and+Puerto+&gs_l=hp. . . .0.0.0.1765. . . .. . . . . . .0.
Drug Policy Alliance Network. 2005. “Drug Users Demonized by Hurricane Coverage.” 
Available at http://www.drugpolicy.org/news/090905hurricane.cfm.
Dudley, Robert. 2002. “Fermenting Fruit and the Historical Ecology of Ethanol Ingestion: 
Is Alcoholism in Modern Humans an Evolutionary Hangover?” Addiction 97:381–388.
Dugsdale, D. 2011. “Delirium Tremens. Medline Plus.” Available online at: http://www.
nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000766.htm.
DuPont, Robert. 1974. “The Evolving Federal Substance Abuse Organization.” The American 
Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 1(1):1–9.
Dushay, Robert, Merrill Singer, Margaret Weeks, Lucy Rohena, and Richard Gruber. 2001. 
“Lowering HIV Risk Among Ethnic Minority Drug Users: Comparing Culturally 
Targeted Intervention to a Standard Intervention.” American Journal of Drug and 
Alcohol Abuse 27(3): 504–524.
Edelman, Murray. 1988. Constructing the Political Spectacle. Chicago: University of 
Chicago.
Edgar Allan Poe Society. 2009. “Edgar Allan Poe, Drugs and Alcohol.” Available on line at: 
http://www.eapoe.org/geninfo/poealchl.htm.
Ehrman, Mark. 1995. “Heroin Chic.” Playboy 42:5.
Eisenhower, Dwight. 1953. “The Change for Peace” speech. Available online at: http://
www.edchange.org/multicultural/speeches/ike_chance_for_peace.html.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth. 1980. The Printing Press as an Agent of Change. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Elliot, Deni. 2011. “Ethical Responsibilities and the Power of Pictures.” In Susan Ross 
and Park Lestor, eds. Images that Injure: Pictorial Stereotypes in the Media, 9–19. Santa 
Barbara: Praeger.
Engels, Friedrich. 1845 and 1972 [2001]. The Condition of the Working Class in England. 
London: Electric Books.
Ensminger, M., J. Anthony, and J. McCord. 1997. “The Inner City and Drug Use: Initial 
Findings from an Epidemiological Study.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 48:175–184.
Epstein, Jennifer, and Gilbert Botvin, 2002. “The Moderating Role of Risk-Taking Tendency 
and Refusal Assertiveness on Social Influences in Alcohol Use among Inner-City 
Adolescents.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol 63 (4): 456–459.
Erwin, William E., Dianne B. Williams, and William A. Speir. 1998. “Delirium Tremens.” 
Southern Medical Journal 91(5): 425–532.

226 
❋ 
references
Evans-Pritchard, Edward. 1940. The Nuer, a Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Politi-
cal Institutions of a Nilotic People. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ezard, John. 2000. “The Story of Dr Jekyll, Mr Hyde and Fanny, the Angry Wife Who 
Burned the First Draft.” The Guardian. Available on line at http://www.guardian.
co.uk/uk/2000/oct/25/books.booksnews.
Fang, Lee. 2012. “The Top Five Special Interest Groups Lobbying to Keep Marijuana 
Illegal.” Republic Report, April 20. Available online at: http://www.republicreport.
org/2012/marijuana-lobby-illegal/.
Feiling, Tom. 2010. Cocaine Nation: How The White Trade Took Over The World. New 
York: Pegasus.
Feldman, Harvey, and Michael Aldrich. 1990. “The role of ethnography in substance abuse 
research and public policy: Historical precedent and future prospects.” In Elizabeth 
Lambert, ed., The Collection and interpretation of Data from Hidden Populations. Pp. 
13–30. National Institute on Drug Abuse Research.
Fine, Michelle. 1994. “Working the Hyphens: Reinvention Self and Other in Qualitative 
Research.” In Handbook of Qualitative Research. Norman Denzin and Yvonna Lincoln, 
eds, pp. 70-82. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
FitzGerald, Edward. 2011. The Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám. New York: Dover Publications.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. 1993. The Great Gatsby. Ware, Herts, UK: Wordsworth Editions.
Fleming, Alice, M. 1975. Alcohol: The Delightful Poison. New York: Dell Publishing 
Company.
Fox, Tracy Gordon. 2002. “Death at Hotel Hooker.” Available online at: http://www.
courant.com/news/specials/hc-2heroin.artoct21,0,5402919.story?page=1. Accessed 
5/4/2011.
Fox, Tracy Gordon, and Bill Leukhardt. 2002a. “Small Town, Big-Time Heroin Use.” The 
Hartford Courant, October 20. Available online at: http://www.courant.com/news/
special-reports/hc-1heroin.artoct20,0,842029.story?page=1. Accessed May 1, 2011.
Fox, Tracy Gordon, and Bill Leukhardt. 2002b. “Can’t Somebody Do Something?” 
Available online at: http://www.courant.com/news/special-reports/hc-5heroin.
artoct24,0,5298485.story?page=1. Accessed May 4, 2011.
Foxcroft, Louise. 2007. The Making of Addiction: The ‘Use and Abuse’ of Opium in Nineteenth-
Century Britain. Hampshire, UK: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Freeth, Tony. 1985. “Racism on Television: Bringing the Colonies Back Home.” In Phil 
Cohen and Carl Gardner, Carl, eds., It Ain’t Half Racist, Mum—Fighting Racism in the 
Media. London: Comedia Publishing Group.
Friedman, Samuel. 1998. “The Political Economy of Drug-user Scapegoating—and the 
Philosophy and Politics of Resistence.” Drugs: Education and Policy 5(1):15–32.
Fuller Crystal, Vlahova, David, Ompad, Danielle, Shah, Nina, Arria, Amelia and Strath-
dee, Steffanie. 2002. “High-risk behaviors associated with transition from illicit 
non-injection to injection drug use among adolescent and young adult drug users: a 
case-control study.” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 2(1):189-198.
Furnas, Joseph C. 1965. The Life and Times of the Late Demon Rum. New York: G.P. Put-
nam’s Sons.
Furst, Peter. 1972. “To Find Our Life: Peyote among the Huichol Indians in Mexico.” In 
P. T. Furst, ed., Flesh of the Gods, 136–184. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Furst, Peter. 2006. Rock Crystals & Peyote Dreams: Explorations in the Huichol Universe. Salt 
Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Galea, S., J. Ahern, M. Tracy, and D. Vlahov. 2007. “Neighborhood Income and Income 

REFERENCES 
❋ 
227 
Distribution and the Use of Cigarettes, Alcohol, and Marijuana.” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine 32(6): 195–202.
Genberg, Becky, Stephen Gange, Vivian Go, David Celentano, Kirk, Carl Gregory, and 
Shruti Mehta,2011. “The Effect of Neighborhood Deprivation and Residential Re-
location on Long-term Injection Cessation among Injection Drug Users (IDUs) in 
Baltimore, Maryland.” Addiction 106(11): 1966–1974.
Gilens, Martin. 1999. Why Americans Hate Welfare: Race, Media and the Politics of Antipoverty 
Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gilliam, Franklin 1999. “The ‘Welfare Queen’ Experiment: How Viewers React to Images 
of African-American Mothers on Welfare.” Nieman Reports. Cambridge, MA: The 
Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University 53(2):49–52.
Gladwell, Malcolm. 2005. Blink: The Power of Thinking without Thinking. New York: Little, 
Brown, and Company.
Global Commission on Drug Policy. 2011. “Report of the Global Commission on Drug 
Policy.” Availble on line at: globalcommissionondrugs.org
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Goldstein, P., B. Spunt, T. Miller, and P. Bellucci. 1990. “Ethnographic Field Stations.” In 
E. Lambert, ed, The Collection and Interpretation of Data from Hidden Populations, 
Monograph 98, 80–95. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse Research.
Goode, Erich. 1984. Drugs in American Society. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Goodman, Jordan. 1993. Tobacco in History: The Cultures of Dependence. New York: Rout-
ledge.
Gordon, Diana. 1994. “Drugspeak and the Clinton Administration: A Lost Opportunity 
for Drug Policy Reform.” Social Justice 21(3): 30–37.
Gossip, Michael. 1996. Living with Drugs. London: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Government Accountability Office. 2012. Growing Inmate Crowding Negatively Affects 
Inmates, Staff and Infrastructure. Washington, D.C.: GAO.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Grant, Igor, J. Atkinson, Gouaux Hampton, Ben Barth, and Wilsey Barth. 2012. “Medical 
Marijuana: Clearing Away the Smoke.” The Open Neurology Journal 6:18–25.
Grau, Lauretta, T. Green, Merrill Singer, Ricky Bluthenthal, Patricia Marshall, and Robert 
Heimer. 2009. “Getting the Message Straight: Effects of a Brief Hepatitis Prevention In-
tervention among Injection Drug Users.” Harm Reduction Journal (on-line journal) 6:36.
Green, E. 1914. “Psychoses among Negroes—A Comparative Study.” Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease 41: 697–708.
Gregory, Steven. 1996. “Race, Rubbish, and Resistance: Empowering Difference in Com-
munity Politics.” Cultural Anthropology 8(1): 24–48.
Grivetti, L. 1995. “Wine: The Food with Two Faces.” In P. E. McGovern, S. J. Fleming, and 
S. J. Katz, eds, The Origins and Ancient History of Wine, 9–22. Luxembourg: Gordon 
& Breach, Publishers.
Gross, Dave. 1995. “A Brief Biography of Fitz Hugh Ludlow.” Online at: http://users.
lycaeum.org/~sputnik/Ludlow/THE/Biography/biography.html. Accessed June 
13, 2013.
Grotenhermen, Franjo, Gero Leson, Gunter Berghaus, Olaf H. Drummer, Hans-Peter Kru-
ger, Marie Longo, Herbert Moskowitz, Bud Perrine, Johannes G. Ramaekers, Alison 
Smiley, and Rob Tunbridge. 2007. “Developing Limits for Driving under Cannabis.” 
Addiction. 102(12): 1910–1917.

228 
❋ 
references
Gusfield, Joseph. 1963. Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the American Temperance 
Movement. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Gusfield, Joseph. 1996. Contested Meanings: The Construction of Alcohol Problems. Madison, 
WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Gustason, Kaaryn. 2012. Cheating Welfare: Public Assistance and the Criminalization of 
Poverty. New York City: New York University Press.
Halnon, Karen. 2009. “Heroin Chic, Poor Chic, and Beyond Deconstructionist Distrac-
tion.” Consumers, Commodities and Consumption 11(1): 1–3.
Harner, Michael J. 1973a. “The Role of Hallucinogenic Plants in European Witchcraft.” In 
Michael J. Harner, Ed. Hallucinogens and Shamanism, pp. 15–27. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Harner, Michael J. 1973b. “The Sound of Rushing Water.” In Michael J. Harner, Ed. Hal-
lucinogens and Shamanism, pp. 28–27. New York: Oxford University Press.
Harner, Michael J. 1990. The Way of the Shaman. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Harrington, Thomas. 2011. Statement for the Record before the Senate Caucus on In-
ternational Narcotics Control. United States Senate. Online at: http://www.justice.
gov/dea/pr/speeches-testimony/2012-2009/110525_ca_security_cooperation.
pdf. Accessed August 8, 2013.
Hart, Carl. 2013. High Price: A Neuroscientist’s Journey of Self-Discovery That Chal-
lenges Everything You Know About Drugs and Society. New York: HarperCollins 
Publishers.
Heath, Dwight. 1958. “Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba.” Quarterly Journal of 
Studies on Alcohol 19: 491–508.
Heath, Dwight. 1976. “Anthropological Perspectives on Alcohol: An Historical Review.” In 
M. Everett, ed. Cross-Cultural Approaches to the Study of Alcohol: An Interdisciplinary 
Approach. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
Heath, Dwight. 1991. “Continuity and Change in Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba.” 
In D. Pittman and H. White, eds, Society, Culture, and Drinking Patterns Reexamined, 
78–84. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Center of Alcohol Studies.
Heath, Dwight. 2004 Camba (Bolivia) “Drinking Patterns: Changes in Alcohol Use, An-
thropology, and Research Perspectives.” In Drug Use and Cultural Contexts: Beyond 
the West, ed. R. Coomber and N. South, 119–136. London: Free Association Books.
Heckel, E. A., and C. Dea Moore. 2009. “Community-Based Participatory Research: The 
College as the Focal Community.” Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work 14 (1): 45–61.
Hedrick, J. 1994. Harriet Beecher Stowe: A Life. New York: Oxford University Press.
Helmer, John. 1983. “Blacks and Cocaine.” In Drugs and Society, Maureen Kelleher, Bruce 
MacMurray, and Thomas Shapiro, eds., 14–29. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
Hickman, Timothy. 2009. Heroin Chic: The Visual Culture of Narcotics Addiction. Third 
Text 16(2):119–136.
Hillman, D. 2008. The Chemical Muse: Drug Use and the Roots of Western Civilization. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Hodgins, D., N. Ed-Guebaly, and J. Addington. 1997. “Treatment of Substance Abusers: 
Single or Mixed Gender Programs?” Addiction 92(7): 805–812.
Hopfer, Christian, Khuri, Elizabeth, Crowley, Thomas, and Hooks, Sabrina. 2002. “Ado-
lescent heroin use: a review of the descriptive and treatment literature.” Journal of 
Substance Abuse Treatment 23(3):321-237.Hopkins, Ellen. 2003. Crank. New York: 
Simon and Schuster.
Huff, Darrell. 1954. How to Lie with Statistics. New York: W. W. Norton.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
229 
Huffman, Michael. 2003. “Animal Self-Medication and Ethno-medicine: Exploration of 
Medicinal Properties of Plants.” Proceedings of the Nutritional Society 62:371–381.
Huisenga, Sarah. 2011. “Newt Gringrich: Poor Kids Don’t Work ‘unless it’s illegal.’” 
CBS News. December 1. Available online at: http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-
503544_162-57335118-503544/newt-gingrich-poor-kids-dont-work-unless-its-
illegal/.
Human Rights Watch. 2009. Decades of Disparity: Drug Arrests and Race in the United States. 
New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2012. Sex Workers at Risk: Condoms as Evidence of Prostitution in 
Four US Cities. Washington: Human Rights Watch.
Hutchinson, Asa. 2002. “Narco-Terror: The International Connection Between Drugs 
and Terror.” Speech delivered at the Heritage Foundation: Kathryn and Shelby Cul-
lom Davis Institute for International Studies, Washington, D.C. Available online at: 
http://www.justice.gov/dea/pr/speeches-testimony/2002/s040202p.html. Accessed 
August 8, 2013.
Humphries, Drew. 1999. Crack Mothers: Pregnancy, Drugs, and the Media. Columbus: Ohio 
State University Press.
Humphries, Drew, J. Dawson, V. Cronin, P. Keating, C.Wisniewski, and J. Eichfeld. 1992. 
“Mothers and Children, Drugs and Crack: Reactions to Maternal Drug Dependency.” In 
The Criminalization of a Woman’s Body. C. Feldman, ed. New York: The Haworth Press.
Huxley, Aldous. 1932. Brave New World. London: Chatto and Windus.
Huxley, Aldous. 1954. The Doors of Perception. London: Chatto and Windus.
Iiyama, Patti, Setsuko, Nishi, and Johnson Bruce. 1976. Drug Use and Abuse among U.S. 
Minorities: An Annotated Bibliography. New York: Praeger.
Inciardi, James. 1989. Personal communication to Bryan Page.
Inciardi, James, and K. McElrath, eds, The American Drug Scene, 225–229. Los Angeles: 
Roxbury Publishing Company.
Ingram, Allan. 1998. “Samuel Taylor Coleridge, letter to John J. Morgan (1814).” Patterns 
of Madness in the Eighteenth Century, 200–224. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
International Center for Alcohol Policies (ICAP). 2012. Producers, Sellers, and Drinkers: 
Studies of Noncommercial Alcohol in Nine Countries. Washington, D.C.: ICAP.
Izant, Eric. 2008. “Altered States of Style: The Drug-Induced Development of Jack Kerouac’s 
Spontaneous Prose.” Master’s Thesis. Brigham Young University.
Jackson, Janine. 1998. “The Myth of the ‘Crack Baby.’” Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting, 
October. Online at: http://www.fair.org/index.php?page=3702.
James, W., and S. Johnson. 1996. Doin’ Drugs: Patterns of African American Addiction. Austin: 
University of Texas Press.
Jeffery, Roger. 1979. “Normal Rubbish: Deviant Patients in Casualty Departments.” Sociol-
ogy of Health and Illness 1(1): 90–107.
Johnson, Paul. 1978. A Shopkeeper’s Millenium: Society and Revivals in Rochester, New York, 
1815–1837. New York: Hill and Wang.
Johnston, Lloyd D., Patrick M. O’Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman,.1985. Use of Licit and 
Illicit Drugs by America’s High School Students 1975–1984. Rockville, MD: DHHS 
Publication No. (ADM) 85–1394.
Johnston, Lloyd, Patrick O’Malley, and Jerald Bachman,. 1986. Drug Use Among American 
High School Students, College Students, and Other Young Adults: National Trends through 
1985. Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Jones, Kenneth, David Smith, Christy Ulleland, and Ann Streissig. 1973. “Pattern of 

230 
❋ 
references
Malformation in Offspring of Chronic Alcoholic Mothers.” Lancet 1 (7815): 
1267–1271.
Joyce Foundation . 2002. Welfare to Work: What Have We Learned. Chicago: The Joyce 
Foundation.
Kallen, Evelyn. 1989. Label Me Human: Minority Rights of Stigmatized Canadians. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Kandel, Denise, Gebre-Egziabher Kiros, Christine Schaffran. 2004. “Racial/Ethnic Differ-
ences in Cigarette Smoking Initiation and Progression to Daily Smoking: a Multilevel 
Analysis.” American Journal of Public Health 94 (1): 128–136.
Kapuściński, Ryszard. 2008. The Other. London: Verso.
Kauffman, S., P. Silver,. and J. Poulin, 1997. “Gender Differences in Attitudes toward Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Other Drugs.” Social Work 42(3): 231–241.
Keller, M. 1979. “A Historical Overview of Alcohol and Alcoholism.” Cancer Research 39: 
2822–2829.
Kennedy, David, and Sue-Lin Wong. 2009. The High Point Market Intervention Strategy. New 
York City: Center for Crime Prevention and Control, John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
Kerr, Peter. 1986. “Rising Concern on Drugs Stirs Public to Activism.” New York Times, 
August 10, A1, 28.
Kessler, Glenn. 2011. “Haley Barbour’s Medicaid Fantasy.” The Washington Post. Available 
online at: http://voices.washingtonpost.com/fact-checker/2011/03/haley_barbo-
urs_medicaid_fantas.html.
Kilbourne, Jean. 1990. Deadly Persuasion: “7 Myths Alcohol Advertisers Want You to 
Believe.” Media and Values 54–55. Available online at: http://www.medialit.org/
reading-room/deadly-persuasion-7-myths-alcohol-advertisers-want-you-believe.
Kimiya, Gary. 2000. “Writing High.” Salon. August 4. Online at: http://www.salon.
com/2000/08/04/drugs_11/. Accessed June 13, 2013.
King, David. 1999. The Commissar Vanishes: The Falsification of Photographs and Art in 
Stalin’s Russia. Chicago: Holt.
King, Stephen. 2000. On Writing, A Memoir of The Craft. New York: Scribner.
Kipling, Rudyard. 2010 [1884]. “The Gate of the Hundred Sorrows.” Available online at: 
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Gate_of_the_Hundred_Sorrows.
Kitton, Frederick. 1897. The Novels of Charles Dickens: A Bibliography and Sketch. London: 
Elliot Stock.
Kleiman, Mark, Jonathan Caukins, and Hawkens, Jonathan. 2012. “Rethinking the War on 
Drugs. The Saturday Essay.” Wall Street Journal. Available on line at: http://online.wsj.
com/article/SB10001424052702303425504577353754196169014.html.
Knipe, Edward. 1995. Culture, Society, and Drugs: The Social Science Approach to Drug Use. 
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Koester Stephen, J. Glanz, and A. Baron. 2005. “Drug Sharing among Heroin Networks: Im-
plications for HIV and Hepatitis B and C Prevention.” AIDS and Behavior 9(1): 27–39.
Kreiger, Nancy. 2005. Health Disparities and the Body. Boston: Harvard School of Public 
Health.
La Barre, Weston. 1975 [original 1938]. The Peyote Cult. Hamden, CT: Archon Books.
La Barre, Weston, D. McAllester, J. S. Slotkin, Omar Stewart, and Sol Tax. 1951. “Statement 
on Peyote.” Science 114:582–583.
Labute, Neil. 2004. Fat Pig. New York: Faber and Faber.
Lee, J. 1989. Thinking about Higher Order Thinking: Abstraction and Stereotype Thinking in 
Education. DeKalb, IL: Social Science Research Institute: Northern Illinois University.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
231 
Leibling, A. J. 1947. “Horsefeathers Swathed in Mink.” New Yorker. Available online at: 
http://www.newyorker.com/archive/1947/11/22/1947_11_22_066_TNY_
CARDS_000212206.
Lender, Mark and James Kirby. 1982. Drinking in America. New York: The Free Press.
Levine, Harry Gene. 1978. “The Discovery of Addictions: Changing Conceptions of 
Habitual Drunkenness in America.” Journal of Studies on Alcohol 39(1): 143–174.
Li, Hui-Lin. 1974. “An Archaeological and Historical Account of Cannabis in China.” 
Economic Botany 28(4):437–448.
Lindesmith, Alfred. 1940. “Dope Fiend Mythology.” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminol-
ogy 31(2): 199–208.
Link, B., E. Struening, M. Rahav, J. Phelan, and L. Nuttbrock. 1997. “On Stigma and Its 
Consequences: Evidence from a Longitudinal Study of Men with Dual Diagnoses 
of Mental Illness and Substance Abuse.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 38: 
177–190.
Lipsitz, G. 1995. “The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: Racialized Social Democracy 
and the ‘White’ Problem in American Studies.” American Quarterly 47, 369–387.
Lister, Ruth. 2004. Poverty. Cambridge: United Kingdom: Polity Press.
Liu, Xiaoru, and Howard Kaplan,. 2001. “Role Strain and Illicit Drug Use: The Moderat-
ing Influence of Commitment to Conventional Values.” Journal of Drug Issues 31 (4), 
833–856.
Lowie, Robert Harry. 1919. The Tobacco Society of the Crow Indians. New York: The Trustees.
————. 1983. The Crow Indians. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Ludlow, Fitz Hugh. 1857. The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the Life of a Pythagorean. 
New York: Harper and Brothers.
————. 1864. “John Heathburn’s Title: A Tale in Two Parts.” Harper’s New Monthly 
Magazine. 28(165): 341–354 and 28(166):465–480.
————. 2009a. (original 1856). “The Apocalypse of Hasheesh.” Putman’s Magazine 
8(48). Online at: http://www.erowid.org/culture/characters/ludlow_fitz_hugh/
ludlow_fitz_hugh_article1.shtml. Accessed June 13, 2013.
————. 2009b. (original 1868). “Outlines of the Opium-Cure.” In Horace Day, ed. The 
Opium Habit. New York: Harper and Brothers.
Luthar, S., and K. D’Avanzo. 1999. “Contextual Factors in Substance Use: A Study of 
Suburban and Inner-City Adolescents.” Developmental Psychopathology 11:845–867.
Lynne-Landsman, Sarah D., Julia A. Graber, Tracy R. Nichols, and Gilbert Botvin,. 2011. 
“Is Sensation Seeking a Stable Trait or Does It Change over Time?” Journal of Youth 
and Adolescence 40 (1): 48–58.
Maher, Lisa. 1997. Sexed Work: Gender, Race and Resistance in a Brooklyn Drug Market. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Makela, Klaus, Robin Room, E. Single, P. Sulkunen, and B. Walsh. 1981. Alcohol, Society 
and State, Vol. 1: A Comparative Study of Alcohol Control. Toronto: Addiction Research 
Foundation.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enter-
prise and Adventure in the Archipelagos of Melanesian New Guinea. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Malloch, M. 2007. “Changing Focus: ‘Drug-Related Crime’ and the Criminological Imagi-
nation.” In A. Barton, et al., eds, Expanding the Criminological Imagination: Critical 
Readings in Criminology, pp. 116–35. Cullompton: Willan Publishing.
Manhal-Baugus, Monique. 1998. “The Self-in-Relation Theory and Women for Sobriety: 

232 
❋ 
references
Female-Specific Theory and Mutual Help Group for Chemically Dependent Women.” 
Journal of Addictions and Offender Counseling 18 (2): 78–85.
Manning, P. 2007. “The Symbolic Framing of Drug Use in the News: Ecstasy and Volatile 
Substance Abuse in Newspapers.” In P. Manning, ed. Drugs and Popular Culture: 
Drugs, Media and Identity in Contemporary Society, pp. 150–67. Cullompton: Willan 
Publishing.
Martin, M. 2007. “19th Century Illustrated Periodicals as International Means of Com-
munication.” Revista Româna de Jurnalism si Comunicare 2 (1): 52–57.
Mathiasen, Helle. 2009. “Dr. Jekyll Impaired.” American Journal of Medicine 122(5): 492.
Mayfield, R. D., R. A., Harris, and M. A. Schuckit. 2008. “Genetic Factors Influencing 
Alcohol Dependence.” British Journal of Pharmacology 154(2): 275–87.
McCoy, Alfred, Cathleen Read, and Leonard Adams. 1986. “The Mafia Connection.” In 
Peter Park and Wasyl Matveychuk, eds. Culture and Politics of Drugs, pp.110–18. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
McCoy, Clyde, J. Bryan Page, Duane C. McBride, Brian Russe, and Richard Clayton. 1979. 
“Youth Opiate Use.” In G. M. Beschner and A. S. Friedman, eds. Youth Drug Abuse, 
353–376. Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books.
Mcdermott, Peter. 1992. “Representations of Drug Users. Facts, Myths and Their Role in 
Harm Reduction Strategy.” Drug Text. Online at: http://www.drugtext.org/Self-help-
peer-support-and-outreach/representations-of-drug-users-facts-myths-and-their-
role-in-harm-reduction-strategy.html.
McGovern, Patrick E. 2003. Ancient Wine. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
McGrath, E. 1981. “A Fraud in the Pulitzers.” Time (Canadian edition) 117 (17): 74, 76, 
78, 80.
McKenna, Terence. 1992. Food of the Gods: A Radical History of Plants, Drugs, and Human 
Evolution. New York: Rider & Co.
McLaughlin, D., and A. Long. 1996. “An Extended Literature Review of Health Profession-
als’ Perceptions of Illicit Drugs and Their Clients Who Use Them. Journal of Psychiatric 
and Mental Health Nursing 3(5): 283–288.
Mencken, H. L. 1917. “The Divine Afflatus.” The New York Evening Mail, November 16.
Miller, Jody, and Christopher Mullins. 2009. “Feminist Theories of Crime.” In Francis T. 
Cullen, John Wright, and Kristie Blevins, eds., Taking Stock: The Status of Criminological 
Theory, 217–249. Piscateway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
MIT Classics. 2011. Available at http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/symposium.html.
Mitchell, Stephen, translator. 2004. Gilgamesh: A New English Version. New York: Simon 
and Schuster.
MoJo News Team. 2012. “Full Transcript of the Mitt Romney Secret Video.” Mother Jones. 
Available online at: http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/09/full-transcript-
mitt-romney-secret-video#47percent.
Mokdad, Ali, James Marks, Donna Stroup, and Julie Gerberding. 2004. “Actual Causes 
of Death in the United States.” 2000. Journal of the American Medical Association 
291(10): 1238–1241.
Morgan, H. Wayne. 1981. Drugs in America: A Social History 1800–1980. Syracuse, NY: 
Syracuse University Press, 1981.
Morganthau, Tom, Mark Miller, Janet Huck, and Jeanne DeQuinne. 1986. “Kids and Co-
caine: An Epidemic Strikes Middle America.” Newsweek, March 17, 58–65.
Mortimer, W. Golden. 1974 [1901]. History of Coca: “The Divine Plant” of the Incas. San 
Francisco: Fitz Hugh Memorial Library Edition.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
233 
Mosher, Clayton, and Scott Atkins. 2007. Drugs and Drug Policy: The Control of Conscious-
ness Alteration. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mozes, Alan. 1999. “Poverty Has Greater Impact than Cocaine on Young Brains.” Reuters 
Health, December 6.
Murphy, Dylan. 2013. “Money Laundering and the Drug Trade: The Role of the Banks.” 
Global Research: Center for Research on Globalization. Available online at: http://
www.globalresearch.ca/money-laundering-and-the-drug-trade-the-role-of-the-
banks/5334205. Accessed June 14, 2013.
Murphy, Sheigla, and Paloma Sales. 2001. “Pregnant Drug Users: Scapegoats of the 
Reagan/Bush and Clinton Era Economics.” National Advocates for Pregnant Women. 
Available online at: http://advocatesforpregnantwomen.org/main/publications/
articles_and_reports/pregnant_drug_users_scapegoats_of_the_reaganbush_and_
clinton_era_economics.php.
Murray, Nicolas. 2003. Aldous Huxley. New York: Abacus.
Musto, David F. 1987. The American Disease: Origins of Narcotics Control. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Nadelmann, Ethan. 2007. “The Global War on Drugs Can Be Won.” Foreign Policy. Online 
at: http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2007/08/15/think_again_drugs.
Nahas, Gabriel G. 1973. Marihuana—Deceptive Weed. New York: Raven Press.
Najavits, Lisa, Roger Weiss, and Sarah Shaw. 1997. “The Link between Substance Abuse 
and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Women: A Research Review.” American Journal 
on Addictions 6:273–283.
Nathan, Richard, and Thomas I. Gais. 1998. “The Early Findings about the Newest Federal-
ism for Welfare.” Publius: The Journal of Federalism 28(3): 95–103.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. 2012. “The Science of Drug Abuse and Addiction: 
What is Addiction.” Available online at: http://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/
media-guide/science-drug-abuse-addiction.
————. 2013. “Appropriations History Table.” Available at http://www.drugabuse.
gov/about-nida/legislative-activities/budget-information/fiscal-year-2012-budget-
information/appropriations-history-table.
National Institutes of Health. 2013. “Appropriations 2000–2012.” Available at http:// 
officeofbudget.od.nih.gov/pdfs/FY12/Approp.%20History%20by%20IC)2012.
pdf
Najavits, L. 2002 “‘Seeking Safety’: Therapy for Trauma and Substance Abuse.” Corrections 
Today 64(6): 136–139.
Navarro, Vicente. 1986. Crisis, Health, and Medicine: A Social Critique. New York: Tavistock.
Needle, Richard, S. Coyle, H. Cesari, R. T. Trotter, M. Clatts, S. Koester, L. Price, et al. 
1998. “HIV Risk Behaviors Associated with the Injection Process: Multiperson Use 
of Drug Injection Equipment and Paraphernalia in Injection Drug User Networks.” 
Substance Use and Misuse 33(12): 2403–2423.
Needle, Richard, S. L. Coyle, S. G. Genser, and R. T. Trotter II, eds. 1995. Social Networks, 
Drug Abuse, and HIV Transmission. NIDA Research Monograph No. 151. NIH Pub. 
No. 95–3889. Washington, DC: Supt. of Docs., U.S. Govt. Printing Office.
Needle, Richard, Robert Trotter, Merrill Singer, Chris Bates, J. Bryan Page, David Metzger, 
and Louis Herns Marcelin. 2003. “Rapid Assessment of the HIV/AIDS Crisis in 
Racial and Ethnic Minority Communities: An Approach for Timely Community 
Interventions.” American Journal of Public Health 93(6): 970–979.
Nelson-Zlupko, L., E. Kauffman, and M/ Dore.1995. “Gender Differences in Drug 

234 
❋ 
references
­Addiction and Treatment: Implications for Social Work Intervention with Substance-
Abusing Women.” Social Work 40(1): 45–54.
Nesse, R., and K. C. Berridge. 1997. “Psychoactive Drug Use in Evolutionary Perspective.” 
Science 278 (5335): 63–66.
Netherly , P. J. 2010. “Early Holocene Coca Chewing in Northern Peru.” Antiquity 
84:939–953.
New York Times. 1976. “ ‘Welfare Queen’ Becomes Issue in Reagan Campaign,” 51.
Nin, Anaïs. 1977. Delta of Venus Erotica. Orlando, Florida: Harcourt, Inc.
————. 1994. Children of the Albatross. New York: Peter Owen.
Nisim, Sarit, and Benjamin Orly. 2010. “The Speech of Services Procurement: The Ne-
gotiated Order of Commodification and Dehumanization of Cleaning Employees.” 
Human Organization 69(3):221–232.
Nunn, Kenneth. 2002. “Race, Crime and the Pool of Surplus Criminality: Or Why the ‘War 
on Drugs’ was a ‘War on Blacks.’” Journal of Gender, Race and Justice 381:384–445.
Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2012. “Marijuana Legalization.” Available online 
at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/ondcp-fact-sheets/marijuana-legalization.
Orcutt, James, and J. Blake Turner. 1993. “Shocking Numbers and Graphic Accounts: Quan-
tified Images of Drug Problems in the Print Media.” Social Problems 40(2): 190–206.
Osio, Patrick. 2008. “U.S. Drug Users: Main Cause for Mexico’s Bloodbath.” New 
America Media. Online at: http://news.newamericamedia.org/news/view_article.
html?article_id=759cac0f65d3b6b9db607bc793933172. Accessed August 8, 2013.
Ostrow, Ronald. 1990. “Casual drug users should be shot, Gates says.” Los Angeles Times, 
September 6. Online at: http://articles.latimes.com/1990-09-06/news/mn-983_1_
casual-drug-users. Accessed June 2, 2012.
Page, J. Bryan. 1983. “The Amotivational Syndrome Hypothesis and the Costa Rica Study: 
Relationships between Methods and Results.” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 15(4): 
261–267.
————. 1989. Personal communication.
————. 1990. “Streetside Drug Use among Cuban Drug Users in Miami, Florida.” In 
R. Glick and J. Moore, eds, Drug Use in Hispanic Communities, pp. 169–191. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
————. 1993. “To Own the Streets: Implications of Approaches to Studying Drug Use 
in Dade County, Florida.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American 
Anthropological Association, November 17–21, Washington, D.C.
————. 1997. “Needle Exchange and Reduction of Harm: An Anthropological view.” 
Medical Anthropology 13:1–21.
————. 1999. “Historical Overview of Other Abusable Drugs.” In R. T. Ammerman, P. 
J. Ott., and R. E. Tarter, eds, Prevention and Societal Impact of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 
pp. 47–63. Mahwah, N. J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Page, J. Bryan, and William E. Carter. 1980. “Smoking Environment and Effects.” In W.E. 
Carter, ed. Cannabis in Costa Rica. Philadelphia: ISHI Press, pp. 116–144.
Page, J. Bryan, and Jose Salazar Fraile. 1997. “Jones and Mono: Withdrawal and Urgency in 
HIV Risk.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Anthropological 
Association, Washington, D.C., November 17–21.
Page, J. Bryan, and Renee Llanusa-Cestero. 2006. “Changes in the Get-off: Social Process and 
Intervention in Risk Locales.” Substance Use and Misuse 41(6–7), 1017–1028, 2006.
Page J. Bryan, and M. J. Miguez-Burbano. 1999. “Parenteral Alcohol Use in Colombia: 
Warning of a Future Trend?” Medical Anthropology 15(4): 1–13.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
235 
Page, J. Bryan and Merrill Singer. 2010. Comprehending Drug Use: Ethnographic Research 
at the Social Margins. Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Page, J. Bryan, Dale D. Chitwood, Prince C. Smith, Normie Kane, and Duane C. McBride. 
1990. “Intravenous Drug Abuse and HIV Infection in Miami.” Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly 4(1): 56–71.
Page, J. Bryan, Jack M. Fletcher, and William R. True. 1988. “Psychosociocultural Perspec-
tives in Chronic Cannabis Use: The Costa Rican Follow-up.” Journal of Psychoactive 
Drugs 20(1): 57–65.
Page, J. Bryan, P. Shapshak, E. M. Duran, G. Even, I. Moleon-Borodowski, and R. Llanusa-
Cestero. 2006. “Detection of HIV-1 in Injection Paraphernalia: Risk in an Era of 
Heightened Awareness.” AIDS Patient Care 20(8): 576–585.
Page, J. Bryan, Prince C. Smith, and Normie Kane. 1990a. “Shooting Galleries, Their Propri-
etors, and Implications for Prevention of AIDS.” Journal of Drug Issues 5(1/2): 69–85.
Page, J. Bryan, Prince C. Smith, and Normie Kane. 1990b. “Venous Envy: The Importance 
of Having Usable Veins.” Journal of Drug Issues 20(2):291–308.
Parker, Howard, Judith Aldridge, F. Measham. 1998. Illegal Leisure: The Normalization of 
Adolescent Recreational Drug Use. London: Routledge.
Parker, Howard, Lisa Williams, and Aldridge, Judith. 2002. “The Normalization of ‘Sensible’ 
Recreational Drug Use: Further Evidence from the North West England Longitudinal 
Study.” Sociology 36(4): 941–964.
Parramore, Lynn Stuart. 2012. “Forbes 400 List Reveals Why the Greedy Rich Fully 
Deserve Your Contempt—And Jesus’s.” AlterNet. Available online at: http://www.
alternet.org/economy/forbes-400-list-reveals-why-greedy-rich-fully-deserve-your-
contempt-and-jesuss?page=0%2C0.
Paseos Amazónicos. 2013. “Shamanism Program.” Available at http://www.paseosama-
zonicos.com/.
Pennock, Pamela. 2007. Advertising Sin and Sickness. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University 
Press.
Pepper, Art and Laurie Pepper. 1984. Straight Life: The Story of Art Pepper. New York: Da 
Capo Press.
Peretti-Watel. Patrick. 2003. “Heroin users as ‘Folk Devils’ and French Public Attitudes 
toward Public Health Policy.” International Journal of Drug Policy 14(4): 321–329.
Petersen, Robert C., and Richard C. Stillman. 1978. PCP Phencyclidine Abuse: An Appraisal. 
Rockville, MD: NIDA Monograph # 21.
Phillips, Rod. 2000. A Short History of Wine. New York: Ecco, an Imprint of Harper Col-
lins Publishers.
Piven, Frances Fox, and Richard Clowar. 2003. Welfare Reform and Low Wage Labor Markets 
in The New Poverty Studies. New York University Press.
Plant, Sadie. 1999. Writings on Drugs. London: Faber and Faber.
Poe, Edgar Allen.1838. “Ligeia.” American Museum of Science, Literature and the Arts 1(1): 
25–37.
Pollack, Harold, Sheldon Danziger, Rukmalie Jayakody, and Kristen Seefeldt, 2001. “Sub-
stance Use among Welfare Recipients: Trends and Policy Responses.” Available online 
at: http://www.fordschool.umich.edu/research/poverty/pdf/jcpr_pollack.pdf.
Pynchon, Thomas. 1966. The Crying of Lot 49. New York: J. B. Lippincott.
Rapping, Elaine. 1997. The Culture of Recovery: Making Sense of the Self-Help Movement in 
Women’s Lives. Boston: Beacon Press.
Reese, Stephen, and Danielian, Lucig. 1988. “Intermedia Influence on the Drug Issue: 

236 
❋ 
references
Converging on Cocaine.” In Pamela Shoemaker, eds. Communication Campaigns about 
Drugs: Government, Media, and the Public. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 29–45.
Reinarman, Craig, and Harry Levine. 1989. “The Crack Attack: Politics and Media in 
America’s Latest Drug Scare.” In J. Best, ed. Images and Issues: Typifying Contemporary 
Social Problems. New York: Aldine De Gruyer.
Reinarman, Craig, and Harry Levine, 1997. “Crack in Context: America’s Latest Demon 
Drug.” In Craig Reinarman and Harry Levine, eds. Crack In America: Demon Drugs 
and Social Justice. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1–17.
Rettig, R., M. Torres, and G. Garrett. 1977. Manny: A Criminal-Addict’s Story. Atlanta, GA: 
Houghton Mifflin, Review Press.
Riggins, Stephen, ed. 1997. The Language and Politics of Exclusion: Others in Discourse. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Riggs, Mike. 2012. “4 Industries Getting Rich Off the Drug War.” Available on line at: http://
reason.com/archives/2012/04/22/4-industries-getting-rich-off-the-drug-w/2.
Riley, K. 1997. Crack, Powder Cocaine, and Heroin: Drug Purchase and Use Patterns in Six 
US Cities. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice and Office of National Drug 
Control Policy.
Ripoll, Carme, José Salazar, and J. Bryan Page. 2002. “Drug-Using Sex Workers in the Streets 
of Valencia.” Journal of Ethnicity and Substance Abuse 1(4): 1–27.
Rivera, M., A. . Aufderheide, L. W. Cartmell, C. M. Torres, and O. Langsjoen. 2005. “Antiq-
uity of Coca-Leaf Chewing in the South Central Andes: A 3,000 Year Archaeological 
Record of Coca-Leaf Chewing from Northern Chile.” J. Psychoactive Drugs 37 (4): 
455–458.
Rodin, A. 1981. “Infants and Gin Mania in 18th-Century London.” Journal of the American 
Medical Association 245(12): 1237–1239.
Rogak, Lisa. 2010. Haunted Heart: The Life and Times of Stephen King. New York: St. 
Martin’s Griffin.
Rosen, Christine. 2005. “The Image Culture.” The New Atlantis: A Journal of Technology and 
Society. Available at: http://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/the-image-culture. 
Accessed April 30, 2011.
Rosenbaum, Marsha. 1981. Women on Heroin. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press.
Rosenbaum, Milton, Phillip Piker, and Henry Lederer. 1940. “Delirium Tremens: A Study of 
Various Methods of Treatment.” American Journal of Medical Sciences 200(5): 677–688.
Ross, Susan. 2011a. “Marking and Demarking: Images, Narratives, and Identities.” In Susan 
Ross and Park Lestor, eds. Images that Injure: Pictorial Stereotypes in the Media, Santa 
Barbara: Praeger, 5–8.
Ross, Susan. 2011b. “Introduction.” In Susan Ross and Park Lestor, eds. Images that Injure: 
Pictorial Stereotypes in the Media. Santa Barbara: Praeger, 1–4.
Rozen, David. 2007. “Anthropological and Public Health Perspectives on Social Inequality, 
Poverty, and Health.” Practicing Anthropology 29(4): 39–42.
Rubin, Vera. 1975. “The ‘Ganja Vision’ in Jamaica.” In Vera Rubin, ed. Cannabis and Culture. 
The Hague: Mouton, 257–265.
Rubin, Vera, and Lambros Comitas 1975. Ganja in Jamaica. The Hague, Netherlands: 
Mouton.
Rubin, Vera, and Comitas Lambros. 1983. “Cannabis, Society and Culture.” In Maureen 
Kelleher, Bruce MacMurray, and Thomas Shapiro, eds. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 
212–18.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
237 
Rush, Benjamin. 1786. An Enquiry into the Effects of Spirituous Liquors upon the Human Body, 
and Their Influence upon the Happiness of Society. [microform] [New York : Readex Mi-
croprint, 1985] 11 x 15 cm. (Early American imprints. First series ; no. 22865; 44963.
Sabelli, Michael. 2013. Ryszard Kapuściński’s Discourse on the Other: Literary Reportage’s 
Perspective of Reality. Otherness: Essays and Studies 3(2): 1–26.
Saïd, Edward. 1978. Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Salinger, Sharon V. 2002. Taverns and Drinking in Early America. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Sanders, Jolene 2009. Women in Alcoholics Anonymous: Recovery and Empowerment. Boulder, 
CO: First Forum Press.
Saxe, L., C. Kadushin, E. Tighe, D. Rindskopf, and A. Beveridge. 2001a. National Evaluation 
of the Fighting Back Program: General Population Surveys, 1995–1999. New York: City 
University of New York Graduate Center.
Saxe, L., C. Kadushin, A. Beveridge, D. Livert, E. Tighe, Elizabeth, D. Rindskopf, and J. 
Ford. 2001b. “The Visibility of Illicit Drugs: Implications for Community-Based Drug 
Control Strategies.” American Journal of Public Health 91: 1987–1994.
Scarborough, John. 2010. Pharmacy and Drug Lore in Antiquity. Burlington, VT: Ashgate 
Publishing Company.
Schawlbe, Michael, Sandra Godwin, Daphne Holden, Douglas Schrock, Shealy Thompson,  
and Michele Wolkomir. 2000. “Generic Processes in the Reproduction of Inequality: 
An Interactionist Analysis.” Social Forces 79(2): 419–453.
Schensul, Jean, Cristina Huebner, Merrill Singer, Lorie Broomhall, and Pablo Feliciano. 
2000. “The High, the Money, and the Fame: The Social Context of ‘New marijuana’ 
Use among Urban Youth.” Medical Anthropology 18:389–414.
Schultes, Richard Evans. 1938. “The Appeal of Peyote (Lophophora williamsii) as a Medi-
cine.” American Anthropologist 40(4): 698–715.
Schultes, Richard Evans. 1976. Hallucinogenic Plants. New York: Golden Press. Rotterdam, 
Netherlands: A. A. Balkema.
Schultes, Richard Evans. 1993. “Amazonian Ethnobotany and the Search for New Drugs.” 
Ciba Foundation Symposium: Ethnobotany and the Search for New Drugs 185: 
106–112.
Schur, Edwin. 1971. Labeling Deviant Behavior: Its Sociological Implications. New York: 
Harper & Row Publishers.
Scott, J. 1969. The White Poppy. New York: Harper and Row.
Seddon, Toby. 2010. A History of Drugs. New York: Routledge.
Sennett, Richard, and Jonathan Cobb. 1972. The Hidden Injuries of Class. New York: Vin-
tage Books.
Sewell, R. Andrew, James Poling, and Mehmet Sofuoglu. 2009. “The Effect of Cannabis 
Compared with Alcohol on Driving.” American Journal on Addictions 18(3): 185–193.
Shafer, R. P., D. Farnsworth, H. Brill, T. L. Carter, J. G. Cooney, C. O. Galvin, J. . Howard, 
H. E. Hughes, J. K. Javits, P. G. Rogers, M. H. Seevers, J. T. Ungerleider, and M. Ware. 
1972. Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding. The Official Report of the National 
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. New York: New American Library.
Siegel, Ronald. 2005. Intoxication: The Universal Drive for Mind-Altering Substances. Roch-
ester, VT: Park Street Press.
Simmons, Janie, and Merrill Singer. 2006. “I Love You . . . and Heroin: Care and Collusion 
among Drug-using Couples.” Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy 1(7), 
online journal at: http://www.substanceabusepolicy.com/content/1/1/7.

238 
❋ 
references
Simon, David. 2008. “Interview by Bill Moyers.” Bill Moyer’s Journal. Available at http://
www.pbs.org/moyers/journal/04172009/transcript1.html.
Singer, Merrill. 1986. “Toward a Political Economy of Alcoholism: The Missing Link in 
the Anthropology of Drinking Behavior.” Social Science and Medicine 23(2): 113–130.
————. 1993. “Knowledge for Use: Anthropology and Community-Centered Substance 
Abuse Research.” Social Science and Medicine 37(1): 15–26.
————. 1994. “AIDS and the Health Crisis of the U.S. Urban Poor: The Perspective of 
Critical Medical Anthropology.” Social Science and Medicine 39(7): 931–948.
————. 1996a. “The evolution of AIDS work in a Puerto Rican community organization.” 
Human Organization 55(1): 67–75.
————. 1996b. “A dose of drugs, a touch of violence, a case of AIDS: Conceptualizing 
the SAVA syndemic.” Free Inquiry in Creative Sociology 24(2): 99–110.
————. 2004. “Why Is It Easier to Get Drugs than Drug Treatment?” In Arachu Castro 
and Merrill Singer, eds.Unhealthy Health Policy: A Critical Anthropological Examina-
tion. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 287–303.
————. 2006. The Face of Social Suffering: Life History of a Street Drug Addict. Prospect 
Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
————. 2007. “Poverty, Welfare Reform and the ‘Culture of Wealth.’” Practicing Anthro-
pology 29(4): 43–45.
————. 2008. Drugging the Poor: Legal and Illegal Drug Industries and the Structuring of 
Social Inequality. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
————. 2012. “Anthropology and Addiction: An Historic Review.” Addiction 107(10): 
1745–1755.
Singer, Merrill, and Mirhej, Greg. 2004. “The Understudied Supply Side: Public Policy 
Implications of the Illicit Drug Trade in Hartford, CT.” Harvard Health Policy Review 
5(2): 36–47.
Singer, Merrill, and Mirhej, Greg. 2006. High Notes: The Role of Drugs in the Making of Jazz. 
Journal of Ethnicity and Substance Abuse 5(4): 1–38.
Singer, Merrill, Pamela Erickson, Louise Badiane, R. Diaz, D. Ortiz, Traci Abraham, and 
Anna Marie Nicolaysen, 2006. “Syndemics, Sex and the City: Understanding Sexu-
ally Transmitted Disease in Social and Cultural Context.” Social Science and Medicine 
63(8): 2010–2021.
Singer, Merrill, Elsa Huertas, and Glenn Scott. 2000. “Am I My Brother’s Keeper: A Case 
Study of the Responsibilities of Research.” Human Organization. 59(4): 389–400.
Singer, Merrill, Greg Mirhej, Susan Shaw, Cristine Huebner, Julie Eiserman, Raul Pino, and 
J. Garcia. 2005. “When the Drug of Choice Is a Drug of Confusion: Embalming Fluid 
Use in Inner City Hartford, CT.” Journal of Ethnicity and Substance Abuse 4(2): 71–96.
Singer, Merrill, Hassan Saleheen, Greg Mirhej, and Claudia Santelices. 2006. “Research 
Findings on Drinking among Street Drug Users.” American Anthropologist 108(3): 
502–506.
Singer, Merrill, Glen Scott, Scott Wilson, Delia Easton, and Margaret Weeks. 2001. “‘War 
Stories’: AIDS Prevention and the Street Narratives of Drug Users.” Qualitative Health 
Research 11(5): 589–611.
Singer, Merrill, William Tootle and Joy Messerschmitt. 2013. “Living in an Illegal Economy: 
The Small Lives that Create Big Bucks in the Global Drug Trade.” School of Advanced 
International Studies Review of International Affairs (SAIS Review) 33(1): 121–133.
Smith, Keven. 2004. “The Politics of Punishment: Evaluating Political Explanations of 
Incarceration Rates.” The Journal of Politics 66(3): 925–938.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
239 
Smith, Phillip. 2012. “This Week’s Corrupt Cops Stories. Stop the Drug War. Com.” Online 
at: http://stopthedrugwar.org/taxonomy/term/27.
Standage, Tom. 2005. A History of the World in 6 Glasses. New York: Walker & Company.
Starks, Michael. 1982. Cocaine Fields and Reefer Madness: An Illustrated History of Drugs in 
the Movies. New York: Cornwall Books.
Stephens, R. 1991. The Street Addict Role: A Theory of Heroin Addiction. Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press.
Stevenson, Robert Louis. 1886. Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. London: Long-
manns, Green and Co.
Stratton, John. 1973. “Cops and Drunks: Police and Actions in Dealing with Indian Drunks.” 
The International Journal of the Addictions 8(4): 613–621.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 2008. “Results from the 2007 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health: National Findings” (No. SMA 08-4343). 
Rockville, MD: Office of Applied Studies.
Sullivan, Roger, Edward Hagen, , and Peter Hammerstein, 2008. “Revealing the Paradox 
of Drug Reward in Human Evolution.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological 
Sciences 275 (1640): 1231–1241.
Sutherland, John. 2001. Last Drink to LA. London: Short Books.
Swartz, J., A. Lurigio, and P. Goldstein. 2000. “Severe Mental Illness and Substance Use 
Disorders among Former Supplemental Security Income Beneficiaries for Drug Ad-
diction and Alcoholism.” Archives of General Psychiatry 57(7): 701–707.
Syal, Rajeev. 2009. “Drug Money Saved Banks in Global Crisis, Claims UN Advisor.” The 
Guardian. Online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/global/2009/dec/13/drug-money-
banks-saved-un-cfief-claims. Accessed June 14, 2013.
Syvertsen, Jennifer Leigh. 2012. “Love and Risk? Intimate Relationships among Female Sex 
Workers Who Inject Drugs and Their Non-Commercial Partners in Tijuana, Mexico.” 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy, Department of Anthropology, College of Arts and Sciences, 
University of South Florida.
Szymanski, Ann-Marie. 2003. Pathways to Prohibition: Radicals, Moderates, and Social Move-
ment Outcomes. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Taylor. Stuart. 2008. “Outsiders: Media Representations of Drug Use.” The Journal of Com-
munity and Criminal Justice 55(4): 369–387.
Tepperman, Jean. 1998. “Welfare Reform Pioneers: What Can We Learn from States That 
Started Early with Aggressive Welfare-to-Work Policies?” In Children’s Advocate. 
Berkeley, CA: Action Alliance for Children.
Thoman, Elizabeth. 1992. “Rise of the Image Culture: Re-Imagining the American Dream.” 
CI 57 (Winter). Available online at: http://www.medialit.org/reading-room/rise-
image-culture. Accessed April 30, 2011.
Thomas, Piri. 1967. Down These Mean Streets. New York: Vintage.
Thompson, Hunter. 1967. Hell’s Angels: The Strange and Terrible Saga of the Outlaw Motorcycle 
Gangs. New York: Random House.
————. 1998 [1971] Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas: A Savage Journey to the Heart of the 
American Dream. New York: Vintage.
————. 2012. “BrainyQuote.com,” Xplore Inc. Available online at: http://www.brainyquote 
.com/quotes/quotes/h/huntersth109598.html, accessed December 23, 2012.
Tonry, Michael. 1996. Malign Neglect: Race, Crime, and Punishment in America. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.

240 
❋ 
references
Tortu, S., J. McMahon, E. Pouget, and R. Hamid. 2004. “Sharing of Noninjection Drug-Use 
Implements as a Risk Factor for Hepatitis C.” Substance Use and Misuse 39(2): 211–224.
Townsend, Mark. 2008. “Drugs in Literature: A Brief History.” The Guardian, November 
15. Online at: http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2008/nov/16/drugs-history-
literature.
Trancas, B., N. Santos, and L. Patricio. 2008. “The Use of Opium in Roman Society and the 
Dependence of Princeps Marcus Aurelius.” Acta Medica Portuguesa 21(6): 581–590.
Trojanowicz, Robert. 1991. Community Policing and the Challenge of Diversity. East Lansing, 
MI: The National Center for Community Policing, Michigan State University.
True, Willaim, J. Bryan Page, M. Hovey. and Paul Doughty. 1980. “Marijuana and User Life-
styles.” In W.E. Carter, ed. Cannabis in Costa Rica. Philadelphia: ISHI Press, 98–115.
Tsuang M., M. Lyons, J. Meyer, T. Doyle, S. Eisen, J. Goldberg, W. True, N. Lin, R. Toomey, 
and L. Eaves. 1998. “Co-occurrence of Abuse of Different Drugs in Men.” Archives of 
General Psychiatry 55:967–972.
Tyrrell, Ian. 1991. Woman’s World/Woman’s Empire: The Woman’s Christian Temperance 
Union in International Perspective, 1880–1930. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press.
Tyrrell, Ian. 2010. Reforming the World. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
U.S. Congress. 1977, House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Conrol. Southeast Asian 
Narcotics. Hearings, 95th Congress, Ist session. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
Ulleland, Christy 1972. “Offspring of Alcoholic Mothers.” Annals of The New York Academy 
of Sciences 197:167–168.
USA Today. 2012. “Editorial: Drug Testing Welfare Applicants Nets Little.” Available on-
line: http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/opinion/editorials/story/2012-03-18/
drug-testing-welfare-applicants/53620604/1.
Vaillant, George E. 1983. The Natural History of Alcoholism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Verdejo-Garcia, Antonio, Lawrence, Andrew and Clark, Luke. 2008. “Impulsivity as a 
vulnerability marker for substance-use disorders: review of findings from high-risk 
research, problem gamblers and genetic association studies.” Neuroscience and Biobe-
havioral Reviews 32(4): 777-810.
Van Radowitz, John. 2010. “Drunk Writers Were Better Sober Says Psychiatrist.” The 
Independent. June 25. On line at: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/
drunk-writers-were-better-sober-says-psychiatrist-2010053.html.
Vargas, Theresa. 2010. “Once Written Off, ‘Crack Babies,’ have Grown into Success Stories.” 
April 18. The Washington Post. Available online at: http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-dyn/content/article/2010/04/15/AR2010041502434.html
Virginia Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services. 
2004. “Gender Differences and Their Implications for Substance Abuse Disorder 
Treatment. Reviews to Use.” Available online at: www.dbhds.virginia.gov/documents/
OSAS-REGenderSpecificSATX.doc. Accessed June 11, 2013.
Vulliamy, Ed. 2008. “Global Banks are the Financial Services Wing of the Drug Cartels.” 
The Guardian, July 21. Available online at http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/
jul/21/drug-cartels-banks-hsbc-money-laundering.
Wacquant, Loïc. 2001. “Deadly Symbiosis: When Ghetto and Prison Meet and Mesh.” 
Punishment & Society 3(1): 95–133.

REFERENCES 
❋ 
241 
Walitzer, Kimberly and Sher, Kenneth. 1996. “A Prospective Study of Self-Esteem and 
Alcohol Use Disorders in Early Adulthood: Evidence for Gender Differences.” Alco-
holism: Clinical and Experimental Research 20(6): 1118-1124.
Wal-Mart Watch. 2012. “Wal-Mart Employees Speak Out.” Available online at: http://
walmartspeakout.com/.
Wallace, J., T. Brown, J. Bachman, and T. Laveist, 2003. “The Influence of Race and Religion 
on Abstinence from Alcohol, Cigarettes and Marijuana among Adolescents.” Journal 
of Studies on Alcohol 64:843–848.
Waterston, Alysse. 1993. Street Addicts in the Political Economy. Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press.
Weaver, Vesla, and Amy Lerman. 2010. Political Consequences of the Carceral State. American 
Political Science Review 104(14): 817–833.
Weis, Lois. 1995. “Identity Formation and the Processes of ‘Othering’: Unraveling Sexual 
Threads.” Educational Foundations 9(1): 17–33.
West, Cornel. 1993. Prophetic Thought in Post Modern Times: Beyond EuroCentricism. Mon-
roe, ME: Common Courage Press.
Weston, Bruce. 2010. “Decriminalizing Poverty.” The Nation. On line at: http://www.
thenation.com/article/157007/decriminalizing-poverty.
Whitehead, Tom. 2009. “Drug Rehabilitation for Offenders a Waste of Time, Says Judge.” 
London Telegraph, January 7. Available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/
law-and-order/4162834/Drug-rehabilitation-for-offenders-a-waste-of-time-says-
judge.html.
Wight, William.1845?. Common Sense: A Word to Those Who Do Not Think by Proxy. Glasgow: 
Office of the Scottish Temperance League. http://find.galegroup.com/mome/
infomark.do?&contentSet=MOMEArticles&type=multipage&tabID=T001& 
prodId=MOME&docId=U3606532590&source=gale&userGroupName=miami_ 
richter&version=1.0&docLevel=FASCIMILE.
Wilbert, Johannes. 1972. “Tobacco and Shamanistic Ecstasy among the Warao Indians of 
Venezuela.” In P. T. Furst, ed. Flesh of the Gods: The Ritual Use of Hallucinogens. Prospect 
Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 136–184.
Wilde, Oscar. 1890. “The Picture of Dorian Gray.” Lippincott’s Monthly Magazine, July:1–100.
Williams, T. 1992. Crackhouse: Notes From the End of the Line. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Wills, David. 2011. “The Weird Cult: William S. Burroughs and Scientology.” Beatdom 
Literary Journal. Available on line at: http://www.beatdom.com/?p=1373.
Windsor, Lilliane, and Eloise Dunap. 2010. “What Is Substance Use About? Assumptions 
in New York’s Drug Policies and the Perceptions of African Americans Who are Low-
Income and Using Drugs.” Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 9:64–87.
Wolf, Eric. 1982. Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley: University of California 
Press.
Woods, Crawford. 1972. “The Best Book on the Dope Decade.” The New York Times Review 
of Books, July 23. Available online at: http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/11/29/
specials/thompson-vegas.html.
World Health Organization. 2004. Global Status Report on Alcohol. Geneva: World Health 
Organization Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse.
Wright, Daniel. 1994. “The Prisonhouse of My Disposition: A Study of the Psychology of 
Addiction in Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.” Studies in the Novel. 26.(3): 254–267.
Wright, Paul. 2013. “The Crime of Being Poor.” Prison Legal News. Online at: https://www.

242 
❋ 
references
prisonlegalnews.org/(X(1)S(muq1sonbeyu1on45rh0uea45))/displayArticle.aspx? 
articleid=6070&AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1. Accessed June 11, 2013.
Wu, Li-Tzy, Woody, George, Yang, Chongming, Pan, Jeng-Jong, and Blzaer, Dan. 2011. 
“Racial/Ethnic Variations in Substance-Related Disorders Among Adolescents in the 
United States.” Archives of General Psychiatry 68(11):1176–1185.
X, Malcolm. 1987 [1977]. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York: Random House 
Publishing Group.
Yongming, Zhou. 1999. Anti-drug Crusades in Twentieth-Century China: Nationalism, History 
and State Building. Lanham, MA: Roman and Littlefield Publishers.
Young, J. 1973. “The Myth of the Drugtaker in the Mass Media.” In S. Cohen and J. Young, 
eds. The Manufacture of News. London: Constable.
Zimmer, Lynn. 1992. “The Anti-Drug Semantic.” Paper presented at the Drug Policy 
Foundation Conference, Washington, D.C.
Zinberg, N., and Andrew Weil. 1969. “Cannabis—1st Controlled Experiment.” New Society 
13(329): 84-86.
Zucchino, David. 1999. Myth of the Welfare Queen: A Pulitzer Prize-Winning Journalist’s 
Portrait of Women on the Line. New York: Touchstone.

243 
INDEX
Addams, Jane, 114
Addiction; history, 53, 61, 63, 69, 73, 113, 
121; to methamphetamine, 67; and access 
to benefits, 33, 34; and writing, 94, 95, 97, 
98, 99, 101, 102, 104, 105, 111, 119–120; 
and its relation to social structure, 36–37, 
46–47, 112; and love, 115, 116, 134, 139; 
and cultural context, 113, 123, 183; self-
medication, 38; in film, 123, 124, 125, 128, 
130, 132, 133, 135, 138, 139, 140, 142, 
143, 144, 146, 147, 150, 151; on television, 
146, 148, 149, 150; and treatment, 11, 
17–18, 44, 46, 105, 131, 141, 168, 178; and 
impact on family, 133, 134; and impact on 
health, 94, 95, 98, 99, 101, 176–177, 179; 
and child neglect 139; duality of, 139, 140; 
public attitudes toward, 32–33, 34–35, 
166, 195; societal impact of, 168, 190, 191, 
215; definition, 11, 177; and oppression 
illness, 47; research on, 161–163, 182–183, 
192–193, 195–196, 198, 199, 200, 202, 
209–210, 215
Addicts; and use of opioids, 62, 134, 136; 
and exposure to drugs, 69, 81, 105, 121; 
and social class, 35, 37, 48; types of, 124, 
133, 137; impact on family, 133; among 
celebrities, 35, 138; ambivalence among, 
139, 140; and withdrawal, 140
Alcohol industry, 155–156
Amphetamine, including methamphetamine, 
14, 35, 66, 67, 70, 93, 100, 101, 115, 149, 
179,
Ancient writers, 53, 57–59, 62
Anslinger, Harry, 159–160, 208
Arthur, Timothy Shay, 82, 83, 125,
Ayurvedic medicine, 57, 58
Baudelaire, Charles, 68, 103
Beat Generation, 101, 107
Becker, Howard, 9–10,
Beerhouse Act, 78, 80
Beliefs about drug use and literary 
productivity, 94–95
Big Tobacco, 188–189
Billie Holiday, 135, 136
Brown, Claude, 110–111
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett, 99–100
Burroughs, William, 106–107, 115, 138–139
Candy, 146, 147, 152
Cannabis, 63, 64, 65, 68, 87, 104, 105, 126, 
127, 160, 161, 162, 191, 192, 194, 212
Christi, Agatha, 118
Christiane F., 137,138, 150
Chronicity of drug use, 54, 59, 79
Club de Hachichins (Hashish Club), 103
Coca, 55, 65, 66, 164, 165
Cocaine, 14, 21, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 48, 49, 51, 
54, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 87, 92, 93, 94, 
98, 108, 109, 116, 128, 129, 133, 142, 143, 
151, 157, 159, 164, 165, 166, 168, 179, 194, 
195; crack, 14, 38, 39, 40–41, 44, 48, 50, 
146, 157, 167. 179; crack babies, 38–41
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 97–98, 102
Corruption, 51, 175
Crank, 115–116
Crying of Lot 49, The, 114–115
Cytochrome P450 metabolic system, 55, 61
Days of Wine and Roses, The, 124, 131, 132, 
135, 146
De Quincey, Thomas, 92, 102–103, 104, 114, 
125
De Rios, Marlene Dobkin, 181, 183, 185, 187
Deviance, 9–10, 13
Diary of a Drug Fiend, 116
Dick, Philip K., 100–101
Dickens, Charles, 117–118
Distilled spirits, 60, 61, 62, 63, 65, 79
Drug; arrest and incarceration, 44–45, 52, 
163, 171, 172, 179, 206, 211–212; laws, 
21, 50, , 50, 157–158, 159, 165, 166, 167, 
168,169, 173, 174–176, 184, 194; scares, 
10, 39, 159; testing, 33–34; traffic, 36,37, 
50–51, 136, 144, 145, 150, 216; use, 
35–36–38, 41–44, 46–49, 52, 53, 64, 67, 
69, 71, 87–90, 92, 94, 96–98, 100–102, 
105, 106, 109, 110, 112, 114–116, 119–125, 
128–130, 133, 136–140, 142–149, 
151–153, 161, 167–173, 176–182, 184–187, 
189, 192, 194–203, 206–210, 212–218

244 
❋ 
index
Drug Enforcement Administration, 8, 36, 
163, 195
Drunkard, Identification/perception/
characterization of, 53, 58, 59, 72, 76, 190
Drunkenness; in writings of the ancients, 53, 
59, 60; in public perception, 43–44, 63, 73, 
76, 78, 80; in relation to potency 
of beverage, 79; depictions of, 121, 
122; among the Camba and the Kolla, 
189–191
Ecstasy/MDMA, 45, 124
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, 107–108
French Connection II, The, 136
Evolutionary theories of human drug use and 
intoxication, 54–55
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 95
Gilgamesh Epic, 53, 88, 89
Gin epidemic, 53, 60, 61, 191
Gramsci, Antonio, 12; hegemony, 12–13, 23
Gridlock’d, 140, 141, 142
Harner, Michael, 187
Hashish Eater, The, 103–104
Heroin, 15, 19, 25, 35, 49, 52, 64, 69, 107, 109, 
110, 112, 113, 116, 127, 129, 130, 134, 135, 
136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 147, 149, 
150, 151, 164, 170, 171, 194, 195,
Hippocrates, 58, 62,
Hogarth, William, 60, 61, 71, 78, 121
Holism, 23–24,
Huss, Magnus, 58, 60, 61
Huxley, Aldous, 105–106, 115
Hyperghetto, 48–49
Hypodermic needle, 102, 168, 179
Intoxication; and refinement of intoxicants, 
60, 73, 78; as chronic malady, 81, 82; 
by marijuana, 162; by tobacco, 188; in 
Homer, 53, 59, 88, 91, 92; throughout 
history 53, 57, 59, 89, 90, 91
Kapuściński, Ryszard, 205–206
Kerouac, Jack, 101 107
King, Stephen, 92, 93–94
Kipling, Rudyard, 117
Lady Sings the Blues, 125, 135, 136, 140, 142
Language of Oppression, 9, 20, 22, 207
Last Drink to LA, 95
Laudanum, 61, 62, 65, 74, 97, 98, 99, 103, 118
Levina, Emmanuel, 206, 209
Lindesmith, Alfred, 10–11
Livesey, Joseph, 77, 79, 80, 125
Long Day’s Journey into Night, A, 132, 133,
Lost Weekend, The, 124, 130, 131, 135, 152
LSD, 70, 93, 106, 108, 115, 170
Ludlow, Fitz Hugh, 103–104
Man with the Golden Arm, The, 129, 130, 131, 
142, 147, 151
Man with the Twisted Lip, The, 117
Manny, A Criminal Addict’s Story, 112
Marihuana, 101, 127, 157, 159–160, 161, 162, 
163, 191–193, 208
Marijuana: Assassin of Youth, 160, 208
Mexican drug war, 11, 144
Mitchum, Robert, 129
Monkey on My Back, 125, 130, 131
National Institute on Drug Abuse, 194, 195, 
196, 199, 200, 201, 202, 209
Native American Church, 90, 106, 183–184
Nicotine, 55, 56, 63, 64, 67, 188
Nin, Anaïs, 118–119
Nova Trilogy, The, 107
Odyssey, 91–92
Office of National Drug Control Policy, 143, 
162
Ontological wounds, 208
Opioid, 53, 54, 61, 62, 63, 64, 68, 69, 73, 76, 
87, 102, 106, 129, 139, 146, 176, 177, 178, 
179
Opium dens, 98, 116–117, 118–119, 123, 128, 
129, 167
Other, The, 205–206
Othering (Social Others), 7, 9, 13, 15, 16–17, 
53, 70, 71, 120, 182; and racism, 208, 210; 
demonization, 9, 19, 20, 21–23, 26, 52, 
109, 120, 127, 151, 156, 159, 163, 168. 195, 
205, 208–209, 216; difference as deficit, 
16.; ethnicity and Othering, 9, 12–13, 
17,25–31, 38–40, 47, 158–159, 164–166, 
167; oppressive power of Othering, 18; 

index 
❋ 
245 
social theory on othering, 9, 15 16, 18, 24, 
25–27, 53, 60, 71, 72, 88, 120, 121, 171, 
180, 189, 190, 192, 200, 205, 206, 207, 
208, 210, 218; and stigmatization, 16,17, 
18, 33, 42–43; technologies of exclusion, 
16; uses of the useless, 8, 15–16, 20–22, 
24, 52, 153, 171, 172, 180, 210, 216–218
Pace that Kills, The, 128
Panic in Needle Park, The, 124, 134, 135, 147, 
150, 151
Picture of Dorian Gray, The, 118
Plant toxins, 54, 55
Plato’s Symposium, 53, 58, 59
Pledge of abstinence, 79–80
Poe, Edgar Allen, 96, 103
Power of pictures, 15
Privatization of prisons, 172–173
Prohibition, 21, 22, 24, 50, 61, 72, 74, 76, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87, 122, 129, 153, 
154, 157, 159, 169, 177, 180, 181, 183, 191
Pro-industry state bias, 155
Ray, 125, 140
Reagan, Ronald, 19, 27–28
Reefer Madness, 123, 125, 126, 127, 130, 133, 
137, 143, 151, 152, 162
Reform, 30, 32, 33, 38, 73, 74, 79, 80, 84, 85, 
86, 114
Reverand William Wight, 76, 77
Rubáiyát, 90–91
Rush, Benjamin, 72, 82
Schultes, Richard Evans, 181–182, 183, 184, 
185
She Shoulda Said, “No!”, 129, 130
Shining, The, 93, 94
St. Augustine, 59
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 98–99
Sydenham, 62, 166
Temperance, 10, 20, 63, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 
77, 78, 79, 80, 84, 86, 94, 122, 125, 129, 
153–154; symbolic crusades, 20
Thomas, Piri, 111
Thompson, Hunter Stockton, 107–109
Torah, 90
Torres, Manuel, 112
Traffic, 143, 144, 145
Trainspotting, 124, 139, 140, 147
“Undeserving” poor, 25–27, 31–32
Vedas, 88–90
“Welfare queen” concept, 25, 27–30
War on drugs, 19, 38, 45–46, 113, 143–144, 
153, 169–172, 174–177, 179, 180, 198, 209, 
213
Webb versus the United States, 169
Withdrawal, 135, 136, 139
X, Malcolm, 109–110
Xenophobia, 153


247 
About the Authors
J. Bryan Page, PhD, is professor and chair in the Department of Anthropol-
ogy at the University of Miami. Research on people who engage in socially 
disapproved behaviors has dominated Bryan Page’s professional activity 
for the last three decades. He has studied patterns of marihuana smoking, 
poly-drug consumption, self-injection, crack use, and sex trade. These studies 
have relied on a number of methods, including direct observation of risky 
behaviors, in-depth interviewing of drug users, qualitative analysis of textual 
materials, focus groups, survey methods, secondary data analysis, results of 
physical examinations, and laboratory techniques for determining immune 
status, viral load, and/or recent drug consumption. Dr. Page recently co-
authored a book with Merrill Singer on the ethnographic study of drug use 
(August, 2010). He has conducted studies funded by the National Institute 
on Drug Abuse and the National Institute of Mental Health. His research 
experience in local neighborhoods uniquely equips him to help research 
teams to accomplish goals related to intervening at the community level 
and monitoring the impact of the intervention. Dr. Page’s publications often 
address questions of community setting and approaches to finding specific 
populations in those settings. His recent work has emphasized the value of 
on-the-scene perspectives in the study of human behaviors such as formation 
of couples, seeking of health care, and uptake of tobacco use.
Merrill Singer, PhD, a medical and cultural anthropologist, is a Professor in 
the departments of Anthropology and Community Medicine, and a Senior 
Research Scientist at the Center for Health, Intervention and Prevention at 
the University of Connecticut. Additionally, he is affiliated with the Center 
for Interdisciplinary Research on AIDS at Yale University. Over his career, 
his research and writing have addressed HIV/AIDS in highly vulnerable and 
disadvantaged populations, illicit drug use and drinking behavior in light of 
political economy, community and structural violence, health disparities, and 
the political ecology of health. His research focuses especially on the nature 
and impact of both syndemics (interacting epidemics) and pluralea (inter-
secting ecocrises) on health. Dr. Singer has published over 260 articles and 
book chapters and has authored or edited 25 books. He is a recipient of the 
Rudolph Virchow Prize, the George Foster Memorial Award for Practicing 
The Social Value of Drug Addicts: The Uses of the Useless, by Merrill Singer and J. Bryan Page, 243–244. 
© 2014 Left Coast Press, Inc. All rights reserved.

248 
❋ 
about the authors
Anthropology, the AIDS and Anthropology Paper Prize, the Prize for Distin-
guished Achievement in the Critical Study of North America, and the Solon 
T. Kimball Award for Public and Applied Anthropology from the American 
Anthropological Association.

