Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rfat20
Download by: [The UC San Diego Library]
Date: 27 December 2016, At: 22:12
Art in Translation
ISSN: (Print) 1756-1310 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rfat20
Visual Geometry: El Lissitzky and the
Establishment of Conceptions of Space–Time in
Avant-garde Art
Igor Dukhan
To cite this article: Igor Dukhan (2016) Visual Geometry: El Lissitzky and the Establishment
of Conceptions of Space–Time in Avant-garde Art, Art in Translation, 8:2, 194-220, DOI:
10.1080/17561310.2016.1216050
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17561310.2016.1216050
Published online: 08 Nov 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 17
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Art in Translation, 2016
Volume 8, Issue 2, pp. 194–220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17561310.2016.1216050
© Igor Dukhan 2016. All Rights Reserved.
Visual Geometry: 
El Lissitzky and 
the Establishment 
of Conceptions 
of Space–Time in 
Avant-garde Art 
Abstract
The development of new spatial and temporal conceptions in twentieth-
century art is examined through the prism of the ideas of El Lissitzky’s 
text “Art and Pangeometry.” A comparative analysis of space–time 
models in art, mathematics and physics indicates that at the beginning 
of the twentieth century, artistic experiments “had fallen behind” in the 
intensity of their conceptual construction of space. This text analyzes 
the ways in which irrational spaces were modeled in the theory and 
practice of El Lissitzky and the avant-garde in tandem with the move 
towards an artistic image of space–time.
Translated by 
Christina Lodder
From the original Work, ﬁrst 
published in Russian as “Vizual’naia 
pangeometriia: El’ Lisitskii v 
stanovlenii prostranstvenno-
vremennoi kontseptsii iskusstva 
avangarda,” Iskusstvoznanie 10, nos 
3–4 (2010): 386–99. Published by 
permission of the author.
Igor Dukhan

195
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
KEYWORDS: space–time conceptions, avant-garde, space in art, time 
in art, perspective, developments in mathematics, relativity
Introduction by Christina Lodder (University of Kent)
Igor Dukhan belongs to that generation of scholars who fully embraced 
the intellectual freedoms of the post-communist world, exploring their 
own cultural heritage in depth while assimilating a wide range of ide-
as from the West. After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, archives, 
libraries and galleries were opened, Western journals, books and ideas 
became accessible and, for the first time, Russian scholars were able to 
study their native avant-garde in great detail and free from all control 
and every kind of ideological constraint. It was a unique moment for 
post-soviet culture.
Not surprisingly, Igor Dukhan, who had originally been exploring 
the concepts of creative synthesis in the Baroque period, became inter-
ested in the philosophy of contemporary art and architecture. Like his 
contemporaries, he devoured the ideas presented in the newly available 
translations and publications of texts by Gilles Deleuze, Jacques Derri-
da, Susan Sontag, Georges Didi-Huberman and others. Creative issues 
became intrinsically connected with philosophical and conceptual prob-
lems for Russian writers like Irina Danilova, Aleksandr Rappaport and 
Figure 1 
El Lissitzky, Constructor (self-
portrait). Photomontage. 1924.

196
Igor Dukhan
Selim Khan-Magomedov. Inspired and stimulated by these ideas and 
theories, Dukhan became fascinated by the complexities of the relation-
ship between philosophy, art, design and architecture and devoted his 
doctoral thesis to exploring this topic within the context of modernism.
Since then, he has extended his research to embrace themes such as 
new approaches to architecture and design, the relationship between 
art and design, the role of traditional skills in the creative process of 
designers and architects today, the connections between neo-classicism 
and modernism, the nature of form in contemporary art and the mix-
ture of art and mysticism in the work of Kazimir Malevich. He has 
explored these topics in numerous publications, including The Theory 
of Art. The Category of Time (Teoriia iskusstv. Katergoriia vremeni, 
2005), and The Articulation of Space-Time Concepts in Art and Design 
Figure 2 
El Lissitzky, Illustration to Sikhes 
Khulin by M. Broderzohn. Scroll, 
lithography, 1917.
Figure 3 
El Lissitzky, Front side of the 
bolder-packet for Chad Gadia. 
Chromolithograph on paper, Kiev, 
Kultur-lige, 1919.

197
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
Culture (Stanovlenie prostranstvenno-vremennoi kontseptsii v iskus-
stve i proektnoi kul’tury, 2010). His latest book Minsk. Independence 
Prospect (A Neo-Classical Elegy) (Minsk. Prospekt Nezavisimosti (neo-
classicheskaia elegiia, 2016) argues that this fine neo-classical avenue in 
Minsk of 1940s and 1950s, represents a form of “Soviet Hollywood,” 
combining emotional metaphors for happiness with Stalin’s imperial 
ideology and the rhetoric of neo-classical architecture. His most recent 
project is “The Allusions of Suprematism,” an exhibition, scheduled to 
open in 2020, which celebrates the centenary of Kazimir Malevich’s cre-
ation of Unovis (Utverditeli novogo iskusstva - Champions of the New 
Art) in Vitebsk.
Naturally, as Head of the Art Department at Belarusian State Uni-
versity in Minsk, Professor Dukhan combines academic research with 
teaching, practical design work, and organising exhibitions. These fields 
Figure 4 
El Lissitzky, “Kunst und 
Pangeometrie,” in Carl Einstein and 
Paul Westheim, eds., Europa-
Almanach (Potsdam: Gustav 
Kiepenheuer, 1925).

198
Igor Dukhan
of expertise are much in demand and he has lectured and taught at 
universities in Europe and America, including Ann Arbor, Edinburgh, 
North Carolina and Palermo.
The present article is the result of Dukhan’s sustained research into 
the figure of El Lissitzky with whom he clearly feels a certain creative 
and intellectual affinity. Dukhan is particularly fascinated by the way 
the artist integrated various aspects of his activities, linking his philo-
sophical ideas with his work as an artist, uniting theory and practice, re-
lating his art to his work as a designer and architect, and combining his 
interest in the rational with his concern for the irrational. This synthetic 
approach is evident in Dukhan’s book El Lissitzky: The Geometry of 
Time (El Lisstizkii: geometriia vremeni, 2010). In a similar way, the 
Figure 5 
El Lissitzky, ”Kunst und 
Pangeometrie,” in Carl Einstein and 
Paul Westheim, eds., Europa-
Almanach (Potsdam: Gustav 
Kiepenheuer, 1925).

199
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
present article examines Lissitzky’s theoretical conceptions concerning 
pan-geometry (and their mathematical basis) and connects them to his 
creative work as a photographer and architect, presenting all of these 
aspects as deriving from a single conceptual approach and a unified 
process of creative thinking. As Dukhan moves from the fundamental 
philosophical and mathematical concepts integral to Lissitzky’s think-
ing to their visual manifestations in his photographs and architectural 
projects, the reader acquires a completely new perspective on the artist 
Figure 6 
El Lissitzky, Proun 1 E “The City.” 
Paper, lithography, 1921.
Figure 7 
El Lissitzky, Proun 1 A “The Bridge.” 
Paper, gouache, 1919.

200
Igor Dukhan
and a more profound understanding of this highly complex and inno-
vative creative personality.
Visual Geometry: El Lissitzky and the Establishment of 
Conceptions of Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
Igor Dukhan
El Lissitzky played a special and, indeed, unique role in developing new 
conceptions of space–time in the avant-garde’s philosophical thinking 
about art and in their experimentation with art and design. As an art-
ist and thinker, El Lissitzky (1890–1941) was active in the period of 
the avant-garde’s mature form-making and theorizing at the end of the 
1910s and beginning of the 1920s. His essay-manifesto “Art and Pange-
ometry” (1925) was both a clear expression of the space–time ideas of 
the avant-garde and a philosophical synthesis of twenty years of exper-
imenting with the radical transformation of space and time in artistic 
practice. It is precisely the space–time philosophy of “Art and Pangeom-
etry” within the context of actual trends characterizing the explorations 
of the late avant-garde that is the focus of the present discussion.
In the 1920s, the theory and practice of avant-garde artistic exper-
imentation turned back to “the great period,” actively “historicized,” 
and clothed rapture and excitement in the forms of a new classical 
synthesis and clarity. Strictly speaking, avant-garde ideas like “the new 
classicism,” a new version of the extreme right wing movement cen-
tred around the journal Action Français (French Action), had developed 
 earlier under the influence of the philosophy of Henri Bergson. As a 
Figure 8 
El Lissitzky, Proun 30T. Oil on 
canvas, 1920.

201
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
counterweight to the established beau ideal (perfect beauty), the the-
orists and artists involved with cubism and futurism had put forward 
the idea of a vital “classicism of the future.”1 Even so, it was only in the 
1920s that “the new classicism,” rather paradoxically, became the dis-
tinctive “synthesis of the avant-garde,” a synthesis moreover in which 
historicizing and innovative-modernizing tendencies both fought and 
collaborated. One might recall the principal assertion of the leader of 
suprematism Kazimir Malevich in his correspondence with El Lissitzky 
in 1924: “For me, the new classicism develops out of the ideology of the 
general movement of human activity and therefore the name comes from 
this theory of activity.”2 The leader of the radical avant-garde character-
ized his entire system as a “new classicism,” historicizing the avant-gar-
de esprit in a synthetic theory of the new creativity. In  contrast, Gino 
Figure 9 
El Lissitzky, Proun. Oil on canvas, 
1919–20.

202
Igor Dukhan
Severini in his essay of 1921 (1925) criticized avant-garde experimen-
tation in the context of classical categories, observing that his contem-
poraries’ interest in poetry and philosophy must be combined with an 
attention to mathematics and especially to geometric proportionality.3 
This reflects the intellectualizing trend of the postwar avant-garde and 
simultaneously its criticism “from within,” including a more profound 
relationship to the classical experience itself (proportionality) and to 
the ideas of mathematics and the natural sciences.
Malevich’s formula of “the new classicism” appears unexpectedly 
in view of his anarchic and sharply “anti-classical” statements of the 
1910s. It is appropriate to recall Malevich’s futurist criticism of archi-
tecture, in which “the very best buildings have to have Greek columns, 
like crutches for a lame duck,”4 and architecture embodied classical 
bourgeois attitudes. Malevich also criticized painting as the personifica-
tion of the classical imitation of the visible world, stating that “objects 
have disappeared like smoke for the new artistic culture,”5 in which the 
Figure 10 
El Lissitzky, Kurt Scwitters. Gelatin 
silver print, 1924–25.

203
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
construction of a new world in the “dynamism of movement” and “dy-
namism of pictorial plasticity” was most important.6 In addition to this, 
during the Vitebsk period (1919–22), Malevich’s vision developed to-
wards a new philosophy of art and reality. The nature of this movement 
is conveyed by the title of his important treatise “Suprematism: The 
World as Non-Objectivity or Eternal Peace.” It unfurled a monumental 
picture of the evolution of creation from “the meaningless effervescence 
of the universe”7 to the perfection of world peace in “the white world of 
Suprematist non-objectivity.”8 Suprematism was conceived as an artistic 
method for transforming the world and a major means for this devel-
opment was rhythm—which was considered to be a general starting 
point for art and reality, something like Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s “flesh 
of the world.”
Figure 11 
El Lissitzky, Kurt Scwitters. Gelatin 
silver print, 1924–25.

204
Igor Dukhan
For all the impulsiveness of Malevich’s discourse, with its combi-
nation of mystical illumination and rational constructs, “The World 
as Non-Objectivity” captured a grandiose conception of harmonizing 
art and life. The impetuous teleology of the movement towards clari-
ty was born in the transformation of mystical experience into rational 
and classical constructions. The treatise’s dedication to Mikhail Ger-
shenzon—an outstanding scholar of Alexander Pushkin’s poetry and 
of classical Russian culture—explains a lot. Andrei Bely described the 
understanding between Malevich and Gershenzon: “I remember in 
1916, that he [Gershenzon] the admirer of Pushkin’s consummate clar-
ity tried to make my soul embrace the most paradoxical picture of the 
most paradoxical Suprematist; this picture that hung in front of him 
in his study.”9 Gershenzon told Bely: “Everyday, I stand in front of this 
Figure 12 
El Lissitzky, Kurt Scwitters. Gelatin 
silver print, 1924–25.

205
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
 painting with trepidation; and I find in it something completely new 
and a new source of thinking and feeling.”10
If one disregards the symbolic aspect of the interaction between 
Malevich and Gershenzon in the context of the apocalyptic ethos of 
the Silver Age, then the classicist Gershenzon’s discovery of a profound 
source of intellectual and emotional harmony and a teleology close to 
this classical Pushkin scholar in the work of the “barbarian” avant-gar-
de artist Malevich is completely comprehensible. The departure point—
the beginning of the vector of Malevich’s movement towards a “new 
classicism” already applies to the period of The Black Square, although 
the direction of this vector was clarified at the stage of “The World as 
Figure 13 
El Lissitzky, Hans Arp. 
Photomontage, gelatin silver print, 
1924–25.

206
Igor Dukhan
Figure 14 
(1)–(8) El Lissitzky, A Tale of Two 
Squares, Vitebsk, 1920, Visual 
book (Berlin: Skythen-Verlag, 1922). 
Plates 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11.

207
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
Non-Objectivity.” The “new classicism”—is a teleological metaphor for 
this synthesis of philosophy and art.
It was not by chance that the leader of suprematism, Malevich, 
talked about the “new classicism” in his letter to El Lissitzky. The im-
age of a new avant-garde rationality had emerged most clearly in Lis-
sitzky’s artistic theory and practice, following his collaborative work 
with Malevich at Unovis (Utverditeli novogo iskusstva [Champions of 
the New Art]).11 Even before the Revolution, Lissitzky had been par-
ticularly attracted to a philosophical and mathematical foundation for 
his own artistic experimentation, having received his architectural and 
artistic training at the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt. In 1919, 
Lissitzky had invited Malevich to Vitebsk, which for some years became 
a creative laboratory for the radical avant-garde, and where Lissitzky in 
partnership with Malevich had been busy constructing the project of a 
suprematist universe. From 1921 to 1925, El Lissitzky was once again 
in Germany and Western Europe, where he naturally appeared at the 
very epicenter of the European avant-garde art scene. It was actually 
here that he became engaged in his intensive intellectual thinking about 
the avant-garde experiment, which received its synthetic expression in 
“Art and Pangeometry.”
The essay-manifesto “Art and Pangeometry” is a masterpiece of 
avant-garde artistic philosophy. El Lissitzky’s text was first published in 
the famous avant-garde Europa Almanach, issued in Potsdam (1925), 
under the editorship of the eminent avant-garde theorist Carl Einstein 
and the illustrious literary and artistic critic, Paul Westheim.12 The al-
manac comprised an international collection of texts about various 
aspects of painting, literature, music, architecture, sculpture, film, and 
fashion. In other words, it was an attempt to synthesize the artistic and 
philosophical theory of the avant-garde.
The new avant-garde rationality in Lissitzky’s conceptual and ar-
tistic practice had the declared intention of instilling a mathemati-
cal clarity into the dynamic and irrational artistic image. In “Art and 
Pangeometry,” the object of Lissitzky’s thinking and criticism was the 
conventional judgment of the eye. He tried to comprehend the evolution 
of visual thinking and systems of spatial construction from elementary, 
rhythmic forms and perspective, to irrational limitless space and space–
time, under the sign of the evolution of the conceptions of numbers and 
relativity. Lissitzky’s imagination was stimulated by the ideas of space 
revealed by non-Euclidean geometry and the theory of relativity. He 
was attracted by the irrational worlds discovered by the latest mathe-
matics and natural sciences, which could not always be represented by 
spatial, geometrical or numerical means—conceptual worlds of “imma-
terial materiality” (Lissitzky’s phrase). We should note Lissitzky’s open 
acknowledgement “in passing” in his 1924 letter: “… I am a rationalist, 
but there are moments when I get scared of the ‘ratio’.”13 We find this 
intense and dramatic duality of the rational and the irrational on every 

208
Igor Dukhan
page of “Art and Pangeometry”: how is it possible to represent ration-
ally and visualize with artistic means what cannot be represented, the 
irrational and the imaginary?
Central to Lissitzky’s critical thinking and artistic practice was over-
coming “scientific” perspective as a hindrance and obstruction to the 
dynamism of vision. As is well known, in these years the problem of 
perspective was central to both classical and avant-garde theory. The 
development of classical perspective was a subject for research by the 
outstanding theoretician and historian of classical art Erwin Panof-
sky (“Perspective as ‘symbolic’ form”).14 In fact, Panofsky cites “Art 
and Pangeometry”15 which had just been published, contesting the 
avant-garde conception “of the end of perspective,” which it had pre-
sented. This theme—the crisis of scientific perspective in seeing—was 
the subject of a significant number of theoretical discussions in the first 
third of the twentieth century.16 The critical departure from classical 
perspective, characteristic of new trends in European art, started ap-
proximately in the 1880s.
In his Proun paintings, photography and theory of the 1920s, El 
Lissitzky developed contemporary space–time models of art, which 
generalize and defeat the rationality of classical perspective: “scientific” 
perspective becomes a particular instance, a fragment of a global system 
of “pangeometry.” The path of universal “pangeometry” is amplified by 
the intuitive and perceptive spatial investigations of Paul Cézanne and 
the multi-dimensional “duration” of the futurists and cubists and the 
establishment of a post-perspectival way of seeing. As a whole, in the 
critical period between Cézanne and cubism and futurism, the classi-
cal rationality of “scientific” perspective turned out to be already con-
quered by the new artistic experiments, the significance of which—in 
the attempt to understand space from the inside, in the complex tactile 
and visual synthesis, and in the dynamism of the subject’s position was 
creating an artistic whole that approximates to the living interaction of 
space and time.17
In this context, Lissitzky had the extraordinary conceptual courage 
to attempt to explain rationally the new artistic perceptions by means 
of their relationship to mathematics. In “Art and Pangeometry”18 the 
evolution of the structure of artistic representations was correlated with 
the development or more accurately with the dissemination and pop-
ularization of the ideas of numbers. In this, Lissitzky, to some degree, 
continued the classical tradition of artistic–mathematical studies and of 
artists appealing to mathematics as the ideal synthetic representation 
of the world for explaining visual puzzles. Lissitzky’s approach raises 
associations with the beginning of the first European “theory of paint-
ing” by Leon Battista Alberti, where we read “In these short notes about 
painting we, above all, in order that our statement will be as clear as 
possible, borrow from mathematics those propositions which relate to 
our subject and, having mastered them, we give an account of painting, 

209
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
beginning with its natural origins, in so far as our talent allows. Never-
theless … I am not writing as a mathematician but as a painter; mathe-
matics measures the form of an object intellectually, independent of all 
its material (Conciossiache i Matematici con lo ingegno solo le spezie 
e le forme delle cose, separate da qualsivoglia materia), we, wishing to 
represent an object for viewing, will for this purpose use, as they say, 
the more accurate Minerva.”19 For Alberti, the “science of painting” 
was based on the dominating judgment of the eye (“Painting must try 
to represent only what is seen”) and this judgment of the eye is the fun-
damental criterion of truth in painting.20
At the very beginning of “Art and Pangeometry,” El Lissitzky ad-
dressed the reader with an almost Albertian appeal to seek mathematic 
foundations for artistic experiments, taking into account the difference 
between the approaches of art and mathematics: “The parallels between 
art and mathematics must be drawn very carefully, for every time they 
overlap it is fatal for art.”21 The meaning of this appeal is that mathe-
matics must “help” art in its journey from the visible (and restrictedly 
visible) to the infinite and invisible. It is precisely in this respect that 
art fundamentally lags behind the evolution of mathematical develop-
ments.
Pondering the convergence between visual and mathematical prac-
tice, El Lissitzky demonstrated what is extremely rare for an artist—a 
profound understanding of the contemporary state of mathematics and 
its evolution. While studying in the architectural faculty of the Higher 
Technical School at Darmstadt, he had taken courses in mathematics 
and during the writing of “Art and Pangeometry” seriously studied 
mathematical investigations, noting in a letter of 21 March 1924, “… 
Have received the history of mathematics and am reading it, it’s good.”22 
As his wife, Sophie Lissitzky-Küppers noted in her reminiscences, the 
master formulated his credo as “Architecture—that is art in its highest 
sense, mathematical order.”23 In our current discourse—it represents the 
trace of the methodological idea of classical clarté (clarity).
We will briefly summarize Lissitzky’s argument. The origin of rep-
resentation is the physical two-dimensional flat plane, corresponding to 
the system of natural numbers, its “rhythm—the elementary harmony 
of the natural numerical progression: 1, 2, 3, 4 …”24 The next stage 
is the formulation of the initial depth of space: “if for example, in a 
relief, the animal in front covers a part of the animal behind, this does 
not mean that that part has ceased to exist, but that there is a distance, 
space, existing between these two bodies. One comes to know from 
experience that there is a distance existing between individual objects, 
that the objects exist in space. The two-dimensional plane ceases to be 
just a flat surface. The plane begins to presume upon space and there 
arises the numerical progression 1, 1½, 2, 2½ …”25
Lissitzky’s observation is completely accurate: and that system of 
relationships between the object and space, and system of fractional 

210
Igor Dukhan
numbers was formulated in the context of ancient Egyptian culture. As 
the historian of mathematics D. Stroik emphasized, “the most striking 
feature of Egyptian mathematics is its work with fractions.”26 If, in Lis-
sitzky’s conception of the initial image of space, harmony and equilibri-
um existed between objects and their spatial surroundings, then in the 
following stage—perspective—the object is fully subordinated to space. 
Perspective “has fitted the world into a cube, which it has transformed 
in such a way that in the plane it appears as a pyramid … Perspective 
defined space and made it finite, then enclosed it.”27 This completeness 
of perspectival space matches the constancy of its perception in time: 
“perspective representation is the clear, objective, obvious way to rep-
resent space.”28 A mathematical analysis of artistic systems followed: 
“Planimetric space provided us with the arithmetical progression. There 
the objects stood in the relation: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 … In perspective space we 
acquired a new geometric progression; here objects stood in a relation: 
1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 …” This is a provocative assertion. Even so, it perfectly 
reveals Lissitzky’s intention—to present the quintessential evolution of 
the image of space as a subspecies of mathematics.
El Lissitzky takes issue with the “inflexibility” of the perspective 
continuum: “The Euclidean conception of fixed space was destroyed 
by Lobachevsky, Gauss and Riemann.”29 And he examines the means 
of transforming artistic space. He exposes a fundamental weakness in 
artistic experiments with constructing images of space: “Up to the pres-
ent time the ‘universal set’ of art has acquired no enrichment. In the 
meantime, science undertook fundamental reconstructions.”30 What are 
the implications of this “reconstruction”? Examining recent develop-
ments in mathematics, Lissitzky focused on the dialectic idea of the 
number, or in mathematical terms on generalizing the conception of 
number. The evolution of the number can be presented as the gradual 
expansion from the objective to the non-objective, irrational and vi-
sionary (virtual).31 As a whole, nineteenth-century mathematics devised 
“the uninterrupted sequence,” including active and complex, signifiers 
and non-signifiers, everyday conceptions of numbers. Mathematics pos-
sessed definitions that were equally rational and irrational, objective 
and imaginary. It was precisely this rapid development in the concept 
of numbers in mathematics at the end of nineteenth and beginning of 
the twentieth century that paved the way for “Art and Pangeometry.”
From the point of view of mathematics’ development of the irration-
al and visionary (virtual), the experiment of the conceptual formulation 
of art in Lissitzky’s evaluation was very limited. The artist noted the first 
attempts to model the irrational in painting:
Our arithmetical notation, which is called the positional system, 
has long used the 0, but it was not until the sixteenth century 
that the 0 was first regarded as a number, as a numerical reality, 
and no longer as nothing (Cardano, Tartaglia). It is only now in 

211
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
the twentieth century that the Square [Kazimir Malevich’s Black 
Square]32 is being acknowledged as a plastic value, as 0 in the 
complex body of art. This solidly coloured33 square, stamped out 
in a rich tone on a white surface [Black Square] has now started 
to form a new space.34
How can a representational system expressing the irrational be con-
structed? El Lissitzky asserts that this must be a new visuality, based not 
on the “measurable” planimetric or depth-perspective narrative, but on 
intense relationships:
New optical discoveries have taught us that two areas of different 
intensities, even when they are lying in one plane, are grasped by 
the mind as being at different distances from the eye.
In this space, the distances are measured only by the intensity 
and the position of the strictly-defined areas of color. The space is 
arranged in the simplest directions—vertical, horizontal, or diag-
onal. It is a positional system. These distances cannot be meas-
ured by any finite measure, as can the objects in planimetric or 
perspectival space. The distances are irrational; they cannot be 
represented as a determinate ratio of two whole numbers.35
In this “gap” between intensities lies the colossal energy of space–time 
dislocation, which is rationally inexpressible.
Lissitzky was more specific about the means of constructing an irra-
tional, infinite space:
Suprematism has advanced the ultimate tip of the visual pyramid 
of perspective into infinity.
It has broken through the “blue lampshade of the firmament.” 
For the color of space, it has taken not the single blue ray of the 
spectrum, but the whole unity—the white. Suprematist space may 
be formed not only forward from the plane, but also backward 
in depth. If we indicate the flat surface of the picture as “0,” we 
can describe the direction in depth by “–” (negative) and the for-
ward direction by “+” (positive) or the other way round. We see 
that Suprematism has swept away from the plane the illusions of 
two-dimensional planimetric space, and has created the ultimate 
illusion of irrational space, with its infinite extendibility into the 
background and foreground.36
Lissitzky’s assertion requires some explanation. The idea of an infinitely 
distant point going visually beyond the lines of perspective had already 
been realized in the art of the Renaissance and the seventeenth  century, 

212
Igor Dukhan
and was theoretically expounded in the projective geometry of Gérard 
Desargues. “Scientific” perspective is a mechanism for localizing the 
infinite; the entire world is reduced to a single spatial model on the 
surface of the picture. “The Renaissance succeeded in mathematically 
fully rationalizing an image of space which had already been earlier aes-
thetically unified. This, as we have seen, involved extensive abstraction 
from the psycho-physiological structure of space, and repudiation of 
the antique authorities. But, on the other hand, it was now possible to 
construct an unambiguous and consistent spatial structure, of (within 
the limits of the ‘line of sight’) infinite extension.”37 But while classical 
“scientific” perspective aspired to the localization and “pacification” of 
infinity within the space–time continuum of the picture, and correlates 
with an enclosed and homogeneous (ontologically “empty”) space, Lis-
sitzky spoke of what might really be called limitless infinity, relating to 
“a qualitatively” changing space. He was the first art theorist to con-
struct a conceptual model of artistic infinity from the point of view 
of mathematical infinity. Here Lissitzky was surprisingly accurate in 
picking the most topical resource of the latest mathematics—infinity—
which at that time, his contemporary, the talented mathematician and 
thinker, Hermann Weyl, defined as the fundamental subject of mathe-
matics.38 Lissitzky and Weyl were fascinated by infinity. For Weyl, infin-
ity was particularly important because it led to a new inner dynamism 
in mathematics. The entire evolution of the new mathematics—from 
Euclid’s stable geometric paradigms to the multi-dimensional spatial 
concepts of Nikolai Lobachevsky, Carl Friedrich Gauss and Bernhard 
Riemann, on the one hand, and from the system of complete numbers 
to irrational and complex numbers, on the other—consisted of making 
the irrational and infinite the most important reality of mathematical 
thinking.
The extent of the differences and changes in the infinite was intensity. 
Contemporary artistic experiments moved towards the implementation 
in graphic forms of irrational infinite space—a counterpoint in inten-
sity, overcoming the constraints and immobility of planimetric and 
perspectival space. Artistic experiment was able, like mathematics and 
relativity, by means of the irrational, to pass from pure spatiality to the 
space–time continuum.
Lissitzky realized the entire methodological complexity of such a 
transfiguration for art: “Mathematics has created a ‘new thing’, the im-
aginary numbers … we reach a sphere which is beyond comprehension, 
which derives from purely logical construction, which is an elemen-
tary crystallization of human thought. What has this to do with the 
perspicuity, with the sensuous comprehensibility of art?”39 But further: 
“Time now becomes a factor of prime consideration as a new constit-
uent of plastic form. In the studios of modern artists it is believed that 
space and time can be formed into a direct unity, and therefore that 

213
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
they can replace each other.”40 In Lissitzky’s understanding, the image 
of  irrational space denoted space–time. Moreover, it reveals two tenden-
cies: the inner time of a work, based on the interplay of tensions (such 
as in the artistic principle of suprematism —“Suprematism has formed 
the dynamic tension of these forces”),41 and the dynamic transgression 
of spatial systems (“curve graphs of speed and dynamism, which have 
been transposed into the irrational system and made apprehensible,” the 
representation of “movement through movement”—Umberto Boccioni; 
and the representation of movement by means of symbols—Vladimir 
Tatlin and The Model for a Monument to the Third International).42
While in Kazimir Malevich’s suprematist painting the irration-
al is revealed through forming an interplay of tensions in an infinite 
space, Lissitzky in his Prouns, photography and exhibition spaces 
(Demonstrationsräume) constructed various anti-perspectival modes 
of space–time. At first glance, in his Prouns we discover a departure 
from classical perspective towards ways of constructing space such as 
axonometric drawing and isometric projection. In this way, Proun 1 
E The City (1921) was constructed (a word that El Lissitzky used to 
emphasize the substantively effective rather than the specifically artistic 
nature of his experiments).43 Here, Lissitzky established plastically the 
duality of classical perspective in the creation of an “objective” image of 
an environment, in so far as axonometry and isometry actually convey 
a significantly more “objective” image of reality, for the sizes of ob-
jects are fixed in their accurate measurements, without any perspectival 
“foreshortening.” Nevertheless, Lissitzky achieves the fundamental ef-
fect of the “removal of perspective” in those Prouns where he confronts 
and integrates various spatial systems. While Malevich freed infinity as 
pictorial ontology and worked with “pure” tensions, Lissitzky the ar-
chitect remained the constructor of space (“a constructivist–montagist” 
as Malevich ironically called him in a letter),44 creating the effect of 
illusionary depth and structures, which were not a feature of Malevich’s 
abstraction.
Constructing his work, Lissitzky created in them varied and compli-
cated spatial constructions. In the Prouns 5A (1919), 30T (1920), 12E 
(1920) L.N.31 (c. 1924) and others, axonometry and isometry were 
integrated with other spatial structures “seeking” different foci and 
depicting a unified complex of interconnected spaces. In the Prouns, 
the architect Lissitzky brilliantly introduced a play with volumetric and 
spatial structures in their individual projections on various planes. Spa-
tiality acquired the character of a system of topological dislocations: 
in front of us unfolds the interaction of topological transformations 
of form in which the constituent factor is time. Lissitzky characterized 
time in Malevich’s suprematism as “a dynamic intensity of forces.” It 
follows that time in Lissitzky’s montage combinations should be defined 
as the dynamic tension transforming spatial structures, the energy of 
topological dislocations. In Lissitzky’s “dislocations,” topological time 

214
Igor Dukhan
becomes the visible power of the transfiguration of forms, and in this 
energy of dislocation and transformation, the space–time field is gen-
erated. Here is visibly incarnate what Lissitzky the theoretician called 
“multi-dimensional, real spaces, in which one can go for a walk without 
an umbrella, and where space and time are interchangeable and can be 
brought into one unity.”45
The space–time shift radically overcomes the already mentioned fun-
damental principle of perspective—the integration of the visual field on 
the basis of a single, static, viewing position. We have already discussed 
Lissitzky’s conceptual criticism of perspective’s “immobile three-di-
mensionality.” Lissitzky’s “displacement,” which transformed the single 
privileged position of the subject into a space–time dynamic, received 
an interesting artistic embodiment in his photographic work46—for 
example in his photographic portrait of Kurt Schwitters (1924)—the 
artist leader of Hannover Dada, etc. The portrait of Schwitters was a 
double exposure with a temporal shift between two states. The nega-
tive, which is preserved in the Hannover Museum, shows two, sepa-
rately taken photographs of Schwitters,47 which Lissitzky then exposed 
on one sheet, adding a small element (a parrot?) in front of Schwitters’ 
mouth.48
Lissitzky used a similar method of displacement and double expo-
sure (or more accurately—multi-exposure) in his photographic portrait 
of Hans Arp (1924). Here he played with and strengthened one method 
of perspective—the effect of binocularity of the visual image, appearing 
when viewed with both eyes. Arp’s head is shown from two angles—al-
most frontal and almost profile. Leah Dickerman writes: “To understand 
how Lissitzky’s photographic work subverts the terms of perspectival-
ism, it is important that along with the desecration of the transparency 
and pure opticality of the photographic field comes an explicit chal-
lenge to the other concept central to the model—the temporal topos of 
immediacy. The disembodied Cartesian eye unimpeded by matter sees 
instantly; in contrast Lissitzky’s Swiss photographic work reveals an 
intense preoccupation with time, a sense of resistance to temporal cap-
ture revealed in the inscription of duration. We can see this in Lissitzky’s 
portrait of Arp, in the layered memory trace of Arp’s bodily position 
and multiplied body parts produced by double exposure.”49 Further, 
Dickerman characterizes the temporal nature of the photographic por-
trait of Arp, using Bergson’s category of duration, la durée. The corre-
lation with la durée does not seem to be entirely successful: Bergson’s 
duration presupposes a direct and vital, ecstatic experience of time, but 
artistic experiments, aspiring to embody this, confront the complexities 
of visualizing a continuous immediacy.50 Lissitzky achieved a different 
effect: in the portrait of Arp, the viewer feels something else—a vital 
“duration of distortion” from the well exposed frontal image to the 
lightly developed “shadow” of his profile. To this image of duration, 
we will attach Julia Kristeva’s observation  concerning “sensual time” 

215
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
(“le temps sensible”) of Marcel Proust.51 Lissitzky really did make time 
sensual and visible.
The ideal of sensual, visible space–time for Lissitzky was the film 
image. In Lissitzky’s view, only film was able to embody completely the 
imaginary/virtual—“forming imaginary space by means of a material 
object.”52
Our visual faculty is limited when it comes to the conception of 
movement and indeed of the whole state of the object; for exam-
ple: disconnected movements separated by periods shorter than 
1/30 of a second create the impression of a continuous move-
ment. It is on this factor that film is based. The involvement of 
the film as a means of solving the problems of dynamic form 
through actual movement is a decided achievement on the part of 
V. [Viking] Eggeling and his successors. This is the first step in the 
direction leading toward the construction of imaginary space.53
Film “generates … an entirely new impression of space, which is there 
for as long as the movement lasts and is therefore imaginary.”54
The film image as an ideal model of form-making appears repeatedly 
in Lissitzky’s theory and practice: A Tale of Two Squares and For the 
Voice were constructed in the form of a visual film montage, and some 
features of film can be discerned in the series of Khad Gadya (1917 
and 1919). Lissitzky even constructed his biography in 1926 like a film 
(“The Film of El’s Life”).
In his conception of the film image, Lissitzky grasped the very es-
sence of the nascent new space–time vision–perception; film introduces 
a new aspect to our understanding of the visible. Here it becomes pos-
sible for the first time to construct a moving image: an artistic image 
not constrained by elements or boundaries of the visible, but directly 
conveying movement. And although Henri Bergson discerned in cine-
matography the fragmented image of movement and not the sponta-
neity of duration, Gilles Deleuze, picking up the impulse of Bergson’s 
thinking, discovered that it is precisely in the language of film that con-
sensus makes modality, the congruence with consciousness, movement 
and time overcoming those inherent contradictions in Bergson’s ideas. 
As Lissitzky saw it, film allows the immediate showing of the “inner” 
spontaneous flow of time in the moving image, grasping the living pro-
cess of space–time reality. Lissitzky seems closer to Deleuze’s notion 
of film which overcame one of the paradoxical misunderstandings of 
Henri Bergson’s conception, contained in the last chapter of Creative 
Evolution—namely seeing film as a mechanical image of reality.
***
In the perspective of the twentieth-century philosophy of time and 
space, El Lissitzky’s investigation stimulated the genesis of a particular 
space–time discourse, which overcame the differentiation of time and 

216
Igor Dukhan
space in art and mathematics. Beginning with Henri Bergson’s intuition 
of duration, and developing these ideas within the Kantian context of 
Edmund Husserl’s phenomenology of the inner consciousness of time, 
temporality as the spontaneous ecstasy of the inner became contrasted 
with space as exterior. In the 1910s, the cubists and futurists had tried 
to embody Bergson’s intuition of duration in their theory and painting, 
which must be considered among the first experiments in the conceptu-
alization of the language of space–time in the twentieth century.
Direct experimentation with space–time in life cannot but confirm 
the immediate connection between time and space, and this associa-
tion is expressed variously in the scientific languages of relativity and 
topology, and later in the phenomenological investigations of Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty and in Gilles Deleuze’s ideas of image–time. El Lissitz-
ky’s philosophy of pangeometry attempted to reveal time in spatiality, 
the irrational in the visual, and in this effort it had to be applied to the 
experiment of forming a new artistic language, overcoming the dissoci-
ation between time and space.
Notes
 1.  I.N. Dukhan, “Filosofiia klassicheskogo v iskusstve i proektnoi 
kul’ture modernizma,” Voprosy filosofii, no 6 (2009): 47–56.
 2.  Kazimir Malevich, Sobranie sochinenii v piati tomakh (Moscow: 
Gileya, 2003), 4:308.
 3.  Gino Severini, Du cubisme au classicisme (Esthétique du compas et 
du nombre) (Paris: J. Povolovzky & Cie., editeurs, 1921).
 4.  K.S. Malevich, Ot kubizma i futurizma k suprematizmu. Novyi 
zhivopisnyi realizm (Moscow, 1916); reprinted in Kazimir Malevich, 
Sobranie sochinenii v piati tomakh (Moscow: Gileia, 1995), 1:69.
 5.  Malevich, Ot kubizma i futurizma k suprematizmu. Novyi 
zhivopisnyi realizm, in idem, Sobranie sochinenii, 1:51.
 6.  Malevich, Ot kubizma i futurizma k suprematizmu. Novyi 
zhivopisnyi realizm, in idem, Sobranie sochinenii, 1:44.
 7.  Kazimir Malevich, “Suprematizm. Mir kak bezpredmetnost’ 
ili vechnoi pokoi,” ms, 1921; reprinted in Malevich, Sobranie 
sochinenii, 4:282.
 8.  Kazimir Malevich, Sobranie sochinenii v piati tomakh (Moscow: 
Gileia, 2003), 4:324.
 9.  A. Belyi, “M. O. Gershenzon,” Rossiia, no 5 (14) (1925): 4 and 255; 
emphasis added.
10.  Ibid., 256.
11.  For the evolution of El Lissitzky’s creative vision from Unovis to 
his active participation in the international avant-garde movement 
while he was staying in Berlin and Switzerland, 1921–25, see: Susan 
Marten-Finnis and Igor Dukhan, “Transnationale Öffentlichkeit 

217
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
und Dialog im Russischen Berlin. Die Avantgarde—Zeitschrift 
Vešcˇ—Gegenstand—Objet,” Osteuropa (March 2008): 37–9; 
and I.N. Dukhan, El’ Lisitskii 1890–1941. Geometriia vremeni 
(Moscow: Art-Rodnik, 2010), 30–62.
12.  El Lissitzky, “K. [Kunst] und Pangeometrie,” in Carl Einstein and Paul 
Westheim, eds., Europa-Almanach (Potsdam: Gustav Kiepenheuer, 
1925), 103–13. English translation: “A. and Pangeometry,” in 
Sophie Lissitzky-Küppers, El Lissitzky, Life. Letters. Texts, trans. 
Helene Aldwinckle (London: Thames and Hudson, 1968), 348–53.
13.  Cited by Éva Forgács, “Definitive Space: The Many Utopias of El 
Lissitzky’s Proun Room,” in Nancy Perloff and Brian Reed, eds., 
Situating El Lissitzky: Vitebsk, Berlin, Moscow (Los Angeles: Getty 
Research Institute, 2003), 70.
14.  Erwin Panofsky, “Die Perspektive als ‘Symbolishce Form,’” in Fritz 
Saxl, ed., Vorträge der Bibliothek Warburg 1924–5 (Leipzig: B.G. 
Teubner, 1927), 258–330.
15.  Ibid., note 75.
16.  See, for instance, Pavel Florenskii, “Obratnaia perspektiva,” in 
Pavel Florenskii, Ikonostas: Izbrannye trudy po iskusstvu (Saint 
Petersburg: Russkaia kniga, 1993), 175–283; and Fritz Novotny, 
Cézanne und das Ende der wissenschaftlichen Perspektive (Vienna 
and Munich: Verlage der Anton Schroll, 1938).
17.  Concerning this type of understanding of space, see Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty, “Eye and Mind” (1951), in The Merleau-Ponty 
Aesthetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting, ed. Galen A. Johnson 
and trans. ed. Michael B. Smith (Evanston, Il.: Northwestern 
University Press, 1996), 121–50.
18.  Concerning the connection of “Art and Pangeometry” with avant-
garde theory and practice, see: A.G. Rappaport, “El’ Lisitskii i ideia 
pangeometrii,” in I.E. Danilova, ed., Rossiia-Frantsiia. Problemy 
kul’tury pervykh desiatiletii XX veka (Moscow: GMII im. A.S. 
Pushkina, 1988), 32–57. For the essay’s significance within the 
context of systems of spatial representation, see Yve-Alain Bois, 
“From – ∞ to  +  ∞: Axonometry, or Lissitzky’s Mathematical 
Paradigm,” in Jan Debbaut, ed., El Lissitzky, 1890–1941: Architect, 
Painter, Photographer, Typographer (Eindhoven: Stedeijk Van 
Abbemuseum, 1990), 27–33. See also I. Dukhan, “El Lissitzky—
Jewish as Universal: From Jewish Style to Pangeometry,” Ars 
Judaica, no 3 (2007): 53–72.
19.  Leon Battista Alberti, Della pittura e della statua (Milan: Società 
tipografica de’Classici italiani, 1804).
20.  Ibid.
21.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” in Lissitzky-Küppers, El Lissitzky, 
348.
22.  Lissitzky, letter to Sophie Küppers, 21 March 1924, in Lissitzky-
Küppers, El Lissitzky, 46.

218
Igor Dukhan
23.  Sophie Lissitzky-Küppers, “Life and Letters,” in Lissitzky-Küppers, 
El Lissitzky, 19.
24.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 349.
25.  Ibid.; original emphasis.
26.  D.A. Stroik, Kratkii ocherk istorii matematiki (Moscow: Nauka, 
1990), 37.
27.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 349.
28.  Ibid.
29.  Ibid.
30.  Ibid.
31.  As is known, historically, the natural sequence of numbers (based 
on the criteria of the nature of quantity and order of objects), was 
initially amplified by fractions and negative numbers. Complete 
numbers, fractions (positive and negative) and “zero” form the 
aggregate of rational numbers, which allow the performance of 
spatial measurements to any required degree of accuracy. The 
system of rational numbers became inadequate for investigating 
constantly changing shifts in size. As is known, even in ancient 
geometry it was observed that not all segments of exactly defined 
length were commensurate; that is, that the relationship between 
two segments could not always be expressed by a rational number 
(e.g. the relationship of the sides of a square and its diagonal cannot 
be expressed by a rational number). The investigation into the 
uninterrupted processes and methods of converging calculations 
led to a more dynamic understanding of numbers, not so much as 
units of quantity, but more as relationships of size. It is precisely in 
this way that Isaac Newton understood numbers. This definition 
already contains the idea of the active number—rational or 
irrational. As Lev Pontriagin observed, “the move from rational 
numbers to active numbers occurred because of the inner logic of 
the development of mathematics rather than because of practical 
requirements, because with the aid of rational numbers it is possible 
to effect any measurement with any degree of precision … Active 
numbers represent a limitless medium, in which rational numbers 
are positioned.” See L.S. Pontriagin, Oboshchenie (Moscow: 
Editorial URSS, 2003). The definitive formulation of the idea of 
active numbers occurred in mathematics in the nineteenth century, 
in connection with thinking about constancy and abstract real 
infinity in the work of Georg Cantor, Karl Weierstrass, and Richard 
Dedekind. The development of the idea of numbers led to the notion 
of complex numbers. The concept first appeared in mathematics in 
the sixteenth century, particularly (as Lissitzky recalls) in the work 
of Girolamo Cardano, although the systematic theory of complex 
numbers was developed by Leonhard Euler and Carl Gauss. 
Complex numbers became particularly significant in nineteenth-
century mathematics in connection with the development of the 

219
Lissitzky and Space–Time in Avant-garde Art
theory of the function of complex changes, although they retained 
an element of uncertainty, which was manifest in the definition of 
a complex number as “imaginary.” For an everyday understanding, 
they are best understood, in so far as they represent themselves, in 
the form of the number x + iy, where x and y are active numbers, 
and i is an imaginary unit (a square which is equal to a negative 
entity).
32.  The iconic image of Kazimir Malevich’s Black Square appears in 
this place in the text. Lissitzky was referring to Girolamo Cardano 
and Niccoló Fontana Tartaglia.
33.  Once again, the iconic image of Kazimir Malevich’s Black Square 
appears in the text.
34.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 350.
35.  Ibid.
36.  Ibid.; original emphasis.
37.  Erwin Panofsky, Perspective as Symbolic Form, trans. Christopher 
S. Wood (New York: Zone Books, 1991), 63.
38.  A.G. Barabasheva, Beskonechnoe v matematike: filosofskie i 
istoricheskie aspekty (Moscow: Ynus-K, 1997).
39.  “Wir kommen in ein Gebiet, das nicht vorstellbar ist, das keiner 
Anschaulichkeit fähig ist, das aus der rein logischen Konstruktion 
folgt, das eine elementare Kristallisation des menschlichen 
Gedankens ist.” See, Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 351. German 
text reprinted in Sophie Lissitzky-Küppers, El Lissitzky: Maler, 
Architekt, Typograf, Fotorgraf. Errinerungen, Briefe, Schriften 
(Dresden: Verlag der Kunst, 1967), 70.
40.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 351.
41.  Ibid., 352.
42.  Ibid.
43.  See facsimile reproduction in:  Lissitzky-Küppers, El Lissitzky: 
Maler,Architekt, 
Typograf, 
Fotorgraf. 
Errinerungen, 
Briefe, 
Schriften (Dresden: Verlag der Kunst, 1967), plate 90.
44.  Kazimir Malevich, letter to El Lissitzky, 17 July 1924; reprinted in 
Malevich, Sobranie sochinenii, 4:297.
45.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 351.
46.  Concerning the space–time aspects of El Lissitzky’s photography, 
see Leah Dickerman, “El Lissitzky’s Camera Corpus,” in Perloff 
and Reed, eds., Situating El Lissitzky, 153–76.
47.  Margarita Tupitsyn, Ulrich Pohlmann and Matthew Drutt, El 
Lissitzky: Beyond the Abstract Cabinet: Photography, Design, 
Collaboration (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 
1999), 86, illus. 18 and 19.
48.  Dickerman, “El Lissitzky’s Camera Corpus,” 159.
49.  Ibid., 160.
50.  See Mark Antliff, Inventing Bergson: Cultural Politics and the 
Parisian Avant-Garde (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 

220
Igor Dukhan
1992); and I.N. Dukhan, “Kubizm i dlitel’nost’: filosofiia vremeni 
Anri Bergsona v zerkale avangarda,” Iskusstvoznanie 10, nos 1–2 
(2010): 455–72.
51.  Julia Kristeva, Le temps sensible: Proust et l’expérience littéraire 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 1–36.
52.  Lissitzky, “A. and Pangeometry,” 352.
53.  Ibid.
54.  Ibid., 353.

