

Contents
Title Page
Contents
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Author’s Note
Introduction
PART I: ASSESS
Leonardo da Vinci and Losing Your Mind
(The Importance of Seeing What Matters)
Elementary Skills
(Mastering the Fine Art of Observation)
The Platypus and the Gentleman Thief
(Why No Two People See Things the Same Way)
Delta Employees Do It on the Fly
(The Who, What, When, and Where of Objective Surveillance)
What’s Hiding in Plain Sight?
(Seeing the Forest and the Trees)
PART II: ANALYZE
Keep Your Head on a Swivel
(Analyzing from Every Angle)
Seeing What’s Missing
(How to Prioritize Like an Undercover Agent)
PART III: ARTICULATE
Making Your Unknown Known
(How to Avoid Communication Breakdowns)
Big (Naked, Obese) Sue and the High School Principal
(How to See and Share Hard Truths)
PART IV: ADAPT
Nothing Is Black-and-White
(Overcoming Our Inherent Biases)
What to Do When You Run Out of Gurneys

(How to Navigate Uncertainty)
Conclusion: Master Work
Acknowledgments
Notes
Illustration Credits
Index
About the Author

Copyright © 2016 by Amy E. Herman
All rights reserved
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book, write
to trade.permissions@hmhco.com or to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
Publishing Company, 3 Park Avenue, 19th Floor, New York, New York 10016.
www.hmhco.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Herman, Amy, author.
Title: Visual intelligence: sharpen your perception, change your life / Amy E.
Herman.
Description: Boston : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, [2016]
“An Eamon Dolan Book.” | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015037245 | ISBN 9780544381056 (hardcover) | ISBN
9780544381063 (ebook) | ISBN 9780544882003 (pbk. (international edition))
Subjects: LCSH: Visual perception. | Visual literacy.
Classification: LCC BF241 .H436 2016 | DDC 152.14—dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015037245
Cover design by Brian Moore
Author photograph © Christine Butler
v1.0516

To Ian. Everything. Always.

The world is full of magic things,
patiently waiting for our senses to grow sharper.
—AUTHOR UNKNOWN

Author’s Note
It has been my great privilege to teach The Art of Perception for fourteen years.
In doing so, I have spoken with and written to thousands of people from around
the world about their experiences with art, observation, perception, and
communication. Since some of these conversations took place years before this
book was even an idea, since my wonderful program participants didn’t plan on
being part of this book when they signed up for my class, and since many of my
interviewees have extremely sensitive jobs, I have changed the names and
identifying details of most of the people whose stories appear in this book to
protect their privacy. Any resulting resemblances to persons living or dead are
entirely coincidental and unintentional. Visual Intelligence is a work of
nonfiction. All stories are recounted as they happened or were told to me, subject
to the limitations of memory. I couldn’t fact-check all of the personal stories
people told me, but I included only those I believed to be true.
Note from the Publisher: The text of this ebook is accompanied by full-color
art reproductions and photographs. For the best reading experience, this ebook
should be viewed on a color device.

Introduction
AS I STOOD in the hallway outside the apartment, everything took on a hazy, slow-
motion quality. Shouting echoed behind the door. Dust particles floated in the
fluorescent light. A cat mewed from somewhere to my left. The officer in front
of me raised his fist to knock, while his partner—tense, armed, ready for action
—covered him. As the domestic dispute blared beyond the door, the black hole
of the second officer’s gun barrel gaped like a silent scream. How had I gotten
here?
Since I was little, I had seen the art in everything: in the beautiful asymmetry
of sunlight streaming through the trees and the unique patterns of stones and
shells left behind when the tide washed out. I was never a particularly creative
person myself, but that didn’t stop me from studying art history. Following
college, though, my upbringing by my scientist father and ultra-practical mother
and a desire to serve led me to law school. And this particularly intense police
ride-along.
To detach myself from the worry bubbling in my gut, I studied my
surroundings as I would a painting, analyzing each nuance, taking stock of both
foreground and back, trying to find meaning in small, seemingly incongruent
details. I knew this was an unusual way to think—I’d been told so often enough
—but I always found my art background useful in the practice of law, where the
need to be an objective observer is critical.
And then I had a terrible thought: what if the officers I was with didn’t have
these skills? What the first officer saw when the door opened—be it a crying
baby, a confused elderly woman, or a gun-wielding madman—and how he
conveyed it to his partner in that split second would affect the outcome for every
one of us. My life was in the hands of a virtual stranger and his ability to see and
accurately convey what he saw.
Thankfully the police were able to defuse the situation and my experience
didn’t end in disaster, but as generally happens when we’re nose-to-nose with a
deadly weapon for the first time or forced to face our own mortality, it haunted
me for years after. How many times do our lives depend upon someone else’s
observation skills? For most of us, it’s too many to count: whenever we get on
an airplane or a train, into a taxicab, or onto an operating table. It’s not always
life-or-death; sometimes it’s just life-altering. Other people’s attention to detail
and follow-through can also affect our job, our reputation, our safety, and our

success. And we can affect theirs. It’s a responsibility we shouldn’t take lightly,
as it can mean the difference between a promotion and a demotion, between a
triumph and a tragedy, between a normal Tuesday in September and 9/11.
Seeing clearly and communicating effectively are not rocket science; they’re
straightforward skills. We’re born hardwired for both. But more often than we’d
care to admit, we fail to use these skills. We show up at the wrong airport gate
and try to board the wrong plane, we send an email to the wrong recipient saying
something we never should have said, we miss a key piece of evidence that was
staring us right in the face. Why? Because we’re hardwired for those errors as
well.
Our brains can see only so much, and can process even less. I knew this from
years of practicing law and witnessing firsthand the unreliability of eyewitnesses
and the fallibility of first-person accounts, but it wasn’t until I followed my heart
back to the art world that I began to actively investigate the mysteries of
perception. As the head of education of The Frick Collection in New York City,
I helped bring a course created by a dermatology professor at Yale to NYC
medical schools, teaching students to analyze works of art in order to improve
their patient observation skills. It was very successful—a clinical study found
that the students who took the course had diagnostic skills that were 56 percent
better than peers who didn’t—and I wanted to understand the science behind it. I
wanted to know more about the mechanics of how we see and how simply
looking at art could improve.
I became a neuroscience fanatic, reading all the research I could find and
interviewing the researchers who’d conducted it. I even signed up for an online
community neuroscience “video game.” And I discovered that while my own
perceptions about how we see were wrong on many levels—apparently the
retina is part of the brain, not the eye—they were spot-on in the most important
ways: while we might not fully understand the human brain, we can change it.
We can train our brains to see more, and to observe more accurately.
And as I often do when I learn something fantastic, I wanted to share it with
everyone, not just medical students. I was out to dinner with friends sharing
some of what I learned one night soon after 9/11, when the city was still reeling
from the terrorist attacks and resulting stories of heroism and heartbreak. One of
my friends asked if I had considered training first responders. I hadn’t, but as I
thought back to my fear in the hallway on that law student ride-along, not
knowing how the officers I was with would see or react to what they saw, it
made perfect sense. I fell in love with the idea of pairing cops with Rembrandt; I
just had to convince the law enforcement community. The following Monday I
cold-called the NYPD.

“I’d like to bring your cops to our museum to look at art,” I told the
bewildered deputy commissioner. I half expected him to hang up on me, but to
his credit, he agreed to give it a try. Within a few weeks, we had weapons in the
Frick for the first time ever, and The Art of Perception® was born.
I’ve been teaching the class for fourteen years now, training officers from
thirteen divisions of the NYPD, as well as the police departments in Washington,
DC, Chicago, and Philadelphia, the Virginia State Police, and the Ohio
Association of Chiefs of Police. Word of the program’s effectiveness spread
quickly, and my client list grew to include the FBI, the Department of Homeland
Security, Scotland Yard, the US Army, Navy, National Guard, Secret Service,
and Marshal Service, the Federal Reserve, the Department of Justice, the State
Department, and the National Park Service.
The Wall Street Journal soon profiled my class and its positive effects on the
law enforcement, legal, and military sectors in a story about an undercover FBI
agent who credited my training with helping him sharpen his observation skills.
After taking The Art of Perception, the agent was able to collect incriminating
evidence against a Mob-controlled garbage collection syndicate that resulted in
thirty-four convictions and the government seizure of $60 to $100 million in
assets. Almost immediately, I started getting calls from private companies,
educational institutions, and even workers’ unions. Because in reality, all of us—
parents, teachers, flight attendants, investment bankers, even doormen—are first
responders on some level.
The Art of Perception’s unique pedagogy has been called “invaluable” by the
Department of Defense and credited with “stimulating the innovative thinking
necessary to generate viable future war-fighting concepts” by the chief of naval
operations. After attending my seminar at an FBI National Academy program,
Inspector Benjamin Naish arranged for me to present to the Philadelphia Police
Department, stating, “I felt like I had my eyes opened wider [in this course, and I
knew it was] the most unusual training they’re ever going to have a chance to
see.”
What’s so unusual about it? I show pictures of naked women with breasts
sagging on their stomachs and sculptures made from urinals to teach the fine art
of accurate observation and effective communication.
And it works.
I’ve helped thousands of people from dozens of walks of life—law firms,
libraries, auction houses, hospitals, universities, Fortune 500 companies,
entertainment companies, banks, unions, and even churches—strengthen and
sharpen their visual analysis and critical-thinking skills. And I can teach you.
Because medical and law enforcement professionals aren’t the only ones who

need to know how to identify pertinent information, prioritize it, draw
conclusions from it, and communicate it. We all do. A single missed detail or
miscommunicated word can just as easily botch a cappuccino order, a million-
dollar contract, or a murder investigation. I know because every week I stand in
front of the best and the brightest and watch as they miss critical information . . .
over and over again. No one is immune to this failure to see, not presidents or
postal workers, not babysitters or brain surgeons.
And then I watch them get better. Whether I’m teaching customer service or
information technology agents, artists or archivists, students or surveillance
experts, people who are already very good at their jobs invariably get even
better. I watch the transformation every single session, and I’m delighted to have
the opportunity to help you transform as well.
JR, Women Are Heroes, Kenya: Self-Portrait in a Woman’s Eye, Kenya,
2009.
This photograph is a self-portrait of the artist JR—or at least one perspective
of him in someone else’s eye. JR had a problem in that he was becoming
increasingly famous for his photographic portraits that were blown up to
billboard size and attached to the tops and sides of buildings all over the world—
to “put a human face to the most impoverished areas of the world”—but since he
never got permits for them, warrants for his arrest had been issued in several

countries. He was asked to create a self-portrait but was hesitant to show his
facial attributes out of fear it might facilitate his arrest. His solution: Self-
Portrait in a Woman’s Eye. I love this photograph because it encapsulates
exactly what The Art of Perception is all about: shifting our perspective and our
expectations further than we ever thought possible.
Think of this book as your new self-portrait. You can use it to step back and
see yourself through new eyes. What do you look like to the world? How well do
you communicate? How well do you observe? What’s behind you and around
you and inside you?
From this book, you’ll learn how to sharpen your own inherent intelligence
gathering, strategic and critical thinking, decision making, and formulation of
inquiry skills using the amazing computer between your ears. Unlike other books
by psychologists or reporters, though, this one will not just tell you what your
brain can do or how people are using theirs to the limit, it will show you.
We’ll use the same interactive training I use to engage leaders around the
globe. We’ll practice reconciling larger concepts with more specific details,
articulating visual and sensory information, and conveying it in an objective and
precise manner with the help of water lilies, women in corsets, and a nude or
two.
Take a look at the photograph on the next page. It hasn’t been retouched or
digitally altered; what you see actually existed this way. What do you think is
going on in the photograph, and where was it taken?

Anna Schuleit Haber, Bloom: A Site-specific Installation, 2003.
The most common answer I get is flowers in an old abandoned building for
some kind of art installation. And that’s partially correct. It is an old building,
those are real flowers, and they were put there intentionally by an artist. What
kind of building do you think it is? We see a hallway with many doors, and a
window at the end of that hallway. People guess it’s an office building or some
kind of school, but it’s not. It’s something most people never consider: a
hi
i h
i l

psychiatric hospital.
When the Massachusetts Mental Health Center was slated for demolition after
ninety years in service to make way for more modern facilities, artist Anna
Schuleit Haber commemorated its closing by filling it with what it had always
lacked. (Sadly, she was inspired by her observation that patients in psychiatric
hospitals rarely receive flowers, as there are no wishes for a speedy recovery.)
Her resulting installation, Bloom, turns our thinking about mental health care
upside down. We do not associate vibrant color with a deteriorating building or
expect to see life oozing from the halls of a psychiatric facility. In the same way,
this book will alter the way you observe the world. You will see color and light
and detail and opportunity where you swore there were none. You will see life
and possibility and truth in the emptiest spaces. You will see order and find
answers in the most chaotic and messiest places. You will never see the same
way again.
All of my requests for The Art of Perception live presentation come from
enthusiastic referrals because once people’s eyes are opened, they can’t shut
their mouths about it. They want everyone to experience the same revelation and
reward. Past participants flood my email in-box with stories of how the training
gave them more confidence in their jobs, helped them win promotions, improved
their customer service, saved their companies hundreds of thousands of dollars,
doubled and tripled their fund-raising outcomes, raised their standardized test
scores, and even kept their children out of unnecessary special education classes.
Learning to see what matters can change your world as well. I invite you to
open your eyes and see how. I bet you’ll discover you didn’t even know they
were closed.

PART I
Assess
We find only the world we look for.
—HENRY DAVID THOREAU

1
Leonardo da Vinci and Losing Your Mind
The Importance of Seeing What Matters
WHEN DERRECK KAYONGO stepped into the shower in his Philadelphia hotel room,
he noticed something that millions of business travelers and families on holiday
before him had seen and not paid any particular attention to: the tiny bar of soap
on the corner shelf. It was different. Instead of the smooth green oval he had
used the evening before, a small cardboard box sat in its place. Inside was a
brand-new bar of soap.
The Ugandan native, who as a child had left everything behind when he and
his family fled Idi Amin’s murderous dictatorship, was a recent American
college graduate, and on a tight budget. He turned off the water, dressed, and
took the unused soap down to the concierge desk.
“I want to make sure I am not charged for this,” he told the employee. “I have
not used it, and do not need it.”
“Oh, don’t worry, it’s complimentary,” the concierge answered.
“Thank you, but I already got one yesterday when I arrived,” Kayongo
explained. “Where is that one?”
“We replace the soap every day for every guest,” the concierge assured him.
“No charge.”
Kayongo was shocked. Every room, every day? In every hotel? Throughout
America?
“What do you do with the old bars?” he asked. Unlike the slivers of soap used
in the African refugee camps he had grown up in, the bar from his shower was
fairly substantial; it seemed almost brand-new even after he had used it.
“Housekeeping throws them away,” the concierge said, and shrugged.
“Where?”
“Just the regular trash.”
“I’m not a great mathematician,” Kayongo tells me, “but I quickly realized
that if only half of the hotels did this, it was an incredible amount of soap—
hundreds of millions of bars just being dumped into landfills. I couldn’t get it out
of my head.”
Kayongo called his father, a former soap maker, back in Africa and told him
the news. “You won’t believe it. In America, they throw away soap after they

the news. You won t believe it. In America, they throw away soap after they
have used it only once!”
“People there can afford to waste soap,” his father told him.
But in Kayongo’s mind it was a waste no one could afford, not when he knew
more than two million people, most of them toddlers, still died every year from
diarrheal disease, a malady easily prevented by the simple act of washing one’s
hands with soap. Soap was a luxury item many in Africa could not afford, yet in
America it was simply thrown away. Kayongo decided to try to do something
with his new country’s trash to help his old country.
Back home in Atlanta, he drove around to local hotels and asked if he could
have their used soap.
“At first they thought I was crazy,” he remembers, a smile spilling through his
voice over the phone. “Why do you want those? They are dirty. Yes, that was a
problem, but we can clean them. We can clean soap!”
Kayongo found a recycling facility to scrape, melt, and disinfect the bars of
soap he collected, and the charity Global Soap Project was born. He has since
recycled one hundred tons of soap and distributed repurposed, life-saving bars
along with a hygiene education program to people in thirty-two countries on four
continents. In 2011, Kayongo was deservedly named one of CNN’s “Heroes.”
Unlike the heroes of old movies and swashbuckling fables, we don’t have to
be the strongest, fastest, smartest, richest, handsomest, or luckiest to get ahead or
make a difference in the world. The most successful people in modern times—
people such as Bill Gates, Richard Branson, Oprah Winfrey, and Derreck
Kayongo—prove that it doesn’t matter what physical attributes we have or don’t,
our level of education, our profession, our station in life, or where we live.
We can survive and thrive today if we know how to see.
To see what’s there that others don’t. To see what’s not there that should be.
To see the opportunity, the solution, the warning signs, the quickest way, the
way out, the win. To see what matters.
Even if we don’t long for front-page accolades, acute and accurate observation
yields rewards big and small across all aspects of life. When a housekeeper at a
Minneapolis hotel noticed a young girl alone in a room who wouldn’t make eye
contact, wasn’t dressed for the cold weather, and had no luggage, she reported it,
and helped uncover an international sex trafficking ring. When an astute waiter
at a crowded Israeli coffeehouse noticed that the schoolboy who asked for a
glass of water was sweating profusely while wearing a heavy overcoat on a mild
day, he looked more intently and saw a small wire sticking out of the boy’s large
black duffel bag. His observation kept the boy from detonating a large explosive
that the local police chief said would have caused “a major disaster.”
The ability to see, to pay attention to what is often readily available right in

y
,
p y
y
g
front of us, is not only a means to avert disaster but also the precursor and
prerequisite to great discovery.
While millions of people have enjoyed using a new bar of hotel soap each
day, only Kayongo saw the potential for a life-saving recycling program. What
made him see exactly the same thing that others had, but see it in a different
way? The same thing that allowed Swiss hiker George de Mestral to look down
at his burr-covered socks and see a new type of adhesion; Mestral’s discovery of
what he christened Velcro revolutionized the way astronauts and skiers suited
up, saved an entire generation of kids from learning how to tie their shoes, and
still posts $260 million a year in sales. The same thing that made Houston mom
Betsy Ravreby Kaufman see plastic Easter eggs as a way to cook hard-boiled
eggs without their shells. Tired of wasting food and time when the process of
peeling eggs left behind a mess, Kaufman envisioned boiling eggs in an egg-
shaped container from the start, thereby eliminating the need for shells
altogether. Her invention, Eggies, plastic egg-size cups with lids, sold more than
five million units in 2012 alone. The same thing that helped propel Apple icon
Steve Jobs to the top of the technological heap: an ability to see. Jobs reported,
“When you ask creative people how they did something, they feel a little guilty
because they didn’t really do it, they just saw something.”
Leonardo da Vinci attributed all of his scientific and artistic accomplishments
to the same concept, which he called saper vedere (“sah-PEAR veh-DARE-ay”)
—“knowing how to see.” We might also call his gift “visual intelligence.”
It sounds easy, doesn’t it? You just have to see. We’re born with the inherent
ability; in fact, our body does it involuntarily. If your eyes are open, you are
seeing. But there’s more to the neurobiological process than just keeping your
eyelids propped up.
A BRIEF BIOLOGY OF SIGHT
I’m not a scientist, but I was raised by one—my father is a parasitologist—so I
knew that the best way to investigate why we see the way we do was not to just
read the cutting-edge studies on human vision and perception but to go out and
meet the people who conducted them. My first stop: Dr. Sebastian Seung.
Thanks to his captivating TED talk and EyeWire, the visionary retina-
mapping project he heads, Dr. Seung is something of a rock star in neuroscience.
As I pull open the front doors of his lab at the new Princeton Neuroscience
Institute, a labyrinthine complex of glass and aluminum, I can feel my blood
pressure rise. The building is intimidating from the first step. There is no

receptionist or directory listing, just an unmarked, open elevator. I step inside
and quickly determine that I might not be smart enough for the building. I can’t
get the elevator to move; push and hold as I might, the buttons won’t stay lit.
There is no signage, no slot for a key card.
Help arrives in the form of an affable young student wearing a LINEAR
ALGEBRA IS MY HOMEBOY T-shirt. He presses his ID against a small glass panel,
and we rise. I tell him whom I’m here to see.
“Good luck,” he says with a smile. I hope I won’t need it.
Returning to Princeton is something of a full-circle moment for me, as I
moved to the town for my first job out of law school and lived just off Nassau
Street for five years. To keep my sanity, on the weekends I volunteered as a
docent at the Princeton University Art Museum.
When I meet Dr. Seung and see that he’s wearing a Mickey Mouse T-shirt, I
instantly relax. Seung exudes an easy charm and has a gift for making the
extraordinarily complex seem not so. As he explains, seeing doesn’t have as
much to do with our eyes as I once thought.
While our sense of sight is most often associated with the spherical organs
that occupy the orbits of the skull, the brain is really the workhorse of the visual
processing system. Not only does processing what we see engage a full 25
percent of our brain and over 65 percent of all our brain pathways—more than
any of our other senses—it begins in a part of the eye that is really the brain.
The process starts when light passes through the pupil of our eye and is
converted into electrical patterns by neural cells on a membrane at the back
called the retina. When I tell Seung I remember learning in high school that the
retina is like the film in a camera, he shakes his head at this common
misconception.
“It’s definitely not film,” he says. “The retina’s such a complicated structure
that it’s not even a camera. It’s more like a computer.”
The retina isn’t a passive pathway but a part of the brain itself formed in utero
from neural tissue.
“Studying the retina is our easiest way into the brain,” Seung explains,
“because it is the brain.”

3D printout of a neuron.
To thank him for introducing me to the beauty and complexity of the retina,
and for referring me to scores of other scientists, I have brought him a gift: one
of the first-ever 3D-printed neurons.
I had downloaded the printable file, a J cell named IFLS mapped for EyeWire
by citizen scientists, from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 3D Print
Exchange, and then visited my local MakerBot store, which had the technology
to print out a vastly enlarged replica of the neuron. The delicate sculpture
resembled a lumpy seed, reminiscent of a tiny brain itself, sprouting a serpentine
f l
d
b
h
h d
d i
h
d
h
l
i
l

system of slender branches, the dendrites that conduct the electrical messages
between cells.
I have seen the network of retinal neurons laced together—referred to as “the
jungle” by Seung—in the EyeWire computer program he runs, each neuron a
different neon color to make its paths more apparent, but as I hold it in my hand,
the importance of each connection is magnified. With 100 million retinal
receptors, the retina not only does the bulk of image preprocessing, it must also
spatially encode or compress an image before it is sent along the 1.2 million
axons in the optic nerve traveling to the brain.
“Some of the first steps of perception are actually happening inside the retina
itself, even before the information reaches the brain,” Seung asserts.
This explains why it is easier to transplant or artificially create other organs
than working prosthetic eyes, since they are so intricately interwoven with our
brains.
What this all boils down to is that we don’t “see” with our eyes; we see with
our brain.
USE IT OR LOSE IT
Our ability to see, make sense of what we see, and act upon that information
relies on the brain’s incredible processing power, a power that is entirely
dependent upon our neural connections. Assuming all of our physical wiring is
healthy and intact, turning visual inputs into meaningful images takes time, time
that increases with age or lack of use.
Scientists have discovered that as we slow down or stop flexing our mental
muscles, the speed of neural transmission dramatically slows, which in turn
leads to a decrease in visual processing speed, the ability to detect change and
movement, and the ability to conduct a visual search. Since our brain controls
every function of our body, any lag in neural processing will likewise cause a
delay in other systems, including what we see and how we react to it. Slower
reflexes and remembrance times aren’t caused only by physical aging. It might
be that we just haven’t exercised our brains enough or in the right way.
Fortunately for all of us, throughout our lives, our brain is continually making
new connections and reinforcing old ones based on learning experiences . . . as
long as we are learning. Researchers have found that stimulating environmental
input—like studying something new, reading about a concept that makes you
think, or playing any kind of “brain games”—will increase cortical growth at
every age, even among the very oldest humans. Just as cognitive conditioning
can be used to stave off dementia, it can also be used to sharpen our ability to

observe, perceive, and communicate. If we can keep our senses and our wits
quick, our reactions will follow, making us better employees, better drivers, and
more capable of caring for ourselves and others longer in life.
To stimulate our senses and set our neurons ablaze we’ll employ the same
techniques I use with the FBI, intelligence analysts, and Fortune 500 companies
every day in my class: we’ll study art.
Jan Steen, As the Old Sing, So Pipe the Young, 1668–1670.

Carel Fabritius, The
Goldfinch, 1654.
WHY ART?
Looking at old paintings and sculptures is definitely not the first thing most
people think of when I tell them we’re going to get their neurons firing and
increase their brain-processing speed. They picture engaging in cutting-edge 3D
computerized training or at least wearing Google glasses while walking down a
busy street, not strolling through a museum viewing objects that have sat still for
hundreds of years. But that’s exactly the point: art doesn’t walk away. If you
want to study human behavior, you can park yourself somewhere public and
people watch: guess at who they are, why they’re dressed that way, where
they’re going . . . until they leave. And you’ll never know if you’re right or not.
Or you could analyze works of art that we have the answers to: the who, what,
where, when, and why. Art historian David Joselit describes art as “exorbitant
stockpiles of experience and information.” It contains everything we need to
hone our observation, perception, and communication expertise.
If you can talk about what is happening in a work of art, you can talk about
scenes of everyday life; you can talk about boardrooms and classrooms, crime
scenes, and factory floors. The Department of the Army retained me to work
with officers before they were deployed to the Middle East. Why? Because when
they go overseas, they encounter the unexpected and the unknown. The army
teaches them cultural differences and etiquette, but I teach them how to be
effective communicators in unfamiliar situations. Describing what you see in a
painting of a woman wearing a foot-long, four-layered starched collar uses the
same skill set as describing what you see in a foreign market or international
airport. I teach the same techniques to hiring managers so they can better
describe the candidates they are interviewing, and to elementary school
principals so they have more effective tools for evaluating their teaching staff.
Art gives us myriad opportunities to analyze complex situations as well as
seemingly more straightforward ones. Ironically, it is often the simple, the
everyday, and the familiar that we have trouble describing because we have
ceased to notice what makes them interesting or unusual. By adulthood, we
become so inured to the complexity of the world that only the new, the
innovative, and the exigent capture our attention and dominate our field of
vision. We rely on experience and intuition rather than seeking out nuances and

details that can make a difference in our success. Yet it is the things that we see
and negotiate on a regular basis to which we must be especially attuned.
To be a hero to our bosses, our families, and ourselves, we need to shake up
our worldview and shift our perspective. Art enables us to do that because we
see it in so many places, because it manifests themes of human nature in all their
complexity, and because it often makes us uncomfortable. And surprisingly,
discomfort and uncertainty bring out the best in our brains.
When we’re forced to use our personal and professional skills in an unfamiliar
venue—which art analysis is for most people—we engage an entirely new
thought process. In 1908, Harvard psychologists discovered that the brain is
most effective at learning new material when stress hormones are slightly
elevated by a novel experience, a theory verified by modern brain imaging.
Therefore, the best way to rethink something we’ve been doing for years—the
way we do our jobs, the way we interact with others, the way we see the world—
is to step outside of ourselves, and outside of our comfort zone.
Art transports us away from our everyday life to rethink how we see and
perceive and communicate. Art inspires conversations, especially when it makes
us squirm. There are women with noses where their eyes should be, men in
curlers with manicures, clocks dripping from trees, spider-legged elephants, and
lots of people screaming.
Part of the beauty of art, especially the more unsettling pieces, is that anyone
can discuss it. You don’t have to be an art historian to talk about what you see;
in fact, I prefer that most of my participants have little or no art training because
it’s completely unnecessary to strengthening our observation and communication
skills and it might color their ability to view works of art objectively. We’re not
studying brushstrokes or palettes or historical periods. We’re simply using art as
confirmable visual data, talking about what we see—or what we think we see.

Gerrit van Honthorst, Smiling Girl, a Courtesan, Holding an Obscene
Image, 1625.
Throughout the book, we’ll use images of painting, sculpture, and
photography—some you may have seen and some you might not be able to
imagine are real—as tools to reconsider the way we’ve previously looked at the
world. Take this portrait of a young woman. You don’t have to know who
painted it or from what art-historical era it hails to investigate and discuss it.
How would you describe her? Handsome or homely? As we’ll learn, both
descriptions are subjective, grounded in the eye of the beholder, so neither is
useful in a professional context where the objective is everything. What about
the term “Caucasian”? Is that objective? Yes, but is it accurate? “Caucasian” can
broadly refer to people with a white skin tone or more specifically to those who

come from the area of the Caucasus mountain range between Europe and Asia.
Where does that leave a light-skinned person from Australia or a dark-skinned
person from Turkey? Did you notice the enormous feather on her head, the
dimple on her left cheek, the ring on her finger, or that she’s holding a painting
of someone’s naked backside? What about her own exposed cleavage? Is that an
objective or even appropriate detail to talk about?
You’ll know the answers and many more once we’ve mastered the core of the
Art of Perception program—I call them “the four As”—how to assess, analyze,
articulate, and adapt. We’ll start with how to assess a new situation by studying
the mechanics of sight and our built-in blindness, and I’ll give you an orderly
process for efficient, objective surveillance. Once we’ve figured out how to
gather all of the information, we’ll learn what to do with it: how to analyze what
we have uncovered, including prioritizing, recognizing patterns, and the
important difference between perception and inference. Finding what we find
and knowing what we know are no good if we don’t tell someone else, though,
so next we’ll work on how to articulate our discoveries to ourselves and others.
And finally, we will look at ways to adapt our behavior based on the first three
elements.
But before we begin, I have one more, very important A for you: autopilot.
Turn it off.
AUTOPILOT
Alexander Graham Bell was sixty-seven years old when he took the stage at the
Sidwell Friends School in Washington, DC, to deliver the graduation address to
the class of 1914. Sporting a snowy beard that swooped up at the end, the
communications pioneer was now a grandfather and nearing the end of his
illustrious career. Although he was best known for inventing the telephone, he
held thirty patents and had foreseen modern advances such as air conditioning,
the iron lung, metal detectors, and the use of solar panels to heat a house. So it
surprised the crowd when he confessed to being inattentive.
As he told the audience, he had recently taken a walk around his family’s
long-held property in Nova Scotia, land he believed he was intimately familiar
with. He was shocked to discover a moss-covered valley that led to the sea.
“We are all too much inclined,” he said, “to walk through life with our eyes
shut. There are things all round us and right at our very feet that we have never
seen, because we have never really looked.”
Habit, boredom, laziness, overstimulation—there are many reasons we tune
out. And in doing so, we miss out. We might brush off something as simple as

how a burr attaches to a sock and miss an opportunity for riches. We might
overlook something as commonplace as a travel-size bar of soap and miss a
chance to better the world. What amazing innovation did Bell miss by not
always being attuned? What have we ourselves missed?
Zoning out leads to more than just missed opportunities. The tendency to
“shut down” or get lost “in the fog” when doing things we’ve done a million
times before, like driving, or when we’re in busy, crowded environments, like a
train station, can put us in physical danger.
I was in a Metro station in Washington, DC, recently, studying the people
surrounding me as I now know to do. I saw businesspeople and friends chatting,
children holding their parents’ hands, students lugging heavy backpacks. And
then I noticed a man sitting on the steps; he had a wiry, dirty beard, wore
threadbare, soiled clothes, and scowled while he chipped away at the wall with
something sharp. No one nearby paid any attention to him. When the train rolled
in, he stood up, shoved the shank into his pocket, and stumbled onto a car with
dozens of other people. How many of them would have chosen a different car
had they seen him five minutes before? Being oblivious to their surroundings put
them in a closed car with a disturbed man concealing a sharp object in his
pocket. How does an entire person escape the view of so many others? Because
not only do we fail to look, we are often also wearing electronic blinders in the
form of earbuds and smartphones.
When we walk through the world on autopilot, our eyes might seem to take
everything in, but in reality we are seeing less than we could if we were paying
closer attention. As we’ll learn in later chapters, attention is a finite resource that
our brains must delegate. We do ourselves and our attention spans a great
disservice when we are not fully engaged.
THE AGE OF DISTRACTION
Thanks to a wireless web with a constant flow of information available to us
anytime, anywhere, there are more things competing for our attention than ever
before. Today more people have access to cell phones than to working toilets,
and the average person checks his phone 110 times a day and nearly once every
6 seconds in the evening. Our perpetual, byte-size interactions are not only a
detriment to our concentration, focus, productivity, and personal safety, but
they’re also hurting our intelligence. A 2005 study at King’s College at London
University found that when distracted, workers suffered a ten-to fifteen-point IQ
loss—a greater dumbing down than experienced when smoking marijuana. A

fifteen-point deficiency is significant, as it brings an adult male down to the
same IQ level as an eight-year-old child.
Our brain’s prefrontal cortex is responsible for analyzing tasks, prioritizing
them, and assigning our mental resources to them. When we inundate it with too
much information or make it switch focus too quickly, it simply slows down.
How much? The Journal of Experimental Psychology reported that students who
were distracted while working on complicated math problems took 40 percent
longer to solve them.
Ironically, compounding the problem is our need for speed. The immediacy of
information delivery in today’s world has also created a culture that places a
premium on speed, spontaneity, and efficiency, but those ideals come at a cost.
In the hospitality industry, the desire for a quicker room turnaround negatively
affected both employee safety and customer satisfaction. As the daily room-
cleaning quota for hotel housekeepers rose from fourteen rooms per shift in 1999
to twenty rooms in 2010, so did the injury risk rate, rising from 47 percent to 71
percent. While the changes meant that the management companies saved money
on staffing, healthcare costs for the injured workers rose, and the properties’
cleanliness—the number one reason guests don’t return to a hotel—was
compromised. In 2012, scientists found that the level of colony-forming units of
bacteria on surfaces in hotel rooms was twenty-four times higher than what
hospitals deem the “highest limit acceptable.”
Similarly, in the managed-healthcare world, where monetary rewards are
given for seeing as many patients as quickly as possible, medical professionals
can be tempted to sacrifice quality care for quantity care and go straight for the
patient’s chart in an effort to expedite the visit, relying on what the caregiver
before them has written before personally evaluating a patient and making
observations of their own.
Thankfully, there is a natural and easy buffer against letting the stress of speed
and the steady stream of distraction overwhelm us: simply slowing down. In a
commencement speech at Sarah Lawrence College, industrial designer and
“Mythbuster” Adam Savage reminded the 2012 graduates that they didn’t have
to be in a constant hurry, that they in fact had plenty of time: “You have time to
fail. You have time to mess up. You have time to try again, and when you mess
that up, you still have time.” Savage also reminds us of the ironic pitfall of
impatience: “Rushing leads to mistakes, and mistakes slow you down far more
than slowing down does.”
In 2013, researchers at Princeton University and the University of California,
Los Angeles, found that students who handwrote lecture notes rather than typing
them out retained more of the information precisely because they were slowed

down. A quick keyboard transcription doesn’t require critical thinking. The
slower process of handwriting means not everything will be captured verbatim;
instead the brain is forced to exert more effort to capture the essence of what’s
important, thus committing the information more effectively to memory.
Slowing down doesn’t mean being slow, it just means taking a few minutes to
absorb what we are seeing. Details, patterns, and relationships take time to
register. Nuances and new information can be missed if we rush past them.
TRUST YOURSELF
In July 2013, Beyoncé stopped her concert in Duluth, Georgia, to remind a fan
that he was missing the opportunity of a lifetime. In her self-professed favorite
part of the concert, she offered her microphone to a select few people from the
audience to allow them to sing the song “Irreplaceable” with her. One lucky
gentleman she picked, though, couldn’t stop recording her with his camera
phone long enough to get the words right.
“You can’t even sing ’cause you’re too busy taping,” she scolded. “I’m right
in your face, baby. You gotta seize this moment. Put the damn camera down!”
Portable technology is not just a sensory distraction; we allow it to be a
sensory substitution. I’m always confounded when I see people taking pictures
of iconic paintings in museums, especially when they jostle for space, snap the
shot, and then walk away. The resulting image, mediated through a camera lens,
is not the same as a close, careful observation of the work. It is akin to reading
the wall label next to a work of art and then failing to examine the object it
describes. Writer Daphne Merkin voiced the same sentiment recently, recalling
her inability to enjoy Vermeer masterpieces in Amsterdam’s Rijksmuseum
because they were “blocked by a throng of phones.” She wrote, “I wonder what
part of the experience gets lost in the hubbub. Instead of your own lens being
enough, everything gets distilled through a second LCD screen. You end up
living life removed, dissociated from your own sensations, perceptions, and
feelings.”
One of the first things I encourage participants in my class to do is put their
phones away. I’d rather they not record the information electronically or take
pictures for one simple reason: I want them to trust themselves. I don’t want
them to rely on anything else except what’s within them: their inherent sense of
observation, their intuition, and their ability to comprehend and retain
information.
Everyone is generally very nervous at first, especially if they work in jobs that
are report-driven. But I assure them, as I do you, that if you simply engage all of

your senses, they will deliver everything you need and more. Your brain is more
powerful than any gadget. Just turn it back on.
Dr. Sebastian Seung turned his retina research into a crowd-science project
because computers couldn’t handle it. When he and his team tried to map images
of the retinal neurons taken with an electron microscope by applying artificial-
intelligence algorithms, they discovered that it couldn’t be done without human
help. Believe it or not, computers can’t recognize patterns or transform 2D
images into 3D objects as effectively as the human brain can. Essentially Seung
needed neurons to map neurons.
Similarly, the first iterations of the Art of Perception program evolved at
medical schools because instructors such as Dr. Glenn McDonald noticed that
their new students were relying too much on advanced technology and not
enough on their own powers of observation. McDonald says, “Students need to
realize that no matter how helpful technology has become, it is no match [for] a
good set of eyes and a brain.”
To get our own brains and eyes engaged and focused, we’re going to look at a
well-known work of art, one you may have seen before. But we’re going to
observe it more slowly than most people ever would. If you can, plant yourself
in an area where you won’t be distracted or disturbed. If you can get out of your
normal surroundings, even better. Now look at the painting on the next page.
There is no specific assignment here; I just want you to look. What do you see?
List everything, in your mind or on paper.
Look at it for as long as you like. The average museum visitor spends
seventeen seconds viewing each work of art, which I think is far too short.
Harvard art history professor Jennifer L. Roberts requires her students to sit
before a painting for three full hours, an exercise that she says is “explicitly
designed to seem excessive” so that they might truly take the time to excavate
the wealth of information proffered. Find a time somewhere in between
seventeen seconds and three hours that feels comfortable but also allows you to
really take in what you see.
To kick-start your observational skills, ask yourself the following questions
while you look at the painting: What do you think is going on in the painting?
What relationships do you see—between people and objects? What questions
does the painting elicit for you?

The point of this exercise is to get comfortable slowing down and truly
studying works of art. With a quick glance we can see that there are two people
in the painting, one standing and one sitting. It takes longer to discover details
and realize relationships.

In the amount of time you looked at the painting, did you notice the orange
sash in the seated woman’s lap? That she was holding a quill pen in her right
hand? That the blue tablecloth was bunched up on the far left of the scene?
Give yourself another full minute or two to really absorb details.
Did you look long enough? Perhaps, if you took note of the white ribbon tying
the seated woman’s pearls together at the nape of her neck or that writing covers
the top half of the paper on the table. If you didn’t, look longer.
Can you say with certainty from which direction the light is coming? If not,
look again.
If you’ve seen that the light enters from the left as evidenced by the shadow
across the seated woman’s legs, you’ve most likely also observed the painting’s
primary colors—the yellow of the seated woman’s fur-lined mantle, the bright
blue of the standing woman’s apron—but what about textures? Did you see the
deep gathers at the top of the seated woman’s left sleeve? The swooping amber
folds in the background? The reflection of windows in the inkwell and glass?
Now that we’ve assessed the scene, what can we make of the information we
have gathered? What relationships can we detect or dismiss? Is the standing
woman a servant, friend, or mother? Her smooth complexion, similar to the
seated woman’s, suggests that they are close enough in age not to be mother and
daughter. Analyzing the standing woman’s plain, untrimmed clothing, lack of
jewelry, and that her hair is pulled straight back from her face rather than curled
in decoration further supports the notion that they are not in the same relational
or social circle. If you look even more closely, you will see a line below the
standing woman’s right wrist that distinguishes her red working hands from the
lighter skin of her more often protected forearm. Such a distinction is
conspicuously absent on the seated woman’s uniformly pale arm. From the
former’s posture and open mouth, it appears that she is delivering a letter to the
seated woman, whose own gestures suggest that she is receiving rather than
having just handed it over. Based on the facts presented, we can determine that
the women are most likely not twins or sisters, mother and daughter, or
strangers. Our best guess is servant and mistress, a supposition confirmed by the
title of the painting: Mistress and Maid.
Studying this Vermeer painting shows us in practice that the longer and more
attentively we look, the more we will discover. George de Mestral, Betsy
Kaufman, Steve Jobs, and Leonardo da Vinci all believed that invention is less
about creation than it is about discovery. And discovery is made possible by
simply opening our eyes, turning on our brains, tuning in, and paying attention.
Sir Isaac Newton agreed, stating, “If I have ever made any valuable discoveries,
it has been owing more to patient attention than to any other talent.”

We all have the talent to observe and make discoveries that will lead to greater
things in any number of fields, but we must first be prepared to see.
When Derreck Kayongo returned from the concierge to his room with the
knowledge that American hotels routinely discarded barely used bars of soap
every day, he knelt down on his bed and cried. He had been the child who helped
his father make soap, the child who lived in a squalid refugee camp without
soap, and he was now living in a country where soap was simply thrown away.
He didn’t know what to do with that information but was determined not to let it
go until he found a way to, as he says, “connect the dots.” That connection came
back to the bar of soap in his hotel shower, the bar he knew he could find a way
to share with the world.
By preparing our minds to observe and absorb everything, and to discover the
possibilities around and inside us, we open ourselves up to success in our own
lives. We’ve already started by recognizing that observation is not just passively
watching something but an actively engaging mental process. Before we can
truly master it, though, we need to know our own blind spots.

2
Elementary Skills
Mastering the Fine Art of Observation

René Magritte, The Portrait, 1935.
IN 1877, AN EIGHTEEN-YEAR-OLD student slid into one of the two hundred seats
arranged in a steep semicircle in the dark wood-paneled Anatomy Lecture
Theatre, a new state-of-the-art classroom at the University of Edinburgh’s
Medical School. The occupants of the room tittered with anticipation for the
arrival of the appointed speaker, a local legend as well known for his deep
knowledge of a wide range of subjects as for his dynamic delivery of it. He was

going to teach the young students what he called “the Method,” a disciplined
approach to diagnosis that relied on keen observation skills above all.
With a flourish, the man—tall and lean with an aquiline nose and piercing
eyes—bounded into the lecture hall, tore off his cloaked coat and deerstalker
cap, and called for the first subject to be sent in. A line of outpatients the man
had never set eyes on before waited in the hallway to be presented live to his
pupils.
An elderly woman dressed in black entered.
“Where is your cutty pipe?” he inquired.
The woman started. How could he know she had one? Shocked, she pulled a
small clay pipe from her purse.
“I knew she had a cutty pipe not because I saw it, but because I observed her,”
he told his rapt audience. “I noted the small ulcer on her lower lip and glossy
scar on her cheek, sure signs of habitual use of a short-stemmed pipe that lay
close to the cheek when smoking.”
Another patient limped in. The teacher called on one of his students.
“What is the matter with this man, sir?” he asked. “Come down, sir, and look
at him! No! You mustn’t touch him. Use your eyes, sir! Use your ears, use your
brain, your bump of perception, and use your powers of deduction.”
The nervous student answered with a guess he hoped seemed confident: “Hip-
joint disease, sir!”
“Hip-nothing!” the instructor cried out. Without a backward glance, he
announced, “The man’s limp is not from his hip, but from his foot, or rather
from his feet. Were you to observe closely, you would see that there are slits, cut
by a knife, in those parts of the shoes where the pressure of the shoe is greatest
against the foot. The man is a sufferer from corns, gentlemen, and has no hip
trouble at all.”
The speaker continued to divine with ever-increasing alacrity the profession,
off-duty vices, and world travels of people whom he had never met.
“Gentlemen, we have here a man who is either a cork-cutter or a slater. If you
will only use your eyes a moment you will be able to define a slight hardening—
a regular callous, gentlemen—on one side of his forefinger, and a thickening on
the outside of his thumb, a sure sign that he follows the one occupation or the
other. The shade of tan on his face shows him to be a coast-sailor, and not a
deep-sea sailor—a sailor who makes foreign lands. His tan is that produced by
one climate, a ‘local tan,’ so to speak.”
When another student got a diagnosis incorrect, the teacher admonished, “The
gentleman has ears and he hears not, eyes and he sees not!” In his view nothing
was more important to discovery—in medicine, criminal law, or life in general

—than finely tuned observation skills. He let no fact, however small, escape his
notice, frequently pointing out what others had failed to observe: tattoos,
accents, skin marking, scars, clothing, even the color of soil on someone’s shoes.
“Glance at a man and you find his nationality written on his face,” he
instructed, “his means of livelihood on his hands and the rest of his story in his
gait, mannerisms, watch-chain ornaments and the lint adhering to his clothes.”
If the speaker’s sharp senses and rapid-fire delivery of his deductions sound
like Sherlock Holmes, it is for good reason: he was the real-life inspiration for
the fictional detective. Dr. Joseph Bell, a professor of surgery, prolific writer,
and a relative of Alexander Graham Bell, enthralled his young student Arthur
Conan Doyle with his uncanny and uncommon yet in his words “elementary”
talents. According to Bell, who often chanted, “Use your eyes, use your eyes” in
his classes, the most important skill was a simple differentiation between passive
sight and active assessment.
Bell’s Sherlockian summation: “Most people see but do not observe.”
What’s the difference? Doyle had Sherlock Holmes himself explain it in one
of his first published short stories, “A Scandal in Bohemia,” when Dr. Watson
claimed to have eyes just as good as Holmes’s.
Holmes countered, “You see, but you do not observe. The distinction is clear.
For example, you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to
this room.”
“Frequently.”
“How often?”
“Well, some hundreds of times.”
“Then how many are there?”
“How many? I don’t know.”
“Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just my
point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have both seen and
observed.”
Although we frequently use the terms interchangeably, seeing can be thought
of as the automatic, involuntary recording of images. Observing is seeing, but
consciously, carefully, and thoughtfully.
WHAT DO YOU SEE?
To help everyone take a personal inventory during every Art of Perception class,
I show this photograph of a young woman walking outdoors and ask the simple
question: what do you see? In just one sentence, tell me what you see.

Go ahead and test yourself right now. What single sentence would you use to
completely and accurately describe this scene?
I’ve been doing this for over a decade now with professionals from every
walk of life. People tell me about the young woman; the most astute note what
she’s wearing, where she’s looking, that she appears to be holding something,
and which leg she is leading with. People tell me about the large tree on the left
and its lack of leaves; some go so far as to estimate its height based on the
comparison of the woman, but true to Holmes’s assertion, no one ever tells me
the number of branches. I hear about the bushes along the fence and the fence
itself, the bench, the fallen leaves and shadows in the foreground. But perhaps
most shockingly, about half of the people who view this photograph don’t
mention the giant letter C in the background.
Do you see it? Did you see it originally? Did you include it in your descriptive
sentence? It’s not an illusion or a postprocessing photography trick. The C really
exists. Is it an important part of the photograph? Is it worth mentioning? It is, for
many reasons. It places the photograph in a unique location, as a bit of research
would uncover that the C is painted on a one-hundred-foot-high rock wall on the
Bronx side of the Harlem River in New York City across from Columbia
University. It helps establish the time frame in which the photograph was taken,
since the C first appeared in all white in 1955 and was repainted to feature pale
blue outlined in white in 1986. And since the C is an impressive 60 feet tall by
60 feet wide—possibly New York City’s largest graffiti—noticing such a sizable

object that takes up much of the photograph is a testament to elementary
observation skills.
Those who fail to see this C are normal people with normal vision who just
haven’t sharpened their observation skills. What if the 50 percent who didn’t see
it included the detective assigned to your robbery, or your surgeon, your boss,
your boyfriend, or your child’s bus driver? What if you didn’t see the C?
Missing such a large detail might not seem critical right now while you’re
reading a book, but what about when you’re babysitting, behind the wheel, or
just crossing the street?
Before we can really hone our observation skills, however, we need to
understand the built-in biological mechanisms that render all of us at one time or
another “blind” to objects, even when they’re massive, moving, or should
otherwise be memorable. And we can do that with a little help from an
orangutan named Kevin.
THE GORILLA IN THE ROOM
The first thing you need to know is that Kevin isn’t conscious. I’d say he isn’t
“real,” but his owner, Dr. Michael Graziano, would argue those semantics, since
Kevin does exist, albeit in acrylic fiber form. Kevin is a puppet.
Dr. Michael Graziano.

Dr. Graziano, another neuroscientist at Princeton and author of Consciousness
and the Social Brain, uses Kevin in his lectures as a unique ventriloquist
demonstration of the power of perception. While his students giggle nervously at
first when Graziano, a tall man with a salt-and-pepper beard and twinkling eyes,
puts Kevin on his hand, only a few minutes later they find themselves
unwittingly assigning a personality to the pretend primate.
To watch the performance with eyes wide open, as it were, knowing full well
that it’s a social illusion, is a fascinating experience. As much as I prepared
myself skeptically—an ape puppet in the Ivy League? Really?—I found myself
drawn in anyway. Kevin makes crude jokes, claims to be Darth Vader, and looks
around the room seemingly independently of his master. I couldn’t help but
smile as Kevin squealed in agony when Graziano finally pulled his hand free.
Even though I knew it was a puppet, Kevin did seem at times to have a mind of
“his” own.
Graziano attributes this phenomenon to what he calls “attention schema
theory.” As we sit in his office—delightfully dominated by a colorful painted
mural of a dinosaur named Science eating a scientist, who he gleefully confesses
is him—he explains the basics. Since humans are bombarded with stimuli, both
externally in the form of sights, sounds, and other sensory information and
internally in the form of thoughts, emotions, and memories, the brain cannot
process every bit of information it encounters. Instead, it must focus on some
things at the expense of others. How the neurons in the human brain decide what
to deal with is called attention.
“We don’t magically become aware of something,” Graziano says. “It’s an act
of the brain processing data.”
By walking us through the experience of attributing a social awareness to an
orangutan puppet, Graziano allows us to feel the otherwise automatic process.
He is quick to point out that attention, while hard to capture, is also finite. We
do not have an unlimited capacity for decoding every single stimulus, both
external and internal, that we encounter.
“It’s partly a source-parsing problem,” he says. “In many ways, your attention
focuses you. You attend to one thing, and effectively your brain suppresses or
filters out everything else.”
It’s hard to believe what the brain sometimes filters out, as evidenced by
another simian experiment, this one involving a woman dressed as a gorilla.
In 1999, Harvard psychologists Daniel Simons and Christopher Chabris set
out to prove that even though our eyes may be open and looking right at
something in our field of view, we don’t always see it—an anomaly known as
“inattentional blindness.” They re-created a famous 1970s video experiment in

which a woman with an umbrella walks through a scene of students passing
basketballs; test subjects were asked to count how many passes were completed,
and in doing so, many missed the woman and her parasol entirely. Simons and
Chabris’s new version made the unexpected intrusion even more dramatic by
taking away the woman’s umbrella and putting her inside a gorilla costume. Just
as in my Columbia University letter C experiment, half of the participants of
their study failed to notice the gorilla even when she was on screen twice as long
as the woman with the parasol, looked directly at the camera, and thumped her
chest instead of just walking straight through the crowd.
Fifteen years later, inattentional blindness experiments continue to prove that
conscious perception requires attention, and that attention is selective. If our
attention is absorbed by anything, even a task as mundane as counting, we can
miss something else huge (and hairy) right in front of us.
Inattentional blindness can affect the best professionals in all fields, even
those whose job entails looking for details. Attention researchers at Harvard
Medical School did their own version of the “invisible gorilla” experiment by
superimposing a two-inch gorilla on slides of lungs and asking radiologists to
review them for cancerous nodules. Eighty-three percent of the radiologists
never mentioned the gorilla shaking its fist at them from inside the slide.
Sometimes inattentional blindness has deadly effects. Boston police officer
Kenneth Conley was pursuing a shooting suspect on foot when he ran right past
a group of fellow police officers beating a man so viciously that the victim was
left with severe head and kidney damage. When federal authorities investigated
the assault, no officer would admit to taking part in or even seeing the incident.
Conley was called to testify and admitted that he had been right there but had not
seen the beating. Investigators did not believe it was possible to miss such an
event, and Conley was convicted of obstruction of justice and perjury, removed
from the police force, and sentenced to three years in prison.
While Conley could only attribute his inability to see the fight he ran right
past to some kind of “tunnel vision,” a claim even the Supreme Court did not
buy, psychologists Simons and Chabris of the woman-in-the-gorilla-suit
experiment believed the officer was suffering from inattentional blindness. To
prove it was possible, they re-created the situation with volunteers, asking them
to jog after a man and count how many times he touched his hat. The joggers
were led right past a staged fight scene; 67 percent of them failed to see it.
Simons and Chabris published the results in a paper titled “You Do Not Talk
About Fight Club If You Do Not Notice Fight Club.”
We are all so susceptible to inattentional blindness that we often miss
important information. We can work to overcome this inborn tendency,

however, by teaching our brains to have better attention and observation skills.
Samuel Renshaw, an American psychologist whose research on vision helped
the armed forces quickly recognize enemy aircraft during World War II,
believed that “proper seeing is a skill which needs to be learned, like playing the
piano, speaking French or playing good golf.” He claimed that just like a
pianist’s fingers, the eyes could be trained to perform better. Likewise, multiple
studies published in the Journal of Vision have confirmed that we can increase
our attention capacity dramatically with challenging visual attention tasks.
Studying provocative, intricate, multidimensional, and even off-putting art
affords us exactly that opportunity.
OBSERVING ART
The success of using art to enhance observation skills among medical students
was proven in 2001 by researchers at Yale. A two-year study published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association found that those who studied
artwork improved their diagnostic skills considerably but that their actual
observational skills, specifically “their detection of details,” also increased by 10
percent. Dr. Irwin Braverman, professor of dermatology at Yale School of
Medicine, called the 10 percent improvement “statistically significant” because
it showed that “you can train someone visually to be a better observer.”
Allison West is living proof. When I first met her, she was a medical student
at New York University, fresh from a small town in Georgia. One of West’s
favorite pastimes was strolling through art museums, and Manhattan had them to
spare. She wasn’t an art major, though, so she didn’t have a practiced way of
looking at paintings; she just enjoyed them each for a few moments before
moving on to the next. So she was excited to find out that her medical school
offered the Art of Perception course, and she signed up.
“I had no idea how much I was missing,” she remembers. “I like to think of
myself as a very observant person, and I didn’t see the Columbia University C
staring me right in the face! I felt like I had been walking around with smudged
lenses coloring everything, and I didn’t even know I was wearing them!”
After learning how to observe rather than just see, West noticed that the way
she encountered and documented her patients changed dramatically.
“In a typical report, I used to write something like: ‘Middle-aged white male
reclining in a bed. He has tired eyes, pale skin, a somber expression, and is
wearing a hospital gown. His surroundings are plain: bare walls, white sheets
with a bloodstain on the right side of the bed.’ Descriptive, but very clinical,”
she tells me. “After the class, I started writing down, ‘He has a crossword puzzle

in his hand, a local newspaper written in Spanish at his side, card on the bulletin
board reads ‘Get Well Soon, Grandpa.’’ Where I used to just see flowers in a
room as a sign of an ill patient, I now pay attention to what kind they are and if
they’re wilting, who sent them, and when.”
West also now notes what stuffed animals may be lying on the windowsill,
what TV show the patient is watching, and what books are on the bedside table.
“These new details that I’d never noticed before might not tell me a
diagnosis,” she explains, “but they give me something just as important:
information about what motivates the patient to live, how he can live best with
his illness, and what sort of alternative treatments he might consider to palliate
his suffering.”
Like a modern-day Dr. Bell, West uses what she initially observes to uncover
even more. Seeing the Spanish newspaper at one patient’s side prompts her to
investigate his diet at home: Is it rich in Hispanic foods that might worsen his
condition? What does he do for a living? Can he return to a job that will engage
his mind and help his overall healing? What are his favorite pastimes and
hobbies? Will he be able to take them up again during his recovery?
“Knowing that he likes to build model trains might seem like an insignificant
detail for a doctor to know,” she says, “but quality of life is key to recovery, and
knowing that he can return to an activity he loves can mean all the difference for
a patient.”
It’s made all the difference for West as well. She is now a doctor specializing
in internal medicine at the University of Chicago Medical Center and was
profiled in New York magazine’s 2012 “Best Doctors” issue.
Like any other skill, observation can be mastered with practice. In his 1950
book The Art of Scientific Investigation, Cambridge scientist William Ian
Beardmore Beveridge gives the following instructions: “Powers of observation
can be developed by cultivating the habit of watching things with an active,
enquiring mind. Training in observation follows the same principles as training
in any activity. At first one must do things consciously and laboriously, but with
practice the activities gradually become automatic and unconscious and a habit
is established.” Practice also makes permanent, as neuroscientists believe that
practicing new skills rearranges the brain’s internal connections. So technically,
biologically, we can wire our brains to see better.
We can do this with exercises that improve our attention and memory, as both
are integral to observation skills. And we’ll start with art.
Without looking back, try to recall the painting at the beginning of this chapter
on page 23. Can you visualize it? I’ll give you a hint: it’s a still life spread out on
what appears to be a table.

If you can’t quite remember the painting, you’re in good company. In my
class I show the same picture quickly as I introduce myself, and many people
don’t pay attention. If you have no idea what I’m talking about—a painting?
What painting?—because you flipped right past it, don’t worry, you’re still in
good company. A lot of us have learned to skim or skip over the beginnings of
things to get to “the meat,” but when we do that we’re quite possibly skipping
over vital, valuable information. We’re going to learn, starting right now, how
not to do that.
Turn back to the painting on page 23. I love this particular, peculiar work
because you don’t have to know anything about art or who painted it, when, or
why to appreciate the striking visual scene: a seemingly ordinary place setting
starring an open, unblinking eye in the oddest of places. Study the picture for a
few minutes, and then come back.
Welcome back! So, what did you see? Let’s start with the basics: How many
objects were on the table, and what were they? Try to remember as many as you
can.
If you can recall that there were five—a glass, a bottle, a knife, a fork, and a
plate with a slice of something on it with an eye in the middle of it—then good
for you! If you can tell me that the glass was empty, the bottle full, that they
were above the plate and utensils, that the fork was to the right of the plate and
the green-handled knife to the right of the fork, and the eye was a blue-gray,
even better!
What food was on the plate? I’ve heard “a pancake” quite often, but if you
look closely, you can see thin white marbles of fat throughout, growing thicker
at the edges; it’s really a piece of ham. Bonus points if you noticed the dark red
staining on the glass.
Now let’s really observe. Go back and look at the painting again but even
more closely, more slowly this time. Savor the stain on the side of the glass.
Puzzle over whether or not everything is really on a table. Notice the light
reflecting off the surface of the bottle, glass, and silverware. Calculate which
direction the objects’ shadows are pointing. What could be causing the reflection
and shadows, and where would we look for such an object? Appreciate how an
image that might seem simple at first glance is really a complex series of
relationships—why is the bottle full if the glass is already stained? The fact that

we keep uncovering more questions and more details the longer we look is how
we know we’re not just seeing but observing.
Now, without turning back, draw the painting yourself, capturing as many
details as you can. When you’re finished, go back and compare it with the
original, noting anything you might have missed. Add those details to your
drawing.
To further enhance your retention abilities, wait an hour and then draw the
painting again. Again, go back and correct it by adding any missing information.
You can also practice on a single everyday object: your watch, your handbag,
or a water bottle. Select something with a lot of detail, and really study it for one
full minute. Then put it away or cover it up, and write down as many details—
shapes, colors, textures, words, measurements—as you can. Retrieve the object,
but instead of subtracting time, add it. Observe the same object for three times as
long, or three minutes, and see how much more you can find. Do this with a
different item every day for a week, and you will notice by the end how the
practice has increased your ability to focus and remember what you’ve seen.
The more you exercise your memory skills, the better you will become at
them not only in these specific tasks but in your general observation of life as
well. One of my students told me she used to walk around her neighborhood
every day for exercise, listening to music, not noticing anything, just trying to
log her thirty minutes. After taking my class, she decided to reengage her senses
on the exact same route, and the differences were startling. She noticed cracks in
the sidewalk, handprints in cement she’d never seen, a secret bike path. She said
it was as if she were “seeing with new eyes.”
Similarly, the more you consciously observe your environment, the more
natural the process will become. To engage your sense of awareness, go outside
at lunchtime, plant yourself in one spot, and practice observing every single
thing that crosses your visual path. Doing so will help train your eyes to look
beyond what’s right in front of you or what you are used to seeing.
Arthur Conan Doyle’s real-life inspiration, Dr. Joseph Bell, didn’t have ESP
or X ray vision. He wasn’t able to see more because he was born with a
superhuman power. He just practiced using his powers of observation on a daily
basis. We all have the same abilities; we just don’t always know it.
In the early 1980s, Philadelphia physician Arthur Lintgen received
international attention when he demonstrated his uncanny ability to “read” vinyl
records on a television show. Dubbed the “man who sees what others hear,”
Lintgen could look at a phonograph record with the label completely obscured
and quickly and correctly detect which classical piece it played by simply

studying the grooves. Expert after expert tested the veracity of his claim, and all
came to the same conclusion: Lintgen’s ability was legitimate.
Lintgen was able not only to identify the recordings’ titles and composers but
also to relay how many movements were in each piece, how long each
movement was, the volume and percussiveness of each movement, and
sometimes even which orchestra had recorded it. He did so not by reading the
music on the record but by examining the smallest physical details on them. He
looked at the spacing, coloring, and contour of the grooves and then correlated
that with his knowledge of the patterns in classical music; for instance, he knew
that a Beethoven symphony has a longer first movement in relation to its second,
and could recognize that pattern.
Lintgen didn’t have special eyes; in fact he was extremely nearsighted and
wore thick glasses. He simply looked at a record closely and consciously and
practiced looking until the process of identifying the piece become quicker and
more natural to him. We can all do the same.
That’s not to say we all see things the same way. The way our brains choose
to sort through the millions of bits of information available is unique to us and
entirely dependent upon our own perceptual filters. To see like Sherlock
Holmes, we need to be familiar with them because, whether we realize it or not,
they are altering our observations.

3
The Platypus and the Gentleman Thief
Why No Two People See Things the Same Way
FOR ALMOST A DECADE the Rubin Museum of Art in New York has hosted a
unique series of events called Brainwave. The program pairs performing artists,
writers, and musicians with neuroscientists to explain to a lay audience what is
happening in the brain when they experience something. I was fortunate enough
to attend a session with Dr. Marisa Carrasco, a cognitive scientist from New
York University, and deception specialist Apollo Robbins, a short man with an
earring in his left ear and a small soul patch.
During the presentation the following photograph was shown on the screen.
“What do you see?” Robbins asked the audience.
I didn’t really see anything, so at first I thought the image was not a
h t
h I fi
d it
t f R
h
h i kbl t t
t t
l

photograph. I figured it was some sort of Rorschach inkblot test to reveal a
secret about our psyche.
Aside from being a professional speaker, Robbins is a charming theatrical
larcenist who calls himself “the Gentleman Thief.” He could take the bracelet off
my wrist and the glasses off my head without my ever knowing. Before the
show, while posing as an usher, he had done exactly that to many guests,
shaking people’s hands and robbing them blind. (He returns everything.) After
picking the pockets of former president Jimmy Carter’s Secret Service detail,
Robbins became a security advisor and now trains law enforcement on sensory
awareness.
Now Robbins assured us that we were indeed viewing a genuine unaltered
photograph. He even threw in a hint: “It’s a four-legged mammal.”
Still, I saw nothing.
The person sitting next to me recognized a definitive animal almost
immediately. She settled back in her seat, satisfied. I continued to look. Harder. I
looked upside down. I squinted.
The woman next to me whispered, “I can’t believe you don’t see this.”
I do this for a living! How could I not see it? Finally, I had to guess. It was a
platypus, I decided. Before you look at the next photo, take another look at the
previous one. What do you see?

It’s a photo of a cow. Do you see it now?
Renshaw’s Cow with face outlined.
Without the outline, I would never have seen the cow. A cat maybe. A
platypus, sure. But not a cow.
While Robbins’s lesson was on “illusion confusion” and how our brains can
play tricks on us, I use the same photograph in my class for a different purpose:
to prove that no two people see things, even facts, the same way.
I’ve shown the cow photograph to thousands of people through the years and
have gotten just as many different answers as to what it is—from a dragon to the
Hindenburg to a woman shopping for bras. While most people can see, not
everyone sees the same things. This premise gets more complicated when we’re
looking at things that aren’t as black-and-white as a black-and-white photograph
and could be subject to so many interpretations.

Eve Oosterman.
For instance, Toronto mother Ruth Oosterman posted this picture of her two-
year-old daughter and her latest creation and posed the same simple question to
her online readers: what do you see? The responses that poured in from around
the world were as varied as the people sending them: rabbit ears, wildflowers on
a seashore, a willow tree, a bucking Shetland pony, a robot dance party.
“Almost every single person saw something different in the shapes and lines,”
Ruth recalls.
Ruth’s own ability to interpret her toddler’s drawings led to a mother-daughter
collaboration years before she thought such a joint effort would be possible.
Ruth, a professional artist, would strap baby Eve into a carrier on her chest and
paint furiously in her studio.
As Eve’s coordination grew, the toddler took up residence next to her mother,
playing with paint at first just to enjoy the texture but then eventually painting on
her own canvases. Ruth couldn’t wait for Eve to be old enough to collaborate
with her . . . until she realized that she already was.
“She would frequently ‘add’ to my pieces and one day I looked at one of her

She would frequently add  to my pieces, and one day I looked at one of her
drawings,” Ruth says, “and in the scribbles, I saw two people standing by the
shore.”
Ruth used watercolors to fill in Eve’s vision, and their first painting, The Red
Boat, came to life. The pair has become an international sensation celebrated
from Austria to South Korea for their whimsical portraits. Eve begins each
sketch on her own, usually with an ink pen, and her mother fills in the details
and color based on the little girl’s stories, songs, and daily activities.
Eve’s drawing, and the collaborative result: The Red Boat by Ruth and
Eve Oosterman.
Each of us brings a similar and unique set of brushes to fill in what we see. If
someone else tried to complete Eve’s drawings, the results would certainly differ
from her mother’s. Ruth is partial to and proficient in watercolors, and that
determines how she interprets the sketches. Someone like me, who has no
artistic ability, would most likely use other materials—I don’t even own
watercolors—and produce another sort of image entirely.
It seems obvious that we all see things differently. Yet we constantly forget,
and act as if there is only one true way to see. However, knowing now that we
are all susceptible to inattentional blindness and other perceptual errors, we
cannot assume that anyone else sees what we see, that we see what they see, or
that either of us accurately sees what’s really there.

OUR PERCEPTUAL FILTERS
No two people will see anything the exact same way. Everything from our
inherited biology to our learned biases influences the way we take in the world.
Not only do we as individuals observe, notice, and gather information
differently, we also perceive what we’ve gathered differently.
Perception is how we interpret the information we gather during observation;
think of it as an internal filter. It can color, cloud, or change what really exists
into what we think we are seeing.
Much like seeing, the process of perceiving is subtle, automatic, and hard to
recognize if we’re not consciously aware of it. Want to feel it right now? Look
back at the black-and-white photograph on page 37. Now try not to see the cow.
It’s impossible. You can unfocus your eyes or turn the page around, but you will
not be able to not see the cow now. Why? The power of your new knowledge—
that it is a cow—has effectively erased your previous perceptions.
This is indicative of the experience we have every time we see, don’t see, and
can’t un-see something. Being aware of how easily our perceptions can change,
and refuse to un-change, can help us to be attuned to them.
Our perceptive filter is shaped by our own unique experiences in the world.
Everyone’s is different from everyone else’s, sometimes wildly so.
Claire, a lawyer in the Trial Division of the Manhattan District Attorney’s
Office, lived just two blocks from the World Trade Center with her husband,
Matt, and their three children. On the morning of 9/11 they evacuated together,
grabbing what few possessions they could and hopping onto a van to New
Jersey, where they lived for the next several weeks. A few months later, her
husband’s uncle, an author, talked to her and her husband separately about their
experiences on that day and wrote up their two accounts.
Claire was shocked when she read them. Even though she and her husband
were together the entire time, in the same place, before, during, and after the
attack, and left New York at the same moment, you would never have believed
from reading the narrative that they lived through the same experience. They
didn’t recall the same things, and the things they did both recall, they didn’t see
the same way. While Claire remembered looking through their ash-splattered
apartment window and seeing people getting trampled in the street and struck by
falling objects, Matt recalled that the window was blacked out completely and
that he didn’t look and didn’t want to look outside. When they decided to move
outside into the hallway, Claire talked about her children needing snacks and
sweaters, while Matt focused on the elderly residents who needed chairs. Matt
thought the falling towers might crush them; Claire was sure the smoke would

kill them.
It wasn’t just their recounting of the events that was different, their emotional
responses were too. Claire called colleagues nearby and begged, pleaded, and
cried for help. Matt was “dead calm.” Matt spoke to his uncle on the phone but
doesn’t remember their conversation; Claire can still recall every word of the
good-bye call she placed to her father in Oregon.
The published account of their “reflections on terror and loss” still resonates
with her as a firsthand example of how your own perceptions of a situation are
just that—your own—and of the fact that you can never assume other people
experience anything the same way you do, even if you are right there with them.
If two parents who are the same age, and came from the same race,
socioeconomic class, and physical location, don’t see things the same way, think
of how differently disparate people do: employers and employees, defenders and
prosecutors, Republicans and Democrats, teachers and students, doctors and
patients, caregivers and children. What we see might be completely different
from what the person right next to us, let alone the person across the room, on
the other end of the telephone, or the other side of the world sees. What might be
apparent to us someone else might overlook entirely.
When I’m in Washington, DC, there’s a work in the Smithsonian American
Art Museum that I often use with my classes. It’s a 9-foot-by-6-foot painting of
a black girl sitting on the floor at the top of a set of stairs near a bookcase. Over
the girl’s head are two translucent cloud shapes with the same set of three letters
in each: “SOB . . .”
While many people’s first assumption is that SOB is a cry of despair or
sadness, the girl’s mouth is set, her eyes dry. I challenge my class: could SOB
mean something else? We don’t have a definitive answer. The title of the work
by Kerry James Marshall is simply SOB, SOB.
Each person brings along his or her own unique experience, history,
education, background, and viewpoint. Medical professionals have told me SOB
means “shortness of breath,” while maintenance crews claim it’s “son of the
boss.” For Texan law enforcement agents, SOB stands for “south of the border.”
To Long Islanders, SOB is New York State Route 135, the Seaford–Oyster Bay
Expressway. My favorite is the mother of a teenage texter who said that while
SOB was an acronym for “son of a bitch” when she was younger and referred
mostly to males, today’s kids use it exclusively for girls and mean it as “self-
obsessed bitch.”
For success with anything—a case, a collaboration, or a new client—you
cannot rely on someone else seeing or interpreting things the way you do. If you
stop inquiring with your own interpretation of what you see, you could be

missing untold information. If when viewing the black-and-white image
presented by Apollo Robbins I got up and left right after I concluded that I saw a
platypus, I might never have learned that the photograph really showed a cow.
And if I relayed my experience to others as fact—“and then Apollo Robbins
showed us a photo of a platypus”—I would be spreading incorrect information.
To get the most accurate picture of anything, we need to see others’ perceptions
and recognize others’ points of view.
How do we find out what other people see or think they see? We don’t have to
look any further than public art, especially contemporary sculptures and
installations, and the very public reaction to it.
When South African artist Jane Alexander’s exhibit Surveys (from the Cape of
Good Hope) was on view at the Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine in
New York in April 2013, I was excited to go and see it for myself. Half human,
half beast, mostly naked statues were installed in front of altars, in the nave, in
courtyards, and on windowsills. There was a young boy with the face of an ape,
a dog-headed man, a long-beaked bird without wings, and a feline-faced female
wearing a white gown and a gold tiara whose arms ended in stumps. Some
creatures sat on ammunition boxes; others were blindfolded, bound, and
dragging machetes and toy trucks on the end of ropes.
While my experience of meeting these strange sculptures in a place normally
reserved for prayer and spiritual repose was definitely extraordinary, the
observations I’ve listed are objective. Not everyone’s were, however. The
exhibit was met by equal parts delight and disgust. While the New York Times
praised the show as “wonderful”and “uncannily beautiful” and believed “the
cathedral setting couldn’t be more perfect,” other critics found the exhibit
“subversive,” “disturbing,” and “off-putting considering it was in a house of
worship.”

Jane Alexander’s installation Infantry with beast, at the Cathedral Church
of Saint John the Divine, 2008–2010.
Of course not everyone is going to like the same things—we are all subjective
beings—but what’s important to note is that our subjectivity can color the
“truth” of what we see. While every visitor looked at the same setup, they all
saw different things. A rusted sickle was seen by some as a sign of fertility and
by others as one of destruction. Which was right? Neither. Unless the curved
blade was marked as one or the other, and it wasn’t, neither can be proven. The
only objective and accurate answer is that the rusted sickle is a rusted sickle. To
call it anything different is to alter the facts.
Look at the photograph of Alexander’s work on page 44. What do you see?
What stands out to you?
Now think about how various people’s answers might differ based on their
experience, priorities, or even profession. A frequent churchgoer might focus on
the ornate relief in the background, while a retailer might zero in on the statues’
footwear. A student of anthropology would look at it differently from someone
with a fear of dogs. Perception is also shaped by a person’s values, upbringing,
and culture. Our natural inclination to either notice the canine-headed, human-
bodied forms’ nudity or avert our gaze from it could affect whether or not we see
that the creatures’ arms are unnaturally long. What would a medical professional
have to say about the statues’ ribs? Or an organizational consultant about the
straightness of the group’s lines? More important, would they notice each other’s
focus—would the physician notice the lines and the consultant see the ribs?

Since we live and work with all different types of people, we need to be
attuned to how others might see something. To test our awareness of others’
perceptions, let’s look at a photo of another sculpture installation, on page 46.
How would you describe this statue’s expression? How do you think a probation
officer would describe it? Since most probation and parole violations often
involve drugs, he might see the sculpture’s closed eyes, slack mouth, and lazily
tilted-back head as an indication of being under the influence. What about a
victim of sexual assault? She might see the sculpture’s head as deliberately
cocked back rather than tilted, eyes momentarily closed and mouth opened as a
prelude to a threatening situation.
Tony Matelli, Sleepwalker, 2014.

Tony Matelli’s February 2014 installation of a realistic-looking man in his
underwear on the Wellesley College campus elicited a divisive uproar that was
covered everywhere from Time magazine to the International Business Times in
India. Reactions ranged from a parody Twitter account to protests and petitions
against it. While some viewers found the statue comical and were openly
amused, dressing it in hats and costumes, others found it so frightening that they
demanded its removal. Some saw the statue as a lost, sympathetic figure, others
as a threatening attacker.
This artwork is a not a performance piece. It is an inanimate structure made of
painted bronze. In its still facial expression, some see melancholy, others
menace.
The artist himself is an unwitting example of how even though we know that
everyone sees things differently, we still don’t always believe it. While Matelli
concedes, “Each person comes to an artwork with their own history, their own
politics, their own hopes and fears and all that stuff,” he goes on to surmise, “I
think people might be seeing things in that work that just aren’t there.”
The artist might not have intentionally infused his work with emotion,
politics, or innuendo, but people still see what they see. We will never all see the
same way, but the challenges that come with that are mitigated when we
acknowledge our visual disparity instead of insisting it doesn’t exist.
Simply knowing how many things shape perception and that perception
shapes what we see can help alleviate miscommunication and misunderstanding,
preventing us from getting upset with others when they don’t see things the way
we do. The fact is, they don’t. They can’t. No one can see things like you do
except you.
SEEING THROUGH OUR SUBCONSCIOUS FILTERS
Since we all see reality through powerful but almost imperceptible perceptual
filters, we must compensate for them to get a more accurate picture of the facts
of life. We can do so the same way we can improve our active observation skills:
with practice.
Just as our ability to consciously process what we see and think is entirely
dependent upon our brain’s neural connections, the same is true for things that
dwell in our subconscious. Every bit of information, whether we sense it or not,
is passed along our neural pathways, pathways that can be strengthened or
rewired. These connections are so powerful and yet so malleable, just thinking
about something like motion can promote actual physical change.
Experimenters at the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland, Ohio, conducted a study

in which people increased the strength in their fingers by 35 percent solely by
mental training—imagining exercising their finger fifteen minutes a day for
twelve weeks—and not any real physical movement. The muscle gain without
moving was possible because the mental rehearsal of movements activates the
same cortical areas of the brain as physical movement. Similarly, mental practice
can influence processes controlled subconsciously because they share the same
neural circuits. Scientists at the University of Oslo found that although people
cannot adjust the size of their eyes’ pupils voluntarily, their pupils would
constrict by as much as 87 percent when they thought about an imaginary light.
We can work on avoiding our own subconscious pitfalls—such as perceptual
filters—by bringing them into our consciousness, which happens as soon as we
pay attention to them. The moment we become aware of a normally
subconscious process, it crosses into our consciousness. Once these filters are
exposed to our awareness, we can address them, sort through them, and
overcome them if necessary. After we have perfected this new skill, it will itself
become a subconscious process; we will be able to observe things through our
perceptive filters and find the salient facts automatically. We know this is true
because we all once learned to tie our shoes. At first the process required active
thought and concentration, but after some practice it became an action we could
perform without thinking, indeed even with our eyes closed.
Let’s begin sorting through our own personal perceptual filters by examining
them more closely. Take a few moments to think about what might
unintentionally be coloring the things you see. For instance, analyze your own
reaction to the Matelli sculpture. How does it make you feel? Amused?
Offended? Ambivalent? There’s no right or wrong answer; we all feel how we
feel. How would you feel if you saw someone defacing it with spray paint? If
you saw someone crying next to it?
How we innately feel about something is informed by our personal
experiences, which in turn contribute to our perceptual filters—filters that distort
or enhance the way we see. To uncover yours, as you imagine each scenario ask
yourself the following questions about Sleepwalker, and if the answer is yes for
any of them, note what the specifics might be.
Am I being influenced by . . .
my own experiences or the experiences of those close to me?
my geographic history, affinity, or present location?
my values, morals, culture, or religious beliefs?
my upbringing or education?

my professional desires, ambitions, or failures?
my personal desires, ambitions, or failures?
my inherent likes and dislikes?
my financial experience or outlook?
my political beliefs?
my physical state (illness, height, weight, et cetera)?
my current mood?
groups I identify with and organizations I belong to?
media that I’ve consumed: books, television, websites?
information or impressions passed on to me by a friend or colleague?
To help get you started, I’ve shared my own answers to the exercise below:
How does the Matelli sculpture make me feel?
Slightly uncomfortable because it is so realistic-looking. I’m not threatened by
it personally, but I can understand how some people might be.
How would I feel if I saw someone defacing it with spray paint?
I would be upset because I consider it vandalism to deface a work of art and I
don’t think it is an acceptable way to express your difference of opinion.
How would I feel if I saw someone crying next to it?
Concerned, although I would find it hard to believe that the person crying was
upset because of the sculpture.
Am I being influenced by . . .
. . . my own experiences or the experiences of those close to me?
YES—I’m thinking about a close friend of mine from high school who after
being dropped off by her boyfriend after a date stumbled upon a strange man
waiting for her in her garage. He tried to rape her, but she was able to escape
him by biting off the tip of his finger. Now I’m thinking of another friend from
high school whose older sister was not so lucky and was unable to fend off a
rapist who attacked her at her job in the back of a Christian bookstore. Now I’m
thinking of a college professor who was raped on a bicycle ride in the French
countryside, and the daughter of a dear friend who was attacked walking home
to her dorm in college. That I can recall so many instances of sexual violence
against women so quickly is profoundly disturbing to me and makes me
understand the questions about the appropriateness of placing this sculpture on a

women’s college campus. I might not agree, but I understand why the issues
were raised.
 
. . . my geographic history, affinity, or present location?
YES—I’m in my office, safe and sound, far away from the sculpture. That’s
probably why it’s easy to think it isn’t threatening to me, because I’m not in
front of it. If I were, and saw that it was life-size, perhaps even taller than me, it
might change my perception of it.
 
. . . my values, morals, culture, or religious beliefs?
NO
. . . my upbringing or education?
YES—I have an art history degree and have worked in and around art for
many years, so I’m probably more familiar with sculpture than the average
person. This might make me less emotional about the sculpture than someone
without a similar background.
 
. . . my professional desires, ambitions, or failures?
NO
. . . my personal desires, ambitions, or failures?
NO
. . . my inherent likes and dislikes?
YES—I hate to admit it, but I’m just not a huge fan of bald men. It might just
be a matter of personal taste and aesthetics, but I’m admitting it so I can consider
how it might affect my perception of this sculpture.
 
. . . my financial experience or outlook?
NO
. . . my political beliefs?
NO
. . . my physical state (illness, height, weight, et cetera)?
YES—I am an average-size female, and the sculpture is a life-size, average-
size male I might have a very different reaction to the piece if I were a male

size male. I might have a very different reaction to the piece if I were a male.
 
. . . my current mood?
NO
. . . groups I identify with and organizations I belong to?
NO
. . . media that I’ve consumed: books, television, websites?
YES—I’ve read quite a few articles about the Matelli sculpture outcry,
including the original petition from some of the students.
 
. . . information or impressions passed on to me by a friend or colleague?
YES—I had a friend tell me she thought the statue was “creepy,” a word I
probably wouldn’t have used to describe it.
  *
The more familiar we are with what might alter our observations, the more
astute and accurate they will be. When you’re asked to report objectively on
something, ask yourself if you are reporting raw observational data or
assumptions about observational data drawn after running it through the filter of
your own personal experience.
Observation is a study of facts. We know that we have perceptual filters that
can color or cloud what we see, and we know that others have their own filters,
but what we want to cull are facts. Sometimes our perceptual filters disguise
opinions as facts, such as with Matelli’s half-naked man sculpture. A viewer
who had experienced trauma might see the statue’s raised hands as aggressive. A
Walking Dead fan might describe the statue as a zombie. Neither is a fact. A
correct description: the statue’s hands are raised, arms outstretched. Is the statue
lost or lustful? Neither. It is a bald man in his briefs. Saying you find him creepy
is subjective. Explaining the objective reasons why you find him creepy could
reveal facts that are useful to someone who thought the statue was merely funny.
When searching for facts, we need to separate subjective discoveries from
objective ones, and we’ll study the concept of the subjective versus the objective
more thoroughly in the next chapter. Here I want to emphasize that subjective
filters and their subjective findings aren’t necessarily useless. We don’t need to
toss them out automatically. Instead, use the way other people look at things to
lead you to new facts you might have missed otherwise If coaxed perhaps I

lead you to new facts you might have missed otherwise. If coaxed, perhaps I
would reveal that I was disturbed by the length of the statue’s fingernails.
Another observer could use my revelation to examine a part of the sculpture she
might have missed. Someone who owns a gym might point out the statue’s
distended belly, while a podiatrist or someone with foot pain might point out the
statue’s odd posture. A six-year-old would focus on different aspects of the
statue than the owners of the Hanes company. To mine the most information
possible, don’t close your eyes to anything, even someone else’s subjectivity.
MOST COMMON PERCEPTUAL FILTERS
While we are all prone to subjectivity in our initial inspection of anything, we
are especially vulnerable when we need to glean specific information to fulfill
our personal or professional desires. Whether you look for a living or you’re just
studying a single occurrence, make sure you’re not seeing something just
because you want to see it or because it’s your job to find it.
Seeing What We Want to See
This very common filter goes by many different names, including cognitive bias,
confirmation bias, myside bias, wishful seeing, and tunnel vision. It puts us at
risk of gathering information selectively, subconsciously seeking data that
support our expectations and ignoring those that don’t. It’s a common trap in
many fields. You can see it when police officers engage in racial profiling, when
journalists only interview experts who support their initial opinion about a topic,
when academics construct case studies to support their hypotheses, and when
managers conducting employee evaluations only focus on performance events
that uphold their preexisting opinion of an employee. Parents do the same thing,
struggling to accurately assess their child’s aberrant behavior.
We find personal proof that wishful seeing shapes our perceptual experience
in “frequency illusion,” which occurs when we first learn about something and
then suddenly see it everywhere—for instance, when you buy a new car and then
see that same car everywhere. More of that particular vehicle didn’t just flood
the roads, you just didn’t notice them before. By the end of this book, the same
thing is likely to occur with art. After being asked to pay close attention to works
of art, you might start to see images of art everywhere: in cereal advertisements,
on umbrellas and laptop covers. The frequency of your encounters with artworks
won’t have mysteriously increased; those images were always there. You only
start to notice them because they align with your new observation-skills
enhancement, and you’ve stopped blocking them out.
While confirmation bias is relatively easy to comprehend from the wide angle

While confirmation bias is relatively easy to comprehend from the wide angle
of wish fulfillment—she desperately wanted it to be true, so she saw things that
way—it is less well known that our preferences can also change the way we see
the minute, material qualities of things, especially in relation to size, length, or
distance. In experiments around the world, researchers have found that our
desires make things seem physically larger or closer than they really are. In the
Netherlands, subjects were asked to guess the size of a chocolate muffin; dieters
estimated that the muffin was much bigger than non-dieters did because it was
something the calorie counters were craving. In New York, subjects were shown
a water bottle and asked how close it was to them; thirsty participants reported
that the beverage was closer than others did.
While the tendency to see what we believe is largely unconscious, we can
reduce its effect simply by knowing that expecting a certain outcome
predisposes us to look harder for evidence that supports that expectation.
Confirmation bias is especially prevalent with data that give us a sense of self-
verification or self-enhancement. To make sure you aren’t mistaking your
desires for facts, ask yourself two questions: “Is this information consistent with
what I initially thought?” and “Does this information benefit me personally or
professionally?” Your findings may still be factual even if you answer yes to
either question, but by addressing your expectations up front, you can add more
transparency to your information-gathering process.
Seeing What We’re Told to See
Sometimes other people can add perceptual filters to our own observations. The
integrity of our search for facts can be compromised when we look for what we
think we need to find. If before I had shown you the photograph, I had told you
that Jane Alexander’s exhibit at Saint John the Divine was being censured for
obscenity, you probably would have noticed the canine-human statues’ nudity
much more quickly than if I hadn’t. If I had told you a story about a man who
smuggled illegal jewels in his underwear before I showed you the photograph of
Tony Matelli’s sculpture, you would have focused on his attire and any bulges
therein more readily than if I hadn’t. Even if we don’t realize it, we often see
what we’re told to see.
To offset this, pay special attention to any outside suggestions or restrictions
that might be placed on your observation skills. I had a student at the University
of Virginia School of Nursing come up to me following a presentation and
confess that she found the common medical practice of “charting by exception”
unduly constraining. Meant to streamline medical record keeping and make it
easier to quickly review trends, charting by exception instructs personnel to
document only unusual findings or exceptions to the norm. As a result, doctors

docu e t o y u usua
d gs o e cept o s to t e o
.
s a esu t, docto s
and nurses are tempted to limit what they look for, especially if the chart is
already filled with WDLs (“within defined limits”) from previous shift workers.
Don’t go right to the chart; go right to the patient. How does the patient look?
What is the patient’s reaction to you? Apply the same principle to any form or
evaluation or standardized report in any field. Be careful not to let it box you in.
Your initial observation should be as unbiased and unlimited as possible. If a
manager is fixated on following a form for evaluating an employee’s punctuality
or profitability, she might miss other telling benchmarks such as the employee’s
attire, demeanor, or body language. Look beyond the list. Focusing all of our
attention on benchmarks and checking off boxes will inhibit a complete and
accurate analysis from the start.
This is one reason why I don’t allow participants in my class to read the labels
next to works of art when we’re in a museum and why I don’t mention the name
of the artist or work in this book right away: because labels shape opinions and
create prejudice. If I had immediately told you that the black-and-white
photograph on page 37 was called Renshaw’s Cow, you would have missed the
experience of looking at the image unfettered and the lesson you learned from
the difficulty of identifying the cow. If you’d known Tony Matelli’s sculpture
was entitled Sleepwalker, you might have had trouble imagining the man as an
active intruder or understanding how someone else might see him that way.
In a group of government agents I took to the Smithsonian American Art
Museum, while standing beside a sculpture of smooth, round balls stacked in a
pyramid and cracked half open with faces inside, one person reported seeing
new life coming out of eggs, another saw death masks inside cannonballs, while
someone else said the spheres reminded him of buckeye candy, spoonfuls of
peanut butter half dipped in chocolate. Had they known ahead of time that the
piece was titled In Memoriam, every observation would have been slanted in the
direction of loss and war. Instead we got a more honest range of input and
learned that the third observer hailed from Ohio and felt hungry. Is this sort of
information relevant or useful? It certainly could be. It opened a door of personal
experience in an otherwise impersonal setting, allowing this man’s coworkers to
view him in a way they never had before—as a small boy in his mother’s
midwestern kitchen.
To get a complete and accurate picture of anything, we need to aggregate all
possible information and as many perspectives as possible so we can then sort
through, prioritize, and make sense of it. Labels and prewritten accounts and
existing information can then be included in our collection, but only after we
have looked on our own first. So here’s the order:

Look first
↓
Consult other preexisting information or opinions
↓
Look again
We’re basically looking at things twice: first without any external influence,
and then with a view informed by new data. You first experienced the photo at
the beginning of this chapter for yourself, with no outside influence. Now that
you have more information—that it’s called Renshaw’s Cow—go back to page
37 and look at it again. Does the name mean anything to you or sound familiar in
any way? Renshaw is in fact the same Samuel Renshaw mentioned in the
previous chapter, the vision expert whose system for recognizing aircraft at a
glance was used to train 285,000 preflight cadets during World War II.
Renshaw used to spring the poorly developed bovine print on visitors to his
Ohio State University lab and ask them to guess what it was. Nearly every adult
got it wrong. One reporter investigating Renshaw’s contribution to the war effort
was confident it was a map of Europe, thus exposing his confirmation bias. In
contrast, every small child Renshaw ever showed it to identified it immediately
as a cow. Why? With fewer years of experience and a natural penchant for not
listening, children don’t have as many perceptive filters obstructing their view.
Not Seeing Change
The final entry in our triad of prevailing perceptual filters is change blindness,
the failure to notice fluctuations in our visual field. Both the psychologist behind
the “invisible gorilla” experiment and our friend the Gentleman Thief have
staged dramatic, public displays of how easily we can fall prey to this perceptual
malady.
Daniel Simons and his colleagues staged an experiment during which
someone would approach pedestrians at a university and ask for directions.
While they were talking, two men carrying an opaque door crossed in between
them, at which time the person asking directions was replaced with someone
new. Only 50 percent of the people giving instructions noticed the switch.
Apollo Robbins appears on and consults for the National Geographic television

show Brain Games, which demonstrated change blindness through an episode
set in a Las Vegas hotel. As guests talk with a hotel employee, he drops his pen,
bends down behind the desk to pick it up, and is replaced by someone new.
Fewer than half of the guests recognized the appearance of a new person.
Considering that our brain encounters an estimated eleven million bits of
information each second and knowing the finite nature of what we can process
and pay attention to, change blindness isn’t that surprising. One way of
combating it is to recognize that everything changes constantly, even if those
changes are too small for us to observe in real time. Think of a tree. You can’t
see it grow, but it still does, maybe as slowly as an inch a year. You could pass
by the same tree every day and think it looks the same, but what happens if you
take a closer look?
Mark Hirsch, That Tree, March 14, 2012.

Mark Hirsch, That Tree, Day 320: February 6.

Mark Hirsch, That Tree, Day 51: May 13.
Mark Hirsch did. He drove by the same tree in Platteville, Wisconsin, every
day for nineteen years. Although a photographer by trade, he’d never considered
snapping a shot of the tree until he got a new iPhone. One January evening as he
passed by the tree, shrouded in blowing snow, he pulled over and decided to
christen his new phone’s tiny digital camera. He was so taken with the
photograph of the towering bur oak rising from the edge of a cornfield that he
documented the same tree every single day for a year.
Even though he lived just a mile away and had viewed it thousands of times,
after taking the time to really look Hirsch discovered that the tree and its familiar
valley were a “foreign land full of strange and wonderful discoveries.”
When we go into any situation thinking it’s going to be the same thing we’ve
seen or done before, we’re putting up our own perceptual filter that will make
any change even harder to find. The resulting blinders can cause us to miss
important details, to go into autopilot, or worse, to become presumptuous about
our expertise, abilities, or safety. And that’s when things can get dangerous. One
of the detectives who attended my class admitted that he often thought, “I know

exactly what this crime scene is going to look like,” before he even arrived to an
investigation. It’s a natural inclination after years on the job, and we’re all
tempted to do it. But we can’t. When doctors or police officers or teachers say,
“I’ve seen this before,” they’re wrong. They may have seen or handled similar
things or cases or people but not the new one in front of them; that one has never
existed before. Think of Hirsch’s tree photographs: it might be the same tree, but
the weather, the humidity, and the light won’t ever be exactly the same. The
ladybug climbing up its bark has never gone exactly the same way with exactly
the same steps at exactly the same time ever before.
No two jobs, classrooms, crime scenes, customers, students, patients, people,
or problems are the same. There is no such thing as the same pneumonia, the
same second-grader, or the same business deal. Every person and situation is
unique. To treat them otherwise is to deceive them and ourselves.
THE ART OF ILLUSION
Illusionists and magicians take advantage of perceptual filters such as change
blindness and confirmation bias to entertain us. Con artists and crooks do the
same in order to fleece us. According to Apollo Robbins, the best defense
against the latter is “the knowledge that you’re always vulnerable to a thief with
the right skills.”
The same can be said of the tricks our brain can play on us; we are all
vulnerable to our unconscious and ever-evolving filters. If we fail to
acknowledge and examine them, they can hurt us. To arm ourselves against
them, we must know them. Once we’re aware of our personal perceptual lenses,
we can see past them.

4
Delta Employees Do It on the Fly
The Who, What, When, and Where of Objective Surveillance
AS IT WAS MOST Saturday afternoons, the upscale mall was packed with shoppers.
Students, mothers with their babies, businesspeople, couples, people of all ages
and ethnicities strolled through the gleaming, five-story retail paradise. In the
center of the mall, bright, auburn escalators crisscrossed the sunny, domed
atrium where customers could sample yogurt, see a movie, or seek out the latest
fashions. With a supermarket, bank, casino, cinema, and more than eighty stores
in the 350,000-square-foot complex, there was a lot to see and do. Perhaps too
much.
On September 21, 2013, four men walked toward the main pedestrian
entrance of the mall and started throwing grenades. Once inside, they were
joined by an indeterminate number of others and started firing automatic
weapons at anyone and everyone For four days the small terrorist group

weapons at anyone and everyone. For four days the small terrorist group—
perhaps as few as eight—held the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya, under siege,
killing 68 people, injuring 175 more, and blowing up much of the building in the
process.
How did a handful of people manage to keep hundreds of others captive inside
a sprawling modern mall for so long? Because of a complete observation and
communication breakdown among locals, visitors, shopkeepers, shoppers, and
law enforcement agents.
After receiving texts from friends trapped inside the mall, local citizens
arrived to help and found no SWAT team, no command center, and no
coordinated government response. The mall security force had run away. The
armed guards from the in-mall bank were cowering in a corner. Hours after the
attack started, there was still no perimeter set up, causing many to suspect that
some of the first assailants had simply walked away.
When police and soldiers did finally show up, they couldn’t communicate
with one another because their radios were set on different frequencies, they
didn’t have night vision goggles so they were limited in what they could do after
dark, and no one could find a blueprint of the building. The only map they could
produce was a printout from Westgate’s own website—until that crashed as the
rest of the world flooded it, looking for information.
Throughout the siege, one of the biggest challenges facing victims and
authorities was that it was hard to tell who the good guys were. People with guns
on the scene included not just the attackers but off-duty policemen, a local gun
club, a neighborhood watch, a British Special Air Service officer, and regular
armed civilians. And their uniforms were as varied as their languages. Midway
through the attack, the terrorists changed clothes. When word got out that their
captors were sparing Muslim hostages, shoppers began sharing their clothes to
disguise their nationality. Outside, local Kenyan police mistook one of their own
undercover cops for an attacker and killed him. The deadly confusion delayed
them from entering the building for days.
While the rescuers waited and argued among themselves, the terrorists
restocked their weapon supply with ammunition previously stashed in the mall
and spent four days hunting down, interrogating, torturing, and mutilating
shoppers who had managed to find hiding places.
What if you were inside? What if your loved one was? The Westgate attack is
an extreme case of public violence, but it is not as unusual as it might seem.
From 2005 to 2012, there were sixteen mall shootings around the world, twelve
of them in the United States; and in 2015, Somali terror group al-Shabaab urged
followers to deploy an attack like the one in Kenya at the Mall of America in
Minnesota

Minnesota.
Missing or mismanaging important data isn’t just a matter of personal safety;
it also affects our and our companies’ professional reputations and profitability.
A mishandled event from the mailroom to the boardroom can erode multiple
facets of a company’s value, from stock and financial to job and customer trust.
In our current digital age, the news of company crises spreads internationally in
an instant, and according to a global study done by Freshfields Bruckhaus
Deringer, 53 percent of companies still don’t see their share prices return to pre-
crisis levels a year afterward.
While crises are crucibles that quickly bring organizational failings to light,
they aren’t the only situations where we need to accurately catalog and
communicate what we see. We must be able to objectively survey the scene in
which we find ourselves, sort fact from fiction, prioritize information, and
disseminate it efficiently in all manner of instances—whether it’s our life or our
livelihood that hangs in the balance. Let’s investigate how to do that step by step
so we’re better prepared.
FACT VERSUS FICTION
The perceptual filters we learned about in the last chapter can sometimes cause
our brains to treat assumptions as facts. We’ll practice sorting through the
difference the same way we do throughout the book—by analyzing works of art.
To start, take a look at these two paintings:
Each features a seated white woman with short hair and exposed legs looking
down. Do the pictures look similar? They might because they were painted by
the same artist, Edward Hopper. But be careful not to jump to any conclusions
based on that information.
Take a look at these two women:

Is it the same woman? Indeed it is: Maud Dale, the wife of a wealthy patron of
the arts who had two different artists paint her portrait. Is it the same artist? No.
The one on the left was painted by the French artist Fernand Léger, the one on
the right by American George Bellows, sixteen years earlier.
To gather data successfully from what we observe, we cannot assume
anything—including who someone is—based on a feeling, a look, or what we
might have experienced in the past. Likewise, moving too quickly or too early in
many situations—implementing a solution to a business problem, reprimanding
an employee, or walking away from a relationship—without confirmation of the
facts can be detrimental and in some situations fatal.
During the Westgate Mall siege in Nairobi, captive shoppers who incorrectly
guessed the identity of the armed men they encountered paid dearly. Police,
helpful citizens, and the attackers were all armed and dressed similarly, since
terrorists often don official-looking uniforms, and many undercover officers
were wearing casual clothes. Survivors who hid inside the Nakumatt
supermarket recounted how after several hours a group of men with guns arrived
at their location, proclaimed they were rescuers, and urged shoppers to come out
of hiding. Those who did emerge, grateful, arms raised, were shot down by the
untruthful terrorists.
Just because someone says something is a fact doesn’t make it so. People lie,
and as we’ve just learned, we can’t even rely on our own eyes to always tell us
the truth. To make sure a fact is a fact, you need to verify it every time.
I travel around the world by myself giving lectures and I think I’m fairly

I travel around the world by myself giving lectures, and I think I m fairly
good at protecting my personal safety, but apparently I’m not good enough,
according to some law enforcement professionals. Once when I arrived at the
train station in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, to speak at an FBI training event, I
received a text from the driver they had arranged for me that my ride would be
waiting outside: a gray Toyota pickup truck. I easily found the vehicle, happily
handed my luggage to the nice driver, and got inside. When the doors were
closed and we started to pull away, the driver surprised me.
“I expected more from you,” he said.
More from me? For what?
“You didn’t ask me for identification,” he continued. “I could have been
anyone.”
“But I got a text about the make and model of your car,” I protested weakly.
“This unmarked gray truck?” he said. “How many other gray trucks were
parked out there at the train station?”
I didn’t know. “But you texted me,” I began again.
“How do you know it was me?” he asked. “Your phone number is easier to
find than you think. If someone wanted to kidnap you, you sure made it easy for
them.”
He was right, of course, and I learned my lesson. We need to be more
watchful. We can’t let our guard down, because criminals—or our competitors—
won’t.
We also must remember that appearances can be deceiving. Just because a
man shows an outstretched hand and a ready smile doesn’t make him a good
guy, or the guy you were supposed to meet. Working with behavior-detection
officers at the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), I’ve learned that a
well-dressed man at the airport terminal may not be wealthy; he may instead be a
drug smuggler disguised to dispel assumptions based on appearances. Likewise,
the modestly dressed old woman may have tremendous wealth. The facts of an
elderly woman’s clothing might include “threadbare sweater, scuffed canvas
shoes, small gold ring on left ring finger” but not “middle-class” or even
“widow.” The gold ring does not automatically indicate that its wearer is
married.
JUST THE FACTS (MA’AM)
To find only the proven in the haystacks of information that often lie before us,
we must set as our first goal in assessing a new scene or environment the
collection of all the facts. By definition, a fact is “a truth known by actual

experience or observation.” Always use an open mind, and look past the
obvious, but focus only on what you can observe to be true, not what you
assume to be.
When looking at anything—a painting, a patient’s room, our peers at a party, a
public square, or a line of people at the airport—we must study it using the same
basic model of information gathering employed by journalists, law enforcement
agents, and scientific researchers: who, what, when, and where. Who is involved
in this scene? What happened? When did it happen? And where did the action
take place? (The why will come later, in chapter 7, when we look at content.)
Let’s begin by studying the Edward Hopper painting back on page 60 and
seeing how many facts we can gather. Remember, we are using the piece not as
an objet d’art but rather as a collection of data points. You may find the level of
analysis of this Hopper painting on the following pages ridiculously detailed, but
that’s the point. Don’t skim over any of it. Take your time and really absorb the
process.
WHO?
Who is the subject of this scene? A lone woman. Are you sure? Look again. Is
there anyone else in the room? In the reflection of the window? No, she appears
to be alone.
What else do we know about the person? Is she married or single? We can’t
tell. Do we know her name? No. How can we definitively describe her? She
appears to be white and in her twenties or thirties, although not too young to be
alone. She doesn’t have any wrinkles on her face, so that would put her age
anywhere from late teens to early forties. We don’t have an actual age as a fact,
but we have eliminated other possibilities: she is not ten, nor is she sixty.
How about her height? Can you tell how tall she is? Yes, since according to
the proportions in the room, she is sitting at what appears to be a regular-size
table on a regular-size chair. We could do some calculations with a standin
person seated at a standard-size table or even measure our woman in relation to
the door handles on the left and come up with a fairly close approximation of her
height.
What about her weight? She is wearing a bulky coat that hides her midsection,
but we can see a slender neck, thin fingers, slim legs, and a rather flat chest. We
can conclude that she is of average weight or slightly under but not overweight.
What is she wearing? A coat and a hat. Be more specific. If you had to
describe her to someone else, differentiate her from another woman in a coat and
hat, how would you do it? She’s wearing a long-sleeved green coat trimmed with

a brown fur collar and cuffs. The coat reaches her knees when she’s sitting,
which means that it’s longer when she’s standing up.
What else can we observe about her attire? She’s wearing a yellow hat with a
tiny cluster of artificial cherries on the right. The hat has a drooping brim that
shadows her face. Knowing what kind of hat she chose to put on can tell us a lot
about her. So what kind is it? Unless you’re a milliner, which I’m not, we’re
going to have to look this one up. We can easily find out by researching it on the
Internet, but we’ll need a good, factual description of it to get good results.
When I searched Google for “women’s hats” I got sixty-nine million results.
When I searched for “women’s hat tight fitting turned down brim,” the results
narrowed to three million, and the first three sites listed all gave me the answer
right away: it’s a cloche. After another quick search I discovered that the cloche
is a fitted, bell-shaped hat invented in 1908 that was very popular in the 1920s.
We cannot see her shoes, but did you notice she’s only wearing one glove?
Where’s the other one? We can’t see it. At this point, you might be saying, “So
what? Who cares?” But the secrets of life are often revealed through small
details. Small details can solve crimes. Small details can lead to significant
diagnoses. Small details reveal big things.
That she’s only wearing one glove, on her left hand, is important to note. It
might be the most important fact, especially if the right-hand glove turns up
somewhere. The discovery of a single glove at the crime scene became the crux
of the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
That our subject is wearing only one glove might indicate her state of mind. Is
she distracted? In a hurry? That she’s sitting with a cup and saucer in front of an
empty plate would suggest that she’s been sitting at this table for some time. Is
she wearing the glove to conceal something on her left hand? A deformity? A
stain? A wedding ring? We don’t have the answers to those questions, but
cataloging the facts will get us to ask the right questions.
What about jewelry? Is that a red earring on her left ear, or a curl of her hair?
It looks like it could be an earring, but if we study where her ear should be in
relation to the bottom of her nose, the red circle proves to be too high for an
earring.
There is a glint on her right ring finger that could be a ring, or perhaps her
fourth and fifth fingers are just slightly apart, allowing the white table to peek
through. A closer examination of the placement of her hand reveals that if her
fingers were separated, the dark brown cuff of her coat, and not the tabletop,
would show through at that particular spot.
We can’t tell if she’s wearing any bracelets, but she doesn’t appear to be
wearing a necklace.
Wh
b
h
b d l
? H
li
d
d h ’
d

What about her body language? Her lips are pursed, and she’s not engaged
with anyone. She’s still wearing her coat. And she’s looking down into the cup
she holds in her right, ungloved hand.
What’s in the cup? Coffee? How can you be sure? The presence of a cup
instead of a glass suggests a hot drink, not cold. The most likely choices of hot
drink are coffee, tea, and hot chocolate. There’s no discernible whipped topping
or brown residue that typically comes from drinking hot chocolate. There’s no
tea bag or spoon that would typically accompany hot tea. So coffee is a good
guess but not a fact.
Employing a similar investigative method of objectively assessing a person’s
attire, behavior, and interactions with objects can help us uncover the identity or
intentions of unknown people in any situation, from a traveler in the airport who
might be a potential terrorist to a driver waiting curbside who might be a
potential kidnapper. Noting whether people’s shoes matched their official
uniforms, what kind of guns they were carrying, and how they walked might
have told those hidden inside the Kenyan mall volumes about who might rescue
them and who might murder them.
WHAT?
The second question in our investigative model is what happened or what’s
happening. What is the main action? In the Hopper painting there’s not much
action: a single woman sitting at a table holding a cup. There’s no one else in the
picture, or even a hint of another person. The woman is looking down, her
mouth closed. There is an empty plate in front of her, aside from the cup and
saucer, that indicates she’s been at the table long enough to finish eating
something.
Such simplicity is not always the case, however. Many paintings, like many
scenes in life, are complex. Let’s take a closer look at a painting we passed by in
chapter 1 on page 10. What’s going on here?

Jan Steen, As the Old Sing, So Pipe the Young, 1668–1670.
Three women and a bearded man are seated around a small food-laden table; one
of the women holds a paper, one holds a baby, and the other a drinking glass in
her outstretched hand. A man with long hair stands over the table pouring liquid
into the seated woman’s glass. Another man, possibly seated, possibly just short
in stature, is to his immediate left holding a long pipe to a young boy’s mouth.
Another boy looks on. Behind him, against the wall, a man holding an
instrument resembling a bagpipe, reed in his mouth, looks directly at the viewer
—the only person in the painting to do so. The group is surrounded by animals.
A tropical bird with long tail feathers, possibly a parrot, gazes down at them
from a tall perch in the corner of the room next to two smaller birds in a cage
mounted high on the wall. A spotted dog, nose and tail up, looks out of the frame
at something we cannot see.
What is the group doing? We cannot conclude definitely, but we can gather
facts that will help eliminate incorrect assumptions. Are they eating dinner? Not
likely, since the table they sit around is small and doesn’t contain place settings.
Most people in the painting are smiling, some have no expression, and the piper
might be pensive, but there seems to be an absence of tension or conflict. Are
those in the group related to one another? We have no facts that prove either for
or against, so we cannot assume. They could be neighbors or guests at an inn.

We might not have a full picture of what is going on, but we have discovered
many facts that can point us toward what is and is not happening. The group has
food and drink, music and companionship. They are fully dressed and seated on
and around carved furniture. Children are present. The animals pictured are
calm. From this we can tell what is not happening. There is not a storm raging
outside. The people are not starving. Aside from the possibly pensive pipe
player, the body language of the group is relaxed and suggests they all know one
another.
Taking the time to analyze what is happening matters. In the firestorm of the
Nairobi mall, many people failed to realize what was going on in their
immediate surroundings, and suffered for it. Some shoppers first thought the
gunshots were a gas heater exploding or a bank robbery. Those who fled without
first assessing what was happening ran right into the gunmen’s line of fire.
Those who waited, evaluated, and figured out that it was a terrorist attack found
safe hiding places. Even though it may seem obvious and not worth
investigating, especially when things are calm, resist the urge to rush past the
what, or you’ll leave behind valuable facts you might not otherwise have
recovered.
WHEN?
Now let’s investigate when the action is taking place. What facts can we find
about when this scene in the Hopper painting back on page 63 occurred?
What time of year is it? The woman’s fur-trimmed clothes would usually put
us in late autumn or winter, yet her yellow, cherry-adorned hat doesn’t seem to
match those seasons. Could it be early spring and unseasonably cold? In either
case, we might eliminate the dead of winter, as her hat seems a bit flimsy, and
the height of summer, as her coat seems too substantial for warm weather.
What time of day is it? It is after dark, but when? Since days are shorter in the
early spring and late fall, it could be fully dark by 5 P.M. in many places, and stay
dark until 7 A.M., so we have a fourteen-hour window. We can shorten that time
span, though, by noting that the scene outside the window lacks any artificial
light as well. The bright, clean interior suggests that the location might not be in
a dicey or isolated part of town, so there should be other activity outside the
window: streetlights or car headlights. That there isn’t suggests either an odd,
late hour, when most people are not out and about, or simply an aesthetic choice
to create a mood of isolation and solitude. Either should be taken into account as
observations.
What about the year or time period? Researching the woman’s hat put us in

the 1920s. Further research on the evolution of the cloche shows that by 1928
the brims were either gone or upturned, so we are most likely before that year,
since our subject’s hat has a downturned brim.
WHERE?
Finally, we need to assess where. Where is the scene from the Hopper painting
taking place? Without a logo on the window or a written word anywhere, we
must do a little more in the way of observation.
Based on the walls, doors, windows, and electric lights, we can see that the
scene is indoors. The place is clean, well kept, and well lit. The golden radiator
and door handles don’t show any signs of scuff or wear.
We can see one white-topped, round table with two dark brown chairs. In the
lower right corner is the back of another chair that suggests there is at least one
more set of table and chairs. Did you miss that chair corner? Is it important?
Noting the facts of your location—what’s around you or the subject of any
scene you are studying—can be critical or even life-saving if something
unexpected happens. Knowing where the emergency exits are in a darkened
theater, which are the exit rows on a plane, or where the storm shelter or
strongest doorway is in the event of a natural disaster can make all the
difference. Situational awareness is imperative for decision making in many
situations from air traffic control and emergency services to driving a car or
maneuvering a bicycle along a busy street.
As I’ve mentioned, I travel frequently for my job and often find myself alone
in hotel rooms—a possibly unsafe situation for anyone, since hotels can be
cavernous, convoluted spaces with a crowded, transient clientele conditioned to
ignore the noises in adjoining rooms. Therefore, I will not take a room on the
first floor, as those are too easily accessed from the outside. In case there is an
unexpected emergency, I take time to locate the nearest elevator and stairs.
Carefully noting where I am, who is around me, and the nearest means of egress
is critical for my personal safety, and an assessment I make before I enter an
elevator or a stairwell or get on a subway or bus.
Westgate Mall survivor Elaine Dang did the same thing, and it saved her life.
The twenty-six-year-old from San Diego who works in Kenya was attending a
children’s cooking competition when the first grenades exploded. She told CNN
that one of the contest presenters told everyone to run to the parking lot. She
followed at first but then changed her mind, deciding that the crowd was
vulnerable. She instead turned back to the competition area knowing there was a

large, silver kitchen counter she could hide behind. She did, and she lived. Many
others ran blindly toward the parking lot and did not.
Let’s go back and look more closely at the location in the Hopper painting to
see what else we can discover. On the table is an empty plate, and the woman
holds a cup that has its own saucer. What kind of place would serve a hot drink
and food, and have multiple tables and chairs? A restaurant, diner, or coffee
shop? There is also nothing else on the table that you would typically see in a
restaurant or diner; there are no napkins, no condiments, no salt and pepper, no
menu. We cannot see a hostess stand or welcome sign or cashier.
What can we see? On the windowsill behind the woman is another nod to
food: a bowl of shiny red, orange, and yellow fruit. On the right side we can see
the top of a rail for a staircase that leads down. The front of the establishment is
dominated by a large window. All we can see in it is two rows of electric lights
stretching back into the building.
So what location in the mid-1920s would be clean, well kept, offer food and
drink, be open at night, and be safe for a woman by herself? With that
information, you could search the Internet and find the answer: an Automat.
Automats were “restaurants” without waiters. Self-service vending machines
lined the walls; patrons could choose whatever food they wanted for a
combination of nickels. Horn & Hardart opened the first Automat in 1902; at one
point it was the world’s largest restaurant chain, serving 800,000 people a day.
Automats typically had round tables with white Carrara glass tops, as we see in
the Hopper painting. And they were well known for the best coffee in town.
GETTING THE ANSWERS
Since we’re using works of art to hone our observational skills, knowing
anything about the background of this painting, the style in which it was painted,
or the painter is neither essential nor required. However, since we do have some
information about the painting, we can use it to confirm our success or failure as
observers.
The title of this piece is Automat, and it was first exhibited in 1927. The
woman in the painting is modeled after Hopper’s wife when she was younger,
but we do not know who she is meant to be, where she came from or is going, or
how she feels. We will never have all of the answers—not many people do—but
the more observant we can be, the more facts we can collect, catalog, and
process, the more we will know.
If more people in the Kenyan Westgate Mall had observed and organized what
facts they knew and didn’t know, more of them might have been saved. For

instance, people hiding in the back room of the mobile phone store Safaricom
heard noises in the air vents and considered climbing into them to escape when
they realized they didn’t know if the noises were from other hostages or from
wandering terrorists. Without the facts, they stayed put, and lived.
When an injured Kenyan was being evacuated with other shoppers, someone
noticed a machine gun magazine falling out of his pocket. If they hadn’t, would
this terrorist have gone free? Instead, he was detained.
How many details weren’t noticed or reported by anyone for the months
leading up to the attack? The BBC reported that the terrorists had been renting a
store inside the Westgate Mall for months, smuggling and storing a massive
stockpile of weapons. How did their activities and the transfer of arms go
unnoticed? The same way we all miss pertinent facts when we’re busy or
distracted or just not looking. A week after the Kenyan mall attack, riders on a
crowded San Francisco commuter train failed to see Nikhom Thephakaysone
raise a .45-caliber pistol several times, wipe his nose with it, and aim it at the
young student across the aisle from him. According to the San Francisco
Chronicle, dozens of passengers were standing and sitting just a few feet away,
“their eyes focused on smartphones and tablets,” and didn’t lift their eyes until
twenty-year-old Justin Valdez was shot dead.
Good objective observation skills aren’t necessary only in life-threatening
instances; they’re imperative for so many facets of our personal and professional
lives. I regularly teach people who interact with children as part of their jobs—
medical personnel, educators, family service investigators—who remind me of
the gravity of reporting objectively. One woman, a caseworker from Maryland,
showed me the importance of bruises.
There is a significant difference between reporting that a child is “covered in
bruises” and “has three dime-size, round, yellow and purple bruises just under
the kneecap, one on the left leg and two on the right.” The latter could probably
be said for the majority of active kids because of how often they bang their
shins. Other places, such as the face, head, neck, and buttocks, are not normal
bruising sites. The color and shape of bruises can be just as telling as their
location. Round bruises typically result from bumping into something. Long,
rectangular, or hand-shaped bruises do not. Bruises may have red in them until
they are fully healed, but yellow bruises typically indicate that at least eighteen
hours have passed since the initial impact. And since bruises fade, it’s crucial to
describe them in clear, objective detail as soon as you observe them.
The importance of objective description applies equally to seemingly
inconsequential things in life such as a cappuccino order. Getting it right
requires an accurate and descriptive order that starts with the customer,
i
i h h
hi
d
d
i h h b i
A
l
i
i
b
i

continues with the cashier, and ends with the barista. Any laziness in observation
or communication can cost time, money, and frustration for all parties. Is a
botched cup of coffee really a big deal? It is if you can’t face the day without
your morning cup, or if you’re in the business of selling coffee. Small errors add
up. If just one incorrectly prepared drink a day is thrown away in each of its
twenty thousand stores, Starbucks loses about $8.5 million a year; two faulty
orders doubles that to over $17 million—all preventable loss.
Occasionally a skeptical participant in my class will protest that cataloging
facts in a painting is nothing like her daily job. I disagree. Almost every job,
especially those on the “front lines” of a business, such as doormen, greeters,
receptionists, and executive assistants, requires objective surveillance. We’re
just not always aware of how much we or those around us are doing it. Take a
flight attendant. Not only are flight attendants ambassadors for the airline, hosts
and waiters, safety experts, administrative and inventory specialists, schedulers,
porters, and sometime concierges, they are also emergency services coordinators
and, in essence, first responders. Even during the seemingly mundane ritual of
greeting and seating passengers, the cabin crew are also on the lookout for what
the International Civil Aviation Organization calls ABPs, or “able-bodied
passengers”—people they can count on to assist in an emergency. There must be
three ABPs per exit. The size and shape, age, and seat location of ABPs changes
on every flight. There is no sign-up list or predetermined ABP indicator. As new
passengers board, the flight attendants must quickly find them through astute and
discreet assessment; most ABPs don’t even know they’ve been mentally marked.
An ABP must be over fifteen years of age; have sufficient mobility, strength,
and dexterity in both arms, hands, and legs; be able to read, understand, and
communicate in English; not require a seat belt extension; and not be traveling
with anyone else, since people are more likely to help their family members
before assisting strangers. Flight attendants are trained to not only spot ABPs
with the correct physical, cognitive, and mental abilities, they need to identify
passengers who can understand and take direction while remaining calm under
pressure.
All of this is determined through objective observation. Serving thousands of
people a year, flight attendants know better than most that you can’t assume
anything from appearance. Just because someone looks a certain way doesn’t
mean he doesn’t speak English or have a strong stomach or isn’t related to the
pretty girl he’s splitting his snack with. The flight attendants must reach their
conclusions by looking, listening, and piecing together the clues they’re
presented. The six-foot-plus guy who asked the flight attendant about
turbulence? He’s out. The woman who shuffles in with a cane? No. The

gentleman who graciously helps the person in front of him store her bag
overhead? A good candidate.
When we are fact gathering, we must be careful that our observations are
objective, though, and not subjective. The distinction can be small, but it’s
critically important; it’s literally the difference between fact and fiction. An
objective observation is based on empirical or mathematical facts. A subjective
observation is based on assumptions, opinions, feelings, or values. The bruise is
nasty is subjective; the bruise is round, approximately one inch in diameter, and
purple is objective.
HOW TO AVOID THE SUBJECTIVE
One way to ensure that our observations remain objective is to quantify them by
counting, estimating, or using measuring tools. “Small” might mean different
things to different people: a ladybug is small compared with a dog, but a dog is
small compared with an elephant. Adding numbers will help remove
interpretation and doubt. “Small” is subjective; “one inch across” is not.
Measure whenever you can, estimate when you can’t, but always use numerical
values. Instead of saying there are “many” lights on the ceiling above the woman
in Edward Hopper’s Automat, note that there are “two rows of seven lights.”
Rather than stating that “there are a few chairs” in the scene, be specific: “there
are three dark, wooden, armless chairs visible.”
Even phenomena that can’t be counted or measured can be quantified. Instead
of saying that the dog is “smelly,” quantify it: “On a scale of one to five, five
being the worst, the smell emanating from the dog was a four.”
Finally, replace descriptive adjectives with comparative nouns. “Smelly” is
subjective. So is “smells bad.” What smells bad to some—cut grass, gasoline—
smells wonderful to others. Instead, find a concrete noun to compare with the
smell you’re describing: “The dog smelled like dead fish.”
Striving for the objective doesn’t end with observation, however; we must
ensure that when we draw conclusions, we are also using only facts, not
opinions. Suppose you hadn’t seen the Hopper painting at all but were presented
with two different summaries of it. Which one is objective and which one is
subjective?
A forlorn woman sits alone in a coffee shop at a round, white, marble table.
A woman with a closed mouth and downcast eyes holds a cup and saucer
while sitting alone at a round, white-topped table.
B th d
ib th
b th
th t th
i
t d
i g
d

Both describe the scene, both convey that the woman is not dancing and
laughing but sitting quietly, looking down. However, the first sentence reaches
the conclusion that the woman is forlorn, an adjective that means lonely or sad.
This is a subjective interpretation of the woman’s expression, not a statement of
fact. The second sentence describes the woman’s face and countenance based on
objective facts—she’s looking down, her mouth is closed—without adding any
assumptions about her mood.
The first sentence also concludes that the woman is sitting in a coffee shop.
The second instead factually states that the woman is holding a cup, without
guessing what type of place she is in or what—if anything—is in her cup.
What’s the big deal with “coffee shop” versus “holds a cup and saucer”? A lot.
Where she is hasn’t been proven or disproven. To state something as important
as location as a fact, even casually, especially to someone unfamiliar with the
scene or someone down the chain of information, can lead to more untrue
assumptions that turn into “facts.”
For instance, location was at the crux of the argument against Matelli’s
Sleepwalker statue, as some of the protesters asserted that by installing it at an
all-women’s college the school’s administration was neglecting to provide a
“safe” environment for its students—a serious allegation. The debate was not
over “a schlumpy guy in underpants,” as a Wellesley College English professor
described him, but over where he was: a school with an all-female student body.
By subjectively reporting the statue as being in a “prominent” place on campus,
the Boston Globe ignited a controversy rather than objective examination.
“Prominent” is subjective; it is an opinion of importance. Yet citing that as the
statue’s location without any factual or logistical information fanned the flames
of reports that students were “freaked out” by it or could not avoid it.
If you were a reporter, a parent of a Wellesley student, or a member of the
board of trustees, it would be in your best interest to gather all of the facts
regarding the statue’s placement. And a “prominent” place is not a complete,
factual location assessment. The statue was not placed thoughtlessly; it was set
right across from the on-campus Davis Museum, specifically situated so that it
could be seen from the windows on the first and fifth floor that contained the
rest of Matelli’s exhibit, which included other realistic human sculptures. As
Davis Museum director Lisa Fischman explained, Sleepwalker was put there to
“connect the exhibition—within the museum—to the campus world beyond”;
she saw it as “art escaping the museum.” School officials also noted that the
work was not put in an area that might invade personal privacy such as outside a
dormitory; indeed, it was purposefully put on a grass enclosure that contained no
sidewalks so students would not be forced to interact with it.

Unearthing all objective observations about the location of Sleepwalker is
critical to determining whether Wellesley meant to confront or assault its
students with art. Similarly, we have a responsibility to glean as many objective
observations as possible—not stopping at a first look, cursory glance, or
checked-off box—so that we are sure conclusions reached are based on facts and
not assumptions.
THE RISK OF ASSUMPTIONS
While researching this book, I was reading with my son and came across a
wonderful description of the downsides of assumptions in The Austere Academy
by Lemony Snicket:
Assumptions are dangerous things to make, and like all dangerous things
to make—bombs, for instance, or strawberry shortcake—if you make
even the tiniest mistake you can find yourself in terrible trouble. Making
assumptions simply means believing things are a certain way with little
or no evidence that shows you are correct, and you can see at once how
this can lead to terrible trouble. For instance, one morning you might
wake up and make the assumption that your bed was in the same place
that it always was, even though you would have no real evidence that
this was so. But when you got out of your bed, you might discover that it
had floated out to sea, and now you would be in terrible trouble all
because of the incorrect assumption that you’d made. You can see that it
is better not to make too many assumptions, particularly in the morning.
Even subtle differences between subjective and objective conclusions can be
crucial. In describing the Hopper painting, while “a round, white, marble table”
and “a round, white-topped table” are just one word off, it’s an important word.
That the table is made of marble has not been proven; it’s not a fact. It could just
as easily be painted wood or Carrara glass; popular craftsman Oscar Bach made
tabletops out of white onyx in the 1920s. The first description also states that the
table is “white” and “marble” but doesn’t signify how much or where. There is a
marked difference between a table that is all white and one that is just white-
topped, as well as one that is made entirely out of marble or just topped with it.
Does it matter what a table is made of? It could matter a great deal. Noticing
the composition of an object saved the life of Goran Tomasevic and the
policemen he followed into the Westgate Mall in Nairobi. The chief
photographer for Reuters in East Africa, Tomasevic was hiding behind a large

column with the police during a gun battle with the terrorists. When he noticed
that the pillar wasn’t attached to the building and knocked on it, he discovered
that it was hollow. He told his companions to knock on it as well, and they did,
answering, “So what?” Tomasevic explained that the thin material wouldn’t stop
bullets or offer the protection they were seeking. They quickly moved to a
better-fortified location and lived.
Assumptions can be harmful whether they are formed about subjective things
or formed from facts. We already mentioned how an elderly woman in line at the
airport wearing a ring on the fourth finger of her left hand is not necessarily
married or engaged or widowed. She might have been single her entire life. Turn
back to the painting on page 13 of the white woman, feather on her head,
holding a painting of someone’s naked backside. We noted in chapter 1 that she
was wearing a ring, and it’s still true, visible on the fourth finger of her left hand.
To assume that this means she is either married or engaged or widowed would
not necessarily be correct. She is, in fact, a prostitute. Similarly, we cannot
assume the people around the table in the painting on page 69 are related, or that
the woman in Hopper’s Automat is waiting for someone.
Subjective inferences are not always easy to spot or dismiss, since they are
informed by observations and grounded in perceptions. Even the best
organizations fail to weed out assumptions.
In 2005 the Iraq Intelligence Commission, formed to determine how the
American intelligence community had misjudged Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) program, presented a 601-page report on its findings to the
president of the United States. The commission concluded, “Its principal causes
were the Intelligence Community’s inability to collect good information about
Iraq’s WMD programs, serious errors in analyzing what information it could
gather, and a failure to make clear just how much of its analysis was based on
assumptions, rather than good evidence.” It went on to state that “analysts were
too wedded to their assumptions” and “much of their conclusions rested on
inferences and assumptions.”
How many other public or private companies could withstand the same kind
of scrutiny brought by an outside investigation with access to all of its
communications? Could yours? We all make assumptions more often than we
think, and like a snowball, even the smallest ones get bigger as they go downhill.
The earlier the assumption is made, the more dangerous it is because it skews
subsequent observations. Accuracy in the first stages of the observation process
is critical. If you’re the eyewitness or the first person to get the news or the one
filing the initial report, you have a heightened responsibility to be objective and
detailed in your observations.

  *
Now that we have a firm grasp of the building blocks of effective observation—
the who, what, when, and where—we’re ready to look beyond what lies in plain
sight in search of the subtleties that can reveal key information.

5
What’s Hiding in Plain Sight?
Seeing the Forest and the Trees
John Singleton Copley, Mrs. John Winthrop, 1773.

MEET MRS. JOHN WINTHROP. You can visit her “in person” at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York City. Mrs. Winthrop’s portrait was painted by John
Singleton Copley in 1773 when she was married to her second husband, a
professor at Harvard. The painting is notable for its realism and a perfect
opportunity to practice objective surveillance. Take a few minutes to observe as
much as you can about the who, what, where, and when of this scene.
Did you note the vibrant blue of her dress; the double white lace cuffs; the
blue, black, and white striped bow on her chest; the red, black, and white striped
bow on her cap; her brown hair with slight widow’s peak; the six strands of
pearls wound around her neck; her multiple chins and her dimples; the red
upholstery of the chair; her short, clean fingernails; the garnet and diamond ring
on her left ring finger; and the nectarines she holds in her hands, one still
attached to its branch?
Although this painting depicts a lone figure against a plain, dark backdrop,
similar to the scene out the window in Hopper’s Automat, the detail here is
exquisite, and it gives the attentive observer much more information about its
subject than Hopper does. We can see varying textures in her bodice, the folds of
skin at her wrist, and many glorious wrinkles on her face.
When cataloging what they see, many people miss one feature that is among
the most compelling attributes of the painting: the mahogany table at which she
is sitting. Did you see it at all? If you did, did you really study it? This prop is
actually the painting’s tour de force and a testament to the artist’s technical skill.
In it, the artist has painted a perfect reflection of Mrs. Winthrop’s skin, her
fingers, the intricate lace patterns of her sleeves, even traces of the nectarine.
The table dominates almost the bottom third of the painting. It seems
impossible that we could miss something so large, yet most of us do. In
countless situations big and small, we overlook the “mahogany table,” and in
doing so miss a crucial piece of information that is hiding in plain sight. The
phenomenon is so common it has its own idiom—“If it were a snake, it would
have bitten you”—and has been facetiously referred to as “refrigerator
blindness” by the Canadian Medical Association Journal for where it frequently
occurs. (I can’t count the number of times I’ve been looking right at the
mayonnaise jar but didn’t see it.)
A couple of years ago I had to take my sister to the hospital for pain in her
back. In the cubicle next to us lay a ninety-year-old man attached to a heart
machine and an oxygen mask. Near him sat his wife; she and I started chatting as
my sister faded into Valium happiness.
As we talked, two emergency room residents who looked to be in their mid-
thirties came in and wheeled a very fancy machine up to the elderly man.

Without saying a word or acknowledging our presence, they stuck patches on his
chest, peered at images on the screen, and then talked very loudly to each other:
“I wonder what caused this?” “I wonder how long the lungs have been
functioning at this level.” “I would love to know the pulmonary history on this
one.”
The patient’s wife politely interrupted them and said, “I can answer all of your
questions.”
“Who are you?” they asked, startled, as if they’d just noticed her.
She answered, “I am his wife. This is our sixth time in the ER in as many
months, and I can give you the whole history of his condition.”
One of the residents replied, “Oh, I didn’t see you when we came in. Tell us
what you know.” The residents were so fixated on their machinery that they
missed the patient’s entire case history, which sat before them—in plain sight.
When we miss things in plain sight—a patient’s wife, a mahogany table, a
mayonnaise jar—it isn’t always as harmless as overlooking a condiment or a
piece of furniture. In many instances, the thing we miss is obscuring other, key
information we need to solve a problem, to make a diagnosis, or to crack a case.
On October 30, 2007, Linda Stein, a famous rock music manager and a real
estate broker to the stars who counted Sting, Billy Joel, and Andy Warhol as
longtime clients and friends, was found dead inside her Manhattan penthouse.
The discovery rocked New York City not just because Stein’s death was ruled a
homicide but because she lived in one of the city’s most secure buildings.
Stein’s eighteenth-floor apartment was accessible only by a private elevator
hand-operated by an attendant, and every visitor had to be checked in and
announced at a front desk where surveillance cameras recorded every arrival and
departure. A stranger would not have had access to Stein in her own home.
Detectives found no sign of a breakin, and other than the pool of blood in
which her body lay facedown, Stein’s apartment was clean. An autopsy
determined that she had been bludgeoned between twenty-four and eighty times
with a heavy stick, but no weapon was found at the scene. Stein hadn’t been
molested, no significant property had been stolen, and she hadn’t sustained
injuries consistent with a struggle. It appeared that Stein was killed by someone
she knew, but who?
Records revealed that Stein had never left her building on the day she was
murdered and had had just one visitor before her daughter discovered her body
late that evening: her personal assistant, Natavia Lowery. Lowery had entered
the building at 11:56 a.m. with only an envelope in her left hand, and had exited
at 1:19 p.m. with a large red shopping bag hooked over her left elbow and an
oversize green purse—Stein’s—slung over her left shoulder. Lowery admitted
h
h l f
i h S i ’
ll
d
ll h
d f
l
i
h b ildi

that she left with Stein’s wallet and cell phone, and after leaving the building
alone, she answered Stein’s phone and told Stein’s ex-husband that her boss was
“out running” in Central Park—odd, since Stein was suffering from breast
cancer and a brain tumor that left her so weak she couldn’t lift her hair dryer on
her own. Detectives discovered that Lowery had been stealing from her
employer and had a criminal past. But stealing and lying don’t automatically
make someone a murderer. Law enforcement needed something to confirm their
suspicions, a fact that would prove Lowery’s guilt beyond any doubt.
Investigators thought the answer could be found in the raw surveillance
footage of Lowery arriving at and leaving Stein’s building, but after hours of
studying it frame by frame, they found nothing out of the ordinary. Yes, Lowery
left with a bag and Stein’s personal effects, but personal assistants often do in
the course of running errands and caring for their employer’s needs. What was
inside the bags: dirty laundry or a bloody weapon? No one could see. Lowery’s
exit was quick but unremarkable.
Late in the investigation, after the videotape had been seen countless times by
those involved in the case, someone made the connection that Lowery’s pants
had been turned inside out, thus no blood was evident when she exited the
building. It seemed impossible, since so many people had examined the tape
thoroughly, that they could have all missed such a crucial detail. Yet there it
was: Lowery’s pants were totally different when she walked into the building
than when she walked out. And the change wasn’t so subtle: Lowery was
wearing cargo pants. The baggy pocket on her left thigh, visible when the pants
were worn correctly, was missing on her exit. In its place darkly stitched seams
stretched vertically along both legs.
It was possibly the break they’d been looking for. Lowery could lie about the
contents of the bags she was carrying that were never recovered, but the fact
remained: she had consciously turned her pants inside out when she left Linda
Stein. There was no common or casual reason for it. Detectives surmised that
Lowery had done it to hide bloodstains.
Stills from the video camera proving Lowery had turned her pants inside out
were submitted during the trial as crucial evidence. The jury was convinced.
Juror Kelly Newton said, “The pants were huge. It solidified the arguments.”
Lowery was convicted and sentenced to twenty-seven years to life in prison.
How could investigators initially miss this essential detail? The same way we
miss the mahogany table and the mayonnaise: because we’re wired to.
BIOLOGICALLY “BLIND”
Whil th
h l gi t h
f
bilit t
t
thi g

While the names psychologists have for our ability to not see something we are
looking at are many—inattentional blindness, attentional blindness, perceptual
blindness, familiarity blindness, change blindness, et cetera—they share a
commonality: blindness. For no physiological reason, sometimes we fail to see
something that’s in our direct line of sight. We overlook things when they are
unexpected or too familiar, when they blend in, and when they are too aberrant
or abhorrent to imagine. However, our cognitive blind spots are not breakdowns
in our visual processing system but rather a critical adaptive skill and a testament
to our brain’s remarkable efficiency.
While the world is filled with limitless information and stimulation, our brain
cannot, and should not, process everything we see. If it did, we would be
overwhelmed with data. Imagine standing in Times Square. If our eyes are wide
open, they are encountering thousands of physical things all at once—dozens of
flashing billboards, garishly lit buildings, flagpoles, taxis, shops, street
performers, and some of the 330,000 people who pass through the same spot
daily—but we do not “see” it all. Our brain automatically filters our
surroundings and allows only a small percentage of information to pass through
to protect us from an information overload that might otherwise paralyze us.
Consider what the modern brain manages as we walk down a street talking on
the phone. Our body is navigating the pavement and potential obstacles; we are
headed in a certain direction; we are noticing people and landmarks as we pass
them, possibly interacting with them or making a mental note of something; we
are carrying on a conversation with the person on the other end of the phone,
talking, listening, responding; and we do it all effortlessly. We are only able
because our brain has filtered out the unnecessary: the ants on the sidewalk, the
breeze in the branches, the crumbs on the mustache of the man who just passed
us. If we paid attention to every piece of information in our path, we wouldn’t
get far past our front door.
Dr. Barbara Tversky, professor of psychology and education at Columbia
University and professor emerita at Stanford University, explains, “The world is
terribly confusing; there’s too much happening at the same time—visually,
auditorily, everything—and the way we cope is by categorizing. We process the
minimum we need in order to behave properly.”
The process of sorting out the pertinent or important from the inordinate
amount of information received by our senses is quick, involuntary, and,
scientists believe, somewhat unconscious. The brain scans information received
from our environment until something captures its attention; only then is it
uploaded into our consciousness. Since our capacity for attention is finite, only a
relatively small amount of input is “realized.” Information that is not categorized

passes through the brain unassimilated; it exists, but we don’t perceive it. Of
course our failure to register something doesn’t mean it doesn’t exist. The
cowboy playing a guitar in his underwear in Times Square is there whether we
“saw” him or not, just as the elderly patient’s wife was in the room and Natavia
Lowery’s pants were inside out whether anyone saw them or not.
FILLING IN THE _______
This innate ability to filter also allows us to focus on the finite in the midst of
multiple sensory inputs. Without it, we might not have thrived as a species. If a
prehistoric hunter had to hide in tall grass waiting for a gazelle to wander by and
he was fixated on every swaying blade in direct view, dinner might never be
served. Being able to hone in on just a select amount of information in our
chaotic world is why we can carry on a conversation in a crowded restaurant,
drive a car while helping our children recite their multiplication facts, or play a
sport in front of a screaming crowd. In the course of our daily lives we routinely
perceive only what’s critical to our current situation, and we do it so
expeditiously that we hardly notice the process.
“We need to quickly get to abstractions,” Tversky says, “to know what’s
happening, to recognize the setting, major objects, actions, and activities of what
we are seeing in order to act ourselves.” To do that, our brains “form fast,
general categorizations of our surroundings.”
This instant organization of data, even with what we now know is incomplete
information, is only possible because our brains are built to automatically fill in
gaps for us. That we cna stlil reda wrods wtih jumbeld lettres and whn vwls r
mssng without missing a beat proves this. This skill accounts for more than just
why texting has replaced talking as the most common form of daily
communication, though; historically, it has contributed to our survival.
Our friend the hunter might be ignoring the grass and focusing on a small
gazelle that just wandered into his line of sight, but that doesn’t mean his brain
wouldn’t receive and perceive a heavy rustling sound nearby. The sound alone
could cause him to run without thinking, without confirming the presence of a
predator, and save his life. The knowledge that rustling might mean a lion is
filled in automatically by the brain, which doesn’t wait for permission before
sending flight instructions.
In terms of self-preservation, our brain’s ability to bridge the gaps is quite
useful, but in the modern world it can be a detriment when we’re not facing a
life-or-death decision but just trying to employ first-class observation and

communication skills. For instance, read the following sentence just once,
counting all of the Fs as you go:
ARTIST FABIO FABBI PAINTED DO-
ZENS OF DEPICTIONS OF ORIENTAL
LIFE ALTHOUGH HE WAS OF ITA-
LIAN HERITAGE HIMSELF.
How many did you get? Four? Six? There are seven Fs in the sentence.
While some of us might have gotten it correct, the majority of us would not,
since our quick-thinking brains filled in a V for the F in words like of, because
that’s the sound the letter is making.
A similar version of this exercise (in which I’ll admit I initially saw two fewer
letters than were there) made the rounds online several years ago labeled as
either a “genius test” or an early Alzheimer’s indicator. It’s a far cry from either,
but it is a good example of how our brains can trip us up even when we know
what we’re looking for and we’re not hampered by any distractions. No matter
how good we think our observation and perception skills are, the reality is that
because of how we’ve evolved to cope in a complex world, we don’t see
everything and we don’t perceive everything. While missing the Fs in a sentence
might not seem like a crucial problem, in many cases what we fail to see is.
THE IMPORTANCE OF (NOT MISSING) DETAILS
Small details make a big difference. There is a huge difference between EST and
PST when scheduling an important conference call, between picking up a child
after soccer practice at 6:30 p.m. instead of 5:30, between 1 teaspoon of salt and
1 tablespoon. Missing the important details in business can erode trust. Missing
the important details in life can cause catastrophe.
The opposite is also true, however: finding and focusing on the details doesn’t
just help avoid disaster, it can lead to success or the solution. Think of the
billion-dollar companies built on their attention to detail. Apple didn’t come by
its reputation for aesthetic perfection by accident. The company consciously
sweats every detail from examining each pixel on a screen with a photographer’s
loupe to employing a team of packaging designers who spend months perfecting
the box-opening experience. Pioneering a new form of robotic animation, the
trademarked Audio-Animatronics, wasn’t enough for Walt Disney. Even though
his engineers told him it would be extremely difficult, he insisted that the
tropical birds in the Enchanted Tiki Room and the presidents in the Hall of
Presidents breathe and fidget and shuffle realistically even when not in the

g
y
spotlight. “People can feel perfection,” Disney reasoned. It’s not a coincidence
that the same airline ranked number one in customer satisfaction by the Institute
of Customer Service, Virgin Atlantic, prides itself on small touches:
complimentary amenity kits, kids’ entertainment backpacks, and even in-flight
massages. The company even advertises its focus on its website: “We get all the
details just right.”
Mastering the details will give you a competitive edge. Thoroughness and
thoughtfulness are not core values for everyone, and if you make them a priority,
they can help you stand out from the crowd of people who just don’t bother.
Once you hone your ability to tune in to telling details, you’ll also find that
they are critical for good problem solving—whether you’re diagnosing a faulty
catalytic converter on a car or trying to determine the correct answers on the
SAT. The solution is often in the details we are programmed to overlook.
Zeroing in on the things that others don’t see can be the difference between
success and failure in all fields.
Marcus Sloan wasn’t as worried about the SAT as most high school math
teachers might be. It was the New York State Regents Exam that had him up at
night. Passing the mathematics portion is one of the requirements for a high
school diploma, and the small, inner-city public school where he worked had a
heartbreaking drop in its graduation rate in just one year, from 76 percent to 53.6
percent. He knew that if his students were going to break the cycle of poverty—
the school classified 99 percent of its students as “economically
disadvantaged”—they needed to graduate.
Walking through the Bronx school’s metal detectors every morning, Sloan
knew he had his work cut out for him. An external audit found that students were
disengaged and disrespectful—when they showed up. The school suffered from
chronic absenteeism; average attendance was just 72 percent, compared with
90.5 percent for the city’s other similarly sized schools. Even worse: their scores
on the Regents exam. While 77 percent of all the students in the state met the
passing requirements for the mathematics portion of the exam, in Sloan’s school
only 39 percent did.
The students in Sloan’s own classroom reflected this. “They had limited
attention spans and trouble catching on to new concepts,” he recalls. But after
completing his first year, Sloan concluded that the students’ poor grades weren’t
due to their lack of intelligence. Instead he realized their problem-solving
deficiencies came from their difficulty focusing on an extended task and
attending to details, both necessities when solving multiple-step mathematical
problems.
He explains, “On standardized tests, after eliminating one or two choices,

these students would have difficulty identifying the necessary information
provided in the question, or necessary inferences from that information, in order
to select the correct answer. They would overlook the key pieces of information
in the problem statements or try to use all of the information in the problem
rather than selecting only the relevant details needed.”
He cites an example from the New York State Regents Exam administered on
June 15, 2006. “One of the questions stated the angle of depression as measured
from the top of a wall to a point on the ground at a given distance from the base
of the wall. When I was grading their tests, I saw that many of my students had
mistakenly used the angle of elevation instead of the given angle of depression,”
he says. His classes had been practicing problems from previous Regents exams,
many of them involving solving for angles of elevation. Missing the single word
change from elevation to depression in their live exam resulted in an incorrect
answer, regardless of the amount of work they showed or their mathematical
ability to solve for either angle.
Sloan realized this simple but critical mistake—missing key details—was
jeopardizing his students’ futures, and he was determined to fix it. He knew he’d
need something out of the ordinary to reach his disenchanted charges.
“I wanted a creative means of engaging them in the kind of thinking that
would enable them to succeed in mathematical learning,” he says.
He’d heard about my training for medical students at The Frick Collection in
Manhattan and wanted to know if Vermeer might be able to help his struggling
students.
“I thought if it could improve medical students’ diagnostic abilities, it might
work for my high school students as well,” he recalls. “A keen sense of attention
to detail is important to medicine, but it’s just as important in many other fields,
including math.”
I wholeheartedly agreed, and visited Sloan’s school to introduce his students
to the concepts of objective observation and searching for pertinent details with a
slide show of selected pieces of art. A week later Sloan brought a group of his
ninth-and tenth-graders to the Frick for a walk-through of the galleries. The
students discussed the observational process and completed written exercises
about the artworks they’d seen. We split the students into groups to study the art,
then asked them to present their subgroup observations to the entire group to
practice articulating their global and detailed observations.
The results were remarkable. They listened attentively, participated
enthusiastically, and provided thoughtful responses to questions. Sloan marveled
at the difference.
“I barely recognized some of them: they were alert, eager, even energetic,” he
ll
“I
i i
d
h
ll
l d
i h
d f

recalls. “It was exciting to see students who usually struggled with and often
obstructed their own learning really get into the experience.”
Back in the classroom, Sloan noted that the students who took part in the
museum training could more easily see connections in math problems than the
students who had not.
We continued the program with two groups of math students from the high
school, each visiting the museum on two different occasions. In written surveys
following the course, the overwhelming majority of the students indicated that
they had enjoyed closely observing the artwork and asked for more opportunities
to do so. Almost two-thirds of the students taking the surveys wrote about the
importance of looking for and focusing on details: exactly what Sloan wanted to
instill in them. Even better: the percentage of students who met the mathematics
standard on the Regents exam that year increased to 44 percent and climbed to
59 percent the following year.
Sloan had set out to solve a big problem: how to raise underperforming
students’ scores on standardized tests. Every other teacher had tried the same
approach—making students take practice tests—and it hadn’t worked. Those
educators had missed the key detail that was hiding in plain sight: their students’
faces, unfocused and uninterested. Sloan saw this and knew that before he could
throw more problem sets at them, he first needed to address their poor attitude
and chronic inability to focus. The solution to the problem wasn’t in
mathematics; it was in their mind-sets. Once they were engaged by the novel
activity of looking at art, their eyes were opened to more of the details they were
missing in their everyday lives.
DETAIL-ORIENTED
Knowing what we now know about how the brain processes and filters and
misses and forgets and transforms, how can we become more detail-oriented?
The first step is the easiest because we’ve already accomplished it: recognition.
We can’t fix something if we don’t know it’s broken. Dr. Marc Green, a
psychologist and professor of ophthalmology at West Virginia Medical School,
asserts, “Most people falsely believe that they seldom experience inattentional
blindness because they are unaware of being unaware.” Now that we’re aware of
our inbred blindness, we can work on consciously overcoming it.
Every automobile has a blind spot, the space we cannot see when we’re sitting
behind the steering wheel. To make the seemingly invisible visible, we must first
be aware of the issue, and then physically do a shoulder turn or mirror
adjustment to compensate for it. The State Farm insurance company counsels
d i
th t th
l
t t
l
d
t
d
d th
l
h
t d i

new drivers that the only way to truly understand and then learn how to drive
safely with blind spots is to spend time behind the wheel. The same concept
applies to our other visual blind spots.
Perception requires attention, so we need to actively seek out the details. The
more we observe art specifically for the details, the more we will see them. To
help us learn to see the mahogany table hiding in plain sight, let’s go back and
look at it. Turn to page 83 and study the mahogany table at which Mrs. Winthrop
is sitting. What details on and around it can you find that you might not have
noticed before?
Do you see the highlight along the beveled edge at the bottom left corner of
the table? The wood grain running diagonally from northwest to southeast?
What about the reflection of Mrs. Winthrop? We see the blue of her dress and
the white of her lace sleeve, but we can also see the scalloped flounce of the
shaped edge of the lace. The stem of the nectarine branch she holds is reflected
on the tabletop; in fact it appears that she is holding it just millimeters above.
Her arm is visible in the reflection, as are just her eight fingers. We cannot see
her thumbs.
Look closely at Mrs. Winthrop’s hands. She was married to a prominent
Harvard professor and one of America’s first notable astronomers. We can see
her garnet and diamond wedding ring on her left ring finger; however, close
examination of that hand in the mahogany table shows that the ring is missing.
If we had missed the mahogany table the first time around, we would have
missed the vanishing wedding ring as well. And it’s a telling detail not to be
missed, since the artist Copley, so diligent in his re-creation of the reflection in
the mahogany table, would likely not leave out such an item accidentally. There
are no records of why Copley omitted the ring in the table’s reflection. It could
be a comment on the state of Mrs. Winthrop’s marriage, or it could simply be the
artist playing a visual game with the viewer. We don’t need to know the
significance of the missing ring to catalog its absence, but we must acknowledge
it. If we don’t, we could be omitting crucial information we’ll need later. You
never know when that one small detail will crack the case or provide the elusive
answer.
Missing key details means missing the other important details they might lead
to. When we see the mahogany table, we can then see the missing ring. When we
see the patient’s wife at the end of his bed, we can then see a more thorough case
history. When we see the inside-out pants, we can then see a conscious cover-up.
The more we see, the better the odds that we, or someone else working with us,
will uncover the solution previously eluding all of us.

DETAILS IN NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
Another place important information often hides in plain sight is in the physical
cues that other people give us: body language. Nonverbal communication is so
telling that police officers in high-crime neighborhoods are trained to not put
their hands in their pockets because it sends a signal of authority or boredom,
and officers should remain ready and alert.
Look at the way Mrs. Winthrop is holding the nectarine stem. It’s peculiarly
arranged in her fingers, almost as if it were a writing instrument. Did the artist
do this on purpose to leave us a clue about Mrs. Winthrop? If we did further
investigation in this vein, we would find that Mrs. Winthrop was a prolific and
expressive writer during the Revolutionary War; her letters, almanacs, and
journals are archived at Harvard University for their importance as first-person
sources.
When searching for details, be attuned to how someone is holding a nectarine
stem. Note facial expression, posture, tone of voice, and eye contact. The way
someone is standing, if she bites her bottom lip—these are facts that anyone can
collect. I’m not a body language expert, but I have learned—by consciously
looking for it—to have a heightened awareness of others’ nonverbal cues. I can
tell if someone doesn’t want to talk to me—there is a conspicuous lack of eye
contact, and the person might speak quickly to make his point and move on or
away. A person who doesn’t want to engage in prolonged conversation tends to
stand farther away from me. You don’t need to know the normal blink rate to
note that someone can’t hold your gaze, but you’ll never see it if you never look
a person in the eyes.
Bonnie Schultz, an insurance investigator for the State of New York, told me
that after ten years on the job she can tell if someone is lying simply by
observing body language.
“It’s the subtle things, but you can see them,” she said. “They’ll shift their
eyes or won’t make eye contact at all. They’ll turn away slightly, or their
shoulders will stiffen.”
I went to a spa recently to redeem a massage certificate I had gotten as a
birthday gift. I had just walked into the darkly lit treatment room, and before I
could say a word the therapist asked me if I was cold and whether my neck hurt.
In those first few seconds while I was surveying my unfamiliar surroundings, the
therapist had been surveying me. She had seen me glancing at the heater
standing in the corner and nervously rubbing my neck—two tiny, unconscious
actions. She delivered world-class customer service just by collecting details
from my body language.

Marcus Sloan’s students didn’t hold up flash cards saying, “We’re bored.”
And I didn’t voice my discomfort at the spa. Sloan and the massage therapist had
to read those messages in our posture and our gaze. Not everyone is comfortable
saying what they want or what they mean out loud, but if you tune in to the other
ways people express it, you will win their business, their loyalty, and their trust.
STRATEGIES FOR SEEING
Aside from being aware and attentive, we can use a few other specific strategies
to combat our unintentional visual lapses. Since some of my clients use code
names for their work, I’ve decided to do the same to help us remember the steps.
I call it COBRA, not just because it sounds cool but also because the king of
snakes has excellent eyesight. Cobras have built-in night vision, can see prey
from 330 feet away, and have a nasty habit of spitting venom exceedingly
accurately right into their opponents’ eyes.
For our purposes, COBRA—which stands for Camouflaged, One, Break,
Realign, Ask—will help us uncover hidden details by reminding us to
concentrate on the camouflaged, work on one thing at a time, take a break,
realign our expectations, and ask someone else to look with us.
Concentrate on the Camouflaged
Inconspicuous objects, such as the mahogany table, are harder for us to see
because we have a natural, survival-based instinct to look for what stands out or
is out of place. We have trouble noticing things that fade into the background or
into the crowd or are naturally camouflaged, physically small, or subtle. While
survivalists, soldiers, and criminals take advantage of this to blend in, the rest of
us must work extra hard to spot what doesn’t automatically stand out.
Investigators didn’t see Natavia Lowery’s inside-out pants because at first
glance they weren’t out of the ordinary. They expected her to be wearing pants,
and the pants appeared clean, so perhaps they didn’t feel the need to look at her
pants any longer. If Lowery had walked out of the building in just her
underwear, that would have been unusual—it would have stood out, and most
likely caused the investigators to spot it right away. If the elderly patient’s wife
had electric-purple hair, the residents might have noticed her right away because
the unusual hair would have caught their eye. Instead, the woman blended in
with all the other people in the hospital.
We are drawn instinctually to the new, the innovative, and the exciting. To see
the things that are truly hiding in plain sight because they appear ordinary, we
must consciously look for the details our eyes might have skipped over on the

first glance. To do this, we need to look again. We need to look at the entire
scene, all the way to the edges and back again. Then, if possible, we must try to
change the item or scene by repositioning it. Finally, we should reposition
ourselves. Get closer, then step back. Walk around to change our perspective. An
unusual angle can help uncover a not-so-unusual detail.
One Thing at a Time
To improve our chances of finding “hidden” details, we need to keep our focus
sharp and single-minded, paying attention solely to this task. In our multitasking
world where juggling multiple things at once is the norm, concentrating on just
one thing can seem counterintuitive, but in reality multitasking leads to less
effective and efficient work, since our brains cannot keep track of or focus on a
million things at once. How many can we manage? A new study puts the limit of
our working memory at a less-than-impressive four things.
Stanford professor Clifford Nass takes it one step further and argues that
“multitaskers are terrible at every aspect of multitasking.” After using fMRIs
(functional magnetic resonance imaging) to study the brain while it was in
juggling mode, he found that people who regularly multitasked were “terrible at
ignoring irrelevant information, terrible at keeping information in their head
nicely and neatly organized, and terrible at switching from one task to another.”
Charles Folk, PhD, director of Villanova University’s Cognitive Science
Program, explains why: “Any time you do a task—whether it’s visual, auditory
or otherwise—it draws on a specific set of cognitive operations. The more tasks
you perform, the more you draw from that limited pool of resources.”
When the brain is taxed with a heavy cognitive load, it lets more unfiltered
information slip by than normal. So if investigators were filling out reports on a
different crime and talking on the phone while looking at the surveillance
footage of Linda Stein’s building, they would have dramatically decreased their
chances of seeing the important details.
To avoid this multitasking brain drain, concentrate instead on just the task at
hand. Called “mono-tasking” or “single-tasking,” the idea is now taking off in
the business world. Set aside other distractions, close your computer, ignore your
telephone, and just observe. It can be difficult in a world that demands multiple
things from us at once—it’s been reported that average workers have thirty to
one hundred projects on their agenda, are interrupted seven times an hour and
distracted up to 2.1 hours a day—but Forbes magazine insists that “focus is a
mental muscle that you have to develop, especially if yours has been weakened
by years of multitasking.” This is one of the reasons I don’t allow phones in my
class and enjoy taking people out of their offices. Without constant distractions

hovering about, people can really focus on what they’re observing, and as a
result, they see so much more.
Take a Break
Be sure when flexing your mono-tasking muscle that you don’t overdo it. The
human brain was not designed to focus on one thing for hours at a time. To
avoid overstimulation, our brains quickly become habituated to whatever’s in
front of us. This is why we stop feeling the chair we’re sitting on or the clothes
we’re wearing. This built-in filter also helps explain why we still don’t see “the
mahogany table”—or our car keys or lost receipt or the way our budget could be
balanced—that we know is there after staring and staring.
Psychologists believe that we can keep our cognitive control system from
losing vigilance and help retain long-term focus by simply taking breaks. The
formula recommended by experts is twofold. First, take a brief mental break
every twenty minutes: just a momentary deactivation from your singular focus.
The key is to pick an activity completely different from what you were doing. If
you’ve been reading a report, don’t switch to reading emails, switch to
something that uses a different set of skills, like talking to someone face-to-face.
Second, relax for ten minutes for every ninety minutes worked. Take a walk,
outside if possible; exercise, even if that means only doing at-your-desk yoga; do
something that gives you pleasure; or take a power nap.
Excessive noise and sensory overload can also add to our brain’s stress and
make it work less effectively. If the scene is noisy or crowded, consider
returning later. Get yourself to a quiet location. (I highly recommend any nearby
museum!)
Many famous people have found their famous solutions while taking a break.
Sir Isaac Newton solved his obsession with gravity while watching an apple fall
at his family’s home, where he retreated when the University of Cambridge shut
down during an outbreak of the plague. In 1901, after weeks of struggling in
vain, French mathematician Henri Poincaré found success for his mathematical
proofs only after he left his worktable for a geological field trip and a day at the
seashore. Analyzing his own success, he wrote, “Often when one works at a hard
question, nothing good is accomplished at the first attack. Then one takes a rest,
longer or shorter, and sits down anew to the work . . . It might be said that the
conscious work has been more fruitful because it has been interrupted and the
rest has given back to the mind its force and freshness.”
When I take homicide detectives into museums, they are forced to step away
from the challenges they face to gather sufficient evidence against suspects, to
focus on something entirely outside the world of law enforcement, and

ultimately, to think differently about what they do. Seeing things anew refreshes
their perspective and often leads to the break that had previously eluded them.
The same is true for anyone for whom studying art is a new and unusual activity.
Unless your job is to stare at the exact paintings in this book all day every day,
analyzing the art presented here will help “recharge” your brain as well.
Realign Your Expectations
We often miss the unexpected because we’re too focused on what we think
should be there. Investigators were convinced that when Natavia Lowery left
Linda Stein’s building carrying a large bag it contained the murder weapon.
They studied the shape of it, the way it bulged at the bottom, how heavy it
looked. During the trial, the lead prosecutor spoke of the footage showing
Lowery leaving carrying a bag “heavily laden with something in it.” So much of
the attention was on the bag, but it was the pants, in plain view, that appeared to
convince the jury unequivocally of the suspect’s guilt. They were looking for a
smoking gun (well, literally a bludgeoning instrument) instead of just looking.
This inherent expectation adds extra filters to our cognitive processing and
can make us miss information our brains perceive to be irrelevant. Since we
don’t “know” what our brain is filtering, we need to remind ourselves to let go of
our preconceived notions and just look. And in some cases, we just might need
to let someone else look.
Ask Someone Else to Look with You
Finally, since every person perceives the world differently, you might want to
enlist help in your search. Bring someone in to look with fresh eyes, preferably
someone with a different perspective, background, and opinions from yours.
I’ve found that people who don’t ask for assistance are often afraid doing so
will make them seem incompetent, but I think the opposite is true. Someone else
might see the answer to the problem that we articulated, and by seeking another
set of eyes, we are proving that we are dedicated to the pursuit of a solution.
  *
Dave Bliss knew the answer was in front of him, he just couldn’t see it. A sales
manager for a commercial cleaning company, he had a huge new client on the
hook, but one thing was standing in his way: the client’s current contract with a
competitor.
The potential client was a medical services facility with forty buildings, a
monster deal for Bliss’s company, and he was determined to close the deal.

When Bliss had shown how switching to his company’s service would save
$137,000 a year, the client was willing to sign up immediately. There was just
one catch: the client was locked in a five-year agreement with another company
and still had three years left.
“If you can find a way to get us out of this, I’ll sign,” the facilities manager
told Bliss.
Bliss knew there had to be a loophole in the contract, but after staring at the
tiny legal print for hours, he still hadn’t found it. The terms were pretty cut-and-
dried; in fact, he’d highlighted the dates: “This agreement is effective as of the
date of execution for a term of 60 months from date of installation.” The contract
was signed on April 4, 2013, the services had begun a week later, and by all
accounts they were acceptable.
Having recently taken my class, Bliss decided to try COBRA. He remembered
the first step: camouflage. The answer could be right in front of him but hidden.
He had spent the majority of his time trying to work out the dates and find a way
out of the contract, but maybe that wasn’t the answer. Maybe he should
concentrate on a different part of the document.
One thing at a time. Bliss turned his phone to voicemail so he wouldn’t be
distracted, closed his laptop, and just looked.
Break. After twenty minutes, Bliss still hadn’t found anything, and the words
were starting to swim on the page. He decided to get up and take a walk to the
break room. He felt better when he returned to his office, buoyed by the change
of scenery and leftover birthday cake he’d discovered.
Realign your expectations. What am I expecting to find? Bliss asked himself.
A way out of the contract. Perhaps that’s the wrong expectation. Should I look
for the opposite? he wondered. A way for the client to stay in the contract?
Could the client somehow hire his company and still honor his current contract
with the other?
Ask someone else to look with you. He called a friend who was an attorney.
“Is there any way for a company to honor their old contract and still use our
services as well?” he asked.
“Sure,” the attorney replied. “Just figure out what the minimum requirements
on the other contract are.”
Minimum requirements? Bliss’s company didn’t have minimum order
requirements, he thought, but perhaps it should. A quick scan revealed the
following under Article 12: “Minimum charge: $50 per service.”
There it was. The phrase that would win Bliss an $832,000 annual contract.
To honor its commitment, the medical facility only had to use its current
cleaning company for a minimum charge of $50 per service. Scaling its service
b
k
l
i
b ildi
d
k
ld
h
j

back to cleaning one building one day a week would cost the company just
$2,600 for the year and allow it to sign with Bliss for an annual savings of over
$134,000. Bliss got the deal.
While it’s in our biology to miss things, we can use our cognitive powers to
make sure the important details aren’t slipping through our filters unnoticed.
Training our brains to be more effective at objective observation and perception
will help us not only to see more but also to miss less.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE BIG PICTURE
As you master your ability to capture key details, be careful not to let the hunt
for meaningful minutiae override other important information.
At 11:32 P.M. on a clear December night in 1972, as the pilots of Eastern Air
Lines flight 401 were preparing to land the Lockheed Tristar jet at their home
airport of Miami International after a smooth ride from JFK, the first officer
noticed the landing-gear indicator light in the cockpit was dark. The captain, a
thirty-two-year veteran who had logged more than 29,000 flight hours, radioed
the control tower: “It looks like we’re gonna have to circle; we don’t have a light
on yet.”
At a safe cruising altitude of 2,000 feet, the captain engaged the plane’s
autopilot and set about determining why the square-shaped “down and locked”
button beneath the gear handle wasn’t glowing green. Had it burned out, or was
the landing gear really not locked into place? For the next seven minutes the
cabin crew obsessed over the little light. They wiggled it, tried to remove it,
cursed at it, worried about breaking it even more with a pair of pliers, cushioned
it with a handkerchief, wondered if the button had worked during a previous test,
twisted it, pushed on it, discussed how the light lens might have been assembled
incorrectly, and tried everything they could to get it to light. And in the
meantime, according to cockpit voice-recorder transcripts, they missed
everything else.
At some point the captain leaned against the control column, the W-shaped
“steering wheel” of the plane, possibly while turning to talk to someone behind
him, switching the autopilot into hold-the-last-position mode. He didn’t notice
that leaning against the yoke was sending the plane down. The jet went into a
gentle descent over the Everglades. No one in the cockpit noticed. After the
plane had lost 250 feet, an altitude warning sounded in the cockpit and also went
unnoticed. The men were so engrossed with a $12 light bulb that they failed to
notice until ten seconds before impact that they had steered the aircraft right into
the ground.
Aft
i i g th
k g
th N ti
l T
t ti
S f t B
d

After examining the wreckage, the National Transportation Safety Board
determined that the landing gear had been down and locked into place, and that
the bulb in the landing-gear indicator button had indeed burned out. The pilots
could have known this if they had correctly accessed the small viewing window
under the flight deck that provides visual confirmation of the landing gear’s
status; and even if the wheels were up, they could have been manually lowered.
The flight could have landed safely if the pilots hadn’t been distracted by a
button. Instead, 101 of the 176 passengers, including everyone in the cockpit,
lost their lives in the crash.
We may be tempted to judge the pilots, but inattentional blindness happens to
all of us. The cure for tunnel vision is the same as the strategies we should
employ to combat our other unintentional visual lapses: Look in a different
direction, look to the edges, take a break from your current activity, and step
back to make sure you’re seeing the whole picture.
Educators believe that the students who best see the big picture—in both
simple and complex systems—are visual learners. Likewise, studying art, a
visual medium, forces us to use and sharpen our visual-spatial intelligence
capabilities and ultimately can help us, too, to see the big picture more clearly.
PAINTING A PICTURE
Most of our communication about an event or incident takes place after it has
occurred; we tell, text, email, and write what we have seen. In doing so, if we
inadvertently omit a critical element, the recipient of our communication who
was not present firsthand will never know the information was missing. As the
primary source, we have a duty to include all of the important details while still
capturing the big picture.
When I was a practicing attorney, to encourage us to relate a complete, detail-
filled description that also incorporated the entire event—for judge and jury,
who were not present—judges often asked us to think of information transfer as
“painting a picture.” The same terminology is used to get stories out of
witnesses, when child welfare workers must fill out a home-visit report, or when
an insurance adjuster investigates a claim.
To “paint a picture” of what we see, we must first realize that we are starting
with a blank canvas. Only what we purposefully put on it will be “seen” by
others. We must not leave it empty or incomplete; rather we must fill it with
accurate, objective, descriptive facts using both broad strokes and fine details to
record our observations.
For instance, I work with family protective services investigators to help them
describe the residence they’re visiting from the moment they pull up outside not

describe the residence they re visiting from the moment they pull up outside, not
just from the front foyer. Is the grass overgrown? Is it near a busy or dangerous
street? Is there trash piling up? Once inside, they should scan the entire
environment. Is the floor clean? Are there animals about, and if so, do they look
healthy and well cared for? What does the home smell like? Do the windows
have curtains?
Then zero in on the details. What’s on the coffee table? A cup? A bent spoon?
A cigarette lighter? A Bible? Paper and crayons? A porn magazine? This is not
making judgments; it’s collecting facts.
When meeting children, look at their teeth. Are they clean or so decayed that
it is evident the child has never been to a dentist? This small detail can tell a lot
about the big picture of how well they are cared for.
I teach investigators to consider the reason they were called to visit someone
—and then to look beyond. Focusing only on the reported incident could cause
them to miss bigger warning signs in the home that could ultimately put a child
at greater risk. The investigators need to diligently catalog the specifics but also
have an appreciation for the rest of the family dynamics. In some cases, this
practice leads to reward.
When caseworker Joanna Longley first visited a home in rural Pennsylvania
to investigate a charge of possible child neglect, she noted all of the pertinent
details of her visit in a report that painted a picture any other colleague could
pick up and follow. The house had boards over a broken front window; the
mailbox slot had duct tape covering it; and the woman who answered the front
door and identified herself as the mother of the house refused to let Longley in.
The mother displayed defensive body language as she wedged herself in the
door’s small opening, she smelled of cigarette smoke, and she ignored Longley’s
request for shelter from the snow that fell heavily overhead.
Although the mother was less than accommodating and Longley herself was
far from comfortable, she stayed focused on the facts of the situation, not the
subjective emotion behind the exchange. She also kept the bigger picture in
mind, knowing that if she simply turned and left, the chance of a professional
evaluation for the children left with her.
Instead of getting sidetracked by insult or injury, by cold toes or a client’s
lousy attitude, Longley remained observant and objective. Her goal was to see
the woman’s children in person, to note the details of their health, development,
and appearance. While not ideal, this could be accomplished on the front porch.
She briefly interviewed each child at the door and determined that they were not
in immediate danger. Longley also looked hard at the facts to sort out her
subjective observations. While the mother’s demeanor wasn’t polite, it wasn’t
abusive either Could her standoffishness stem from defensiveness? Perhaps

abusive either. Could her standoffishness stem from defensiveness? Perhaps
she’d had a bad experience with authorities in the past. The mother was the adult
of the house, it was her house, and she had a right to decide who could come
inside.
Longley’s conscious decision to seek out the important details of the
children’s safety while deferring to their mother’s wishes to do so outside paid
off. By acknowledging the mother’s authority, Longley earned her trust and was
welcomed inside on future visits. The mother even opened up and began to work
with Longley to improve her children’s lives.
Let’s practice “painting a picture” with an actual painting, seeking out details
big and small.
Look at the two side-by-side images below. For the sake of our blank canvas,
let’s pretend we don’t recognize these gentlemen. We’ll call them #1 and #16.
Using the investigative model we learned in the last chapter and a modern
recording system of some kind to stay organized—pen and paper, smartphone,
or Post-it note—complete an objective surveillance of the two scenes. Write
down as many factual details as you can muster: the who, what, when, and
where. Compare and contrast the two; for instance, #1 is standing while #16 is
sitting, and both are presenting three-quarter profiles facing left. Ideally, you
should spend two to five minutes on this exercise. Go.

#1. Gilbert Stuart, George Washington (Lansdowne Portrait), 1796. #16. Alexander Gardner,
Abraham Lincoln, 1865.

What did you find? Did you note the differences in dress? In background? In
hair ownership? How about the similarity of their skin color or that they are both
next to a table? Did you then include the differences in those tables, including
height, location, and appearance?
What about body language? How would you describe their posture? In a class
of intelligence analysts, I had one tell me that “number sixteen is passive, while
number one is more open.” The word passive is subjective, open to
interpretation. I pointed out that his colleague at the back of the room, an
outgoing, animated guy, was sitting with arms held in the same way and yet we
would never call him “passive.” Instead, try to be more objective and more
specific: #1’s right hand is held out, palm up, while #16’s arms are in front of
him, fingertips touching.
Did you list that #1 holds a sword in his left hand while #16 holds spectacles
in his right?
Is there a line-of-sight difference? Where is each man looking?
How do their expressions vary? While I’m tempted to say that #16 is wearing
a smirk, that’s another subjective inference. More specific would be: the corners
of #16’s mouth are raised slightly. Other objective details could include that #16
has disheveled hair and bags under his eyes, his tie is crooked, and his suit is
wrinkled. Just because he was a president of the United States doesn’t mean he
isn’t a mess in this image. Acknowledge and make use of the human condition
as you observe it. It’s valuable information that can contribute tremendously to
the viewer’s overall impression of the portrait.
Now go back and search the two pictures specifically for details. List as many
as you can find.
In recording the details, did you note the buckles on #1’s shoes or the watch
chain hanging from #16’s vest? That the sword in #1’s hand is sheathed and the
spectacles in #16’s hand are folded? Did you list the dust and scratches on the
image on the right? The books stacked under the table in the image on the left—
two large ones, almost the height of the subject’s knee, leaning against the gold
table leg?
Did you see the rainbow in the upper right corner of #1’s portrait? If not, as
with Renshaw’s Cow, I bet you can’t stop seeing it now. In many ways it’s the

“mahogany table” of this picture: it’s hanging out in the background, doesn’t
seem very significant, but it exists, so it is worth noting. In this case, it’s a telling
detail: there are at least 25,000 paintings of George Washington in the history of
American art, but only three have rainbows in them. Discovering it would help
you place the time period of this work. It was painted in 1796, the last full year
of Washington’s presidency. The rainbow was added to symbolize that
America’s first president had brought the young country through the storms of
the previous decades and that prosperous days were ahead.
If you missed the rainbow or the spectacles, the sheath or the oversize books,
remember to engage COBRA when searching for details. Look specifically for
things that might be camouflaged, concentrate on just the one task of looking,
take a break and come back to the search, realign your expectations of what you
thought you might see, and ask someone else to take a look with you.
Finally, what are the big-picture observations we shouldn’t miss in these two
images? The things so “obvious” most people assume they don’t need to be
noted? Step back and consider the facts that aren’t so small. One image is black-
and-white, while one is color. Another big-picture fact that many people miss:
one is a painting and one is a photograph. Everything must be noticed—just like
Mrs. Winthrop’s mahogany table.
WHAT’S YOUR MAHOGANY TABLE?
The takeaway here isn’t that people miss shiny furniture, the patient’s wife at the
end of the bed, the correct angle of elevation on a math test, or inside-out pants.
It’s that those invisible-yet-visible things were, as they often are, the linchpins to
success. Sometimes we’re so busy looking for the answer that we miss the
information that can get us there.
To remind themselves not to miss what’s right in front of them, one group of
executives I taught adopted the phrase “What’s your mahogany table?” There is
a mahogany table (or more likely more than one) in all of our lives—something
that could be instrumental to our work and we just don’t see it.
Look around you, your home, and your workplace, and ask yourself the same
question. What’s your mahogany table; what can you find hiding in plain sight?
  *
We’ve learned how to master the fine art of observation: to gather only facts, to
sort the objective from the subjective, and to keep an eye out for both the small
details and bigger, but sometimes hidden, information. Now we’re going to

unleash our inner intelligence analyst and figure out how to make sense of what
we’ve found.

PART II
Analyze
Discovery consists of seeing what everybody has seen and
thinking what nobody has thought.
—ALBERT SZENT-GYÖRGYI

6
Keep Your Head on a Swivel
Analyzing from Every Angle
ALTHOUGH IT SITS on a hill overlooking the city, Rio de Janeiro’s oldest favela,
Morro da Providência, a massive slum of shanty houses, is largely invisible to its
cosmopolitan neighbors. Awash in extreme poverty and violent crime, its
residents are isolated in every possible way: economically, geographically, and
socially. Neither taxis nor ambulances will go there. If you need to get up or
down, there are 365 steps to climb. Fearing for their personal safety, even news
crews won’t ascend the hill; instead, when necessary, they send helicopters to
report from afar. Special paramilitary troops do patrol the area, but residents
view them with as much suspicion and distrust as they do the local drug lords—
for good reason, since the two have been known to work together.
In June 2008, eleven soldiers tried to detain five young men from Providência.
Two ran away. The remaining three, ages seventeen, nineteen, and twenty-three,
were charged with disrespecting authority, led away to an army barracks, and
then reportedly sold to a gang in a neighboring favela. Their bodies were
discovered mutilated in a trash dump.
Although the victims—two students and one young father—were mourned by
grieving friends and relatives, the rest of Rio hardly took notice. The favela
residents demanded justice and started a small riot to grab the city’s attention. It
didn’t work. The world continued to look the other way.
Until the day the huge eyes appeared.
One morning the citizens of Rio woke up to something new: the ramshackle
houses on the hill of Providência had been papered overnight with oversize
black-and-white enlargements of extreme close-up photographs of human eyes.

JR, Women Are Heroes, Brazil, Action in the slums Morro da
Providência, tree, moon, horizontal, Rio de Janeiro, 2008.
They looked out from the sides of buildings, unmoving, unblinking, wide
open, waiting. The favela that no one wanted to look at was suddenly staring at
them.
What did the eyes mean? Whose were they? How did they get there?
Reporters, still afraid to go and see for themselves, took pictures of the pictures
and beseeched the public for answers.
The eyes were the brainchild of a self-titled photograffeur (graffeur in French
means “graffiti artist”) from France who goes only by the initials JR. A tall, thin
man who is never seen in public without a hat and sunglasses to hide his identity,
JR learned about the young men’s murders and flew to Brazil to see if he could
help. He walked up into the favela and introduced himself to the first person he
saw. He stayed for a month, meeting as many people as he could—community
leaders, drug dealers, teachers, teenagers, and local artists—winning their trust
and enlisting their help.
“The favela is in the center of town, but when you look at a map it is like it is
not there,” JR explains. “The people were saying, ‘Hey, we are there, we are
right there in front of you, and you pretend that we don’t exist.’”
To give them a voice, he photographed women from the favela up close and
unflinching. To JR, eyes are everything. He notes how often we avoid looking
people in the eyes, something he hopes his in-your-face art can remedy. He had
the pictures printed on waterproof vinyl and showed the residents how to hang
the colossal portraits. Then he disappeared, so the now curious international

the colossal portraits. Then he disappeared, so the now curious international
media would have to actually interview the subjects, including family members
of the young victims.
“I left Brazil right after we were done with the pasting,” he says. “Down the
favela, all the TV stations were there, waiting for an explanation as they’d seen
those portraits appear, and wondering why or who had done it. It was the women
who talked to the media about the project—their project—and I was very moved
to see how each one translated it into her own words.”
JR’s plan to make people see the humanity behind the headlines worked. “For
once, the media didn’t cover the violence, the trafficking in the favela, but
listened to the voices of the people,” he recalls.
With his project, named “Women Are Heroes,” JR was able to help change
the way the rest of Rio de Janeiro, and the rest of the world, viewed the blight in
their backyard by changing their perspective. Crumbling concrete houses are
harder to write off as an inevitable side effect of civilization and corruption
when they are shellacked with larger-than-life images of the people who live
within.
The project also changed the way the favela residents saw themselves. Being
international models gave them a new sense of pride; being part of a global
movement changed their perspective on their ability to effect change. The Morro
da Providência now has its own website, while locals continue to manage and
host weekly events at the cultural center JR left behind.
The photographs even changed the perspective of the local government. The
mayor of Rio confessed to JR that the exhibit had influenced subsequent political
decisions. The Brazilian officers involved in the original crime were arrested,
and the victims—Marcos Paulo da Silva, Wellington González, and David
Wilson—properly named and memorialized by news outlets around the world.
The story of JR and the forgotten favela illustrates the paramount importance
of perspective. Without it, we have only a partial picture of anything. To simply
read the police report on the Providência incident and stop or alternatively only
speak with the mother of a victim and then walk away would mean leaving
information behind. Comprehensive assessment and analysis require examining
things from all angles.
In art, perspective refers to the actual angle from which a work will be seen. It
is carefully considered and in many cases manipulated by the artist to
purposefully direct the viewer’s eye. For instance, many Renaissance painters
arranged their compositions to make sure the vanishing point, or where all lines
seem to visually converge, fell exactly on the Virgin Mary’s womb to emphasize
her importance as the mother of Christ. We are also going to use perspective to
our advantage, consciously taking control of it to make sure we are following

g ,
y
g
g
every lead possible.
Perspective, from the Latin word perspicere, meaning “to look through,” is
defined as the point of view from which something is considered or evaluated.
Originating in the fourteenth century, the word perspective was initially used to
describe a physical object, specifically an optical glass that would change the
way you viewed something. A telescope’s perspective, therefore, was an actual
piece of curved glass inside it. We can use this definition to think of perspective
in a similar way, as another lens through which we see.
In the first section of this book, we learned how to gather information; now
we will begin to look through what we have uncovered. We’ll start by
appreciating and analyzing perspective both from without and within.
PHYSICAL PERSPECTIVE
Dr. Wayne W. Dyer, author of one of the best-selling books of all time, says the
secret to his success is the maxim he lives by daily: Change the way you look at
things, and the things you look at change. Where we stand, figuratively and
literally, when we view things can dramatically change the way we see them;
therefore it’s critical that we approach data from every possible physical angle.
Look behind, underneath, in the corners, and off the page. Step back, crouch
down, and walk around everything. Things are not always what they appear to
be, especially at first glance from one angle. Take this bowl of food:

Giuseppe Arcimboldo, L’Ortolano (The Vegetable Gardener), c. 1590.
What do you see? An onion, carrots, mushrooms, a turnip, parsnips, garlic, a
sprig of mint, that furry thing near the middle (a chestnut—I had to look that one
up), and a few varieties of lettuce—basically the fixings for a really good meal.
Everything is in a dark bowl that appears to be made of some type of reflective
metal and rests on a flat surface.
Now let’s look at the same image upside down:

Giuseppe Arcimboldo, L’Ortolano (The Vegetable Gardener), c. 1590.
With a new perspective, the image changes entirely. Instead of a collection of
edibles, we now have the outline of a person.
Go back and look at the original picture. Would you have guessed that a
bearded man was lurking inside? If we had committed to looking at the image
from every angle, including sideways or upside down, we would have seen it. In
all of my years of teaching, I’ve only ever had one student, a young journalism
major from Columbia University, lie down on a bench in a museum, hang his
head physically over the edge, and peer at a painting upside down. We should all
be so committed

be so committed.
Recently, I was waiting by the foreign baggage claim in an international
airport terminal for a colleague to meet me. I did my best to stand out from the
bustling crowd: I sat down. As everyone around me was walking, grabbing their
bags, consulting their dictionaries and maps, or queuing up for the dozens of
lines, sitting down gave me an instantly distinct profile.
I’ve sat, and unfortunately slept, in airport terminals before, but always by the
gate where others were doing the same thing and discreetly against the wall. This
time I plunked myself right in the middle of baggage claim with my back against
a large pillar, so I wouldn’t miss my colleague. Seeing things from the ground in
this way, I noticed details I never would have otherwise. In an instant I became
an expert on contemporary luggage, as large rolling bags obscured most of my
field of vision, but I also noted socks and footwear, ankle tattoos, how people
trod, what they dropped, and if they shuffled nervously. I was so deep in
observation that I was startled when a face suddenly filled my view. A little girl,
delighted to finally find someone else at her eye level, smiled and babbled at me
in a language I sadly didn’t speak. When she toddled away, she left her
perspective with me, as all I could suddenly see was how the world must look in
the strange and noisy environment when you only come up to everyone’s knee
and no one looks you in the eye.

Michelangelo, David, 1501–1504.
That’s part of the magic of changing our physical perspective: that it will not
only give us new factual information but can also change our perceptions. Let’s
experience just how dramatic this shift can be by analyzing one of the world’s
most famous works of art: Michelangelo’s David.
The who, what, where, and when of the work are fairly well known: it is a
sculpture of a muscular, nude man meant to depict the biblical hero David just
before his battle with the giant Goliath. Carved from a single slab of white
marble, he stands facing front, head turned to the left, counterposed with his
weight on his right foot left arm bent right arm at his side He holds a sling and

weight on his right foot, left arm bent, right arm at his side. He holds a sling and
a rock, and can be viewed under a skylight built just for him at the Accademia
Gallery in Florence.
He’s frequently been called strong, heroic, relaxed, languishing,
contemplative, peaceful, even ethereal. Sixteenth-century historian Giorgio
Vasari wrote, “Nor has there ever been seen a pose so easy, or any grace to equal
that in this work, or feet, hands and head so well in accord, one member with
another, in harmony, design, and excellence of artistry.” Art critics have written
that he “transmits exceptional self-confidence,” is “the perfect man” and even
“the standard by which male beauty has been judged.”
Beauty is a subjective opinion, but let’s examine the photograph of David on
page 121 to verify if the other popular characterizations—graceful, peaceful,
relaxed—are in sync with our own observations. His face does appear smooth,
free of wrinkles, lips closed, possibly even turned up in a slight smile. His stance
is casual, his right shoulder slightly slumped, his right hand gently resting
against his thigh.
But how will our assessments stand when we view the statue from a different
angle? As the iconic statue is almost seventeen feet tall and sits on top of a six-
foot pedestal, most of us, whether we’ve seen David in person or in a photo like
the preceding one, have viewed it from the front at an upward angle and from
quite far away. If we walk around it, get eye level with it, and investigate it from
other viewpoints, it tells a different story.

Michelangelo, David (detail).
The peaceful, relaxed image of David disappears when we get higher and
closer. If we could view it from above, as Michelangelo did when carving it, we
would find a face full of tension. His nostrils are flared, his eyes wide open, the
muscles of his eyebrows furrowed. Close up, his stare is intent, possibly worried.
In fact, a 360-degree computer study revealed the opposite of a relaxed man in
repose: every visible muscle in David’s body is tensed. Anatomy professors at
Florence University assert that every detail of the sculpture “is consistent with
the combined effects of fear, tension and aggression.”

Close scrutiny also dispels the illusion of David’s physical perfection. He is
actually slightly cross-eyed and has a squint. He also has a flat spot on his head
and is quite abnormally proportioned. David’s hands are freakishly large, while
his pisello, as they say in Italy, does not correspond in size. His head seems too
big for his body, and Florentine doctors have discovered that he is missing a
muscle in his back.
Viewing the statue from other angles calls into question other “facts” as well.
The stone he holds in his right hand? A view from behind reveals the end of a
flat cylinder in his fingers that some believe is the handle of a sling rather than a
rock. His hand curves tightly around the object, obscuring much of it from our
view, and as with the contents of the bag Linda Stein’s personal assistant was
carrying, we cannot presume to know what it truly is by guessing at a shape.
We must also take into account a perspective many often miss: that of the
artist. How did Michelangelo intend for people to view David? Many scholars
believe that the current placement of the statue is incorrect, and that to really
stand in front of David, you need to move to the side into his line of sight. The
statue faces as it does because in 1504, city leaders decided that its “malevolent
stare and aggression” should be directed not at “peaceful passersby” but at
Florence’s true enemy, Rome. Regardless of what Michelangelo might have
wished, David was originally positioned outside with his back against the
Palazzo Vecchio, turned so that he was looking south toward the eventual capital
of Italy. When it was moved inside in 1873, the orientation was kept the same;
however, museum pillars and display cases installed to the right blocked a
proper frontal view.

Michelangelo, David, digital image.
Stanford University’s Digital Michelangelo Project provided a computerized
remedy that allows us at last to see David from this alternate view. With this new
perspective, the statue almost looks like a different person entirely. Our eyes
notice different things: the curve of his abdomen is more pronounced, the sling
over his shoulder easier to see, the knots on the tree stump behind him readily
visible, and the focus shifts from his genitals upward to his face.
Looking at the statue from Michelangelo’s point of view, we would also learn
that the physical imperfections were deliberate. While David’s eyes don’t line up
perfectly, scholars believe the mathematically inclined Michelangelo
deliberately skewed them in a trick of perspective so that from the ground, where
he knew a viewer would be standing, they would appear aligned.


Only a close and careful inspection will reveal the veins in David’s hand, the
length of his fingernails, the gap between the first and second toes on his left
foot. Why would something as small as the spacing between toes matter? In a
criminal investigation, the exact placement of bodies and evidence, indeed
everything in the surrounding scenes, is critical, but minute physical data matter
in many other disciplines as well: manufacturing medicine archiving insurance

in many other disciplines as well: manufacturing, medicine, archiving, insurance
claims adjusting, scouting for an ABP on an airplane. In this case, the toe gap is
important because that particular appendage separation was a signature of
Michelangelo’s work. In the absence of his name scrawled over David’s
backside, it is a nuanced hint to the viewer that we are looking at an authentic
masterwork. But we would never have found it if we hadn’t looked around.
To remind one another to keep looking constantly in every direction, World
War II pilots came up with a phrase still used in the army (I’ve heard that
football coaches are also fond of it): keep your head on a swivel. Instead of
defaulting to what’s right in front of us, we must keep shifting our perspective.
Doing so can help us find more information, more of the story, the missing
piece, the right path, the true intent, or even the way out.
I personally employ a practical head-swivel trick I learned from the FBI. They
teach their agents to frequently turn around and survey the scene behind them
when walking in unknown territory—an unfamiliar city street, a field, even an
airport parking lot—since that’s the view they’ll have when they need to find
their way back. Not doing so can mean that when you exit or try to retrace your
steps—especially in an emergency situation such as a mall evacuation—you can
get confused because the scenery is different; you’re suddenly looking at the
backside of the things you passed when you entered. By consciously
acknowledging the lay of the land from all angles when you approach a new
location, you capture a more complete picture of your surroundings that you can
recall no matter what direction you’re headed.
GO AND SEE
The importance of seeing things from all angles doesn’t begin and end with
investigative work; it’s just as critical for any business that trades in process,
products, or people. It’s the key principle behind Toyota’s famous genchi
genbutsu concept—which translates to “go and see”: the idea that the only way
to get the comprehensive picture of a scene, see a process as a whole, and absorb
as many details as possible is for managers to leave their offices, get out from
behind their computers, and physically go to where the work is being done.
Many manufacturing companies have adopted this in a practice called “gemba
walks”—gemba in Japanese meaning “the actual place.” In gemba walks,
employees go to the place that matters most to their job, be it where the product
is made or sold or even used, to better understand their work. Bill Wilder at
IndustryWeek describes it as such: “Gemba is rarely found at an executive desk.

Instead, you’ll find it on the shop floor. Or in the marketing department. Or at a
customer’s place of business.”
In another version of “go and see,” some companies are sending their
employees out to observe not where their work typically takes place but the
opposite. In the search for efficiency, Detroit’s Beaumont Health System
hospitals have kaizen (Japanese for “improvement”) teams of employees who
walk around the grounds outside of their normal departments to find sustainable
savings. One group saw that the sprinkler systems on the campus were watering
unnecessary areas; fixing that and switching to low-flow sprinkler heads saved
the company $180,000 and 500,000 gallons of water in six months. “Unless you
go out and walk,” says Kay Winokur, a nurse and Beaumont’s vice president of
quality, safety, and accreditation, “you won’t notice these things.”
Shifting our physical perspective can also help when we’re stuck mentally.
Just as the ancient Greeks purposefully carved grooves into their stone roads to
make heavy wheeled carts easier for horses and oxen to pull, our efficiency-
loving brains deliberately seek familiar patterns. Unfortunately sometimes we
get stuck in those ruts.
Think of a time you stared and stared at a seemingly unsolvable problem or
tried in vain to break a mental block. For me, it most often occurs when I have to
write a technical proposal. I want it to be perfect. I need it to be perfect. But the
words . . . just . . . won’t . . . come. I sit hypnotized by my laptop while hour
after unproductive hour ticks by, but I’m afraid to move on to something else,
trapped in the vicious cycle of just-five-more-minutes and I’ve-already-wasted-
so-much-time. Neuroscience and my author friends have taught me the simple
solution for writers’ or any other kind of block: get up and go.
“I limit myself to one hour without progress,” Jess McCann, author of two
dating advice books, tells me. “And then I’m out of there! I work on deadlines,
so I can’t completely abandon what I’m doing. I don’t drop my project and go on
vacation. All it takes is a quick change of physical location. Fifteen minutes
outside, and I come back refreshed and usually with the answer I was looking
for.”
When you’re ready to throw your computer (or coworker) out the window, go
for a quick discovery walk around your office, around your building, or around
the block.
“The very act of walking and moving about invigorates your brain,” confirms
neuroimaging experts Professor Roderick Gilkey and Dr. Clint Kilts, “because
the brain is an interactive system.” Any activity that stimulates one part of the
brain, such as physical movement, simultaneously stimulates other parts, such as
creative problem solving.

Even better than only walking is also observing what you see along the way.
Scientists have discovered that just looking can have a profound impact on the
brain’s ability to perform. “Experience gained through observation activates
performance-enhancing neurons which accelerate learning and the capacity to
learn,” Gilkey and Kilts say.
To do this, seek and sort out objective facts—who, what, where, and when—
while you’re walking. The more unfamiliar the territory you traverse, the more
potential there is for you to refocus your perceptions and break out of what
psychologists call “functional fixedness,” or the habit of seeing things from only
one perspective.
Instead of banging your head on the wall thinking about the same thing, by
getting up and going you’ll engage your real-time observational skills, which
will in turn ignite your critical thinking abilities, refresh all of your senses, and
in many cases release your mental block.
A SENSE OF PERSPECTIVE
While we’re on a perspective-changing walkabout, or any other time we’re
actively cataloging observations, we must remember to use all of our resources
as data collectors, specifically to look with more than just our eyes. As Discover
magazine editor at large Corey S. Powell writes, “Our appreciation of the natural
world is bolstered not just in sights but in sounds, smells, and tactile sensations.
A walk in the woods would not be the same without birdsong, the loamy odor of
decaying leaves, the brush of branches.”
Our perceptions are informed by observations from all of the senses, but we
default to the visual too often. Objective analysis doesn’t end with what we can
see. We also need to catalog and analyze what we can learn from all five senses
to develop a full picture of what we’re observing; if we don’t, we’re leaving
valuable information behind. The smell of the lobby in a hospital versus the
smell in the emergency room, the decibel level of someone’s voice, the strength
in someone’s handshake, whether they look you in the eye or look away: that’s
all important information.
Indeed, sight isn’t always our most powerful or productive sense. Working
with some of the finest law enforcement officials in the world, I am privy to
some of the small yet significant behind-the-scenes details of major cases that
don’t always make the headlines. These details are often the most thought-
provoking and revealing about the crime. Consider the murder of Annie Le, a
pharmacology graduate student at Yale who disappeared in 2009 five days

before her wedding. This investigation was hindered by sound and solved by
smell.
Initially, sight wasn’t helping the officers much. Surveillance footage and
electronic key records showed Le entering the lab where she worked but never
leaving. Her wallet and cell phone were left in her office. But authorities
couldn’t find her or her body; without either it’s very hard to identify, much less
indict, a suspect. After five days had passed with no discovery—no DNA, no
confirmed crime scene, no Le—the FBI was called in.
One of the FBI agents was standing in the lab very frustrated that Le couldn’t
be found when he decided to do what no one else had done: go to the men’s
room down the hall. He didn’t use the facility in the conventional way; instead,
he was seeking someplace where he could ponder the case further and give
himself a change of perspective. When he opened the restroom door, he recoiled
from the foul smell. When the wall between the restroom and the lab was
excavated, the victim’s body was found stuffed inside.
Why didn’t anyone smell the decomposition in the lab? Since the room held
mice in their cages for experimentation, a built-in fan had been running nonstop
to remove the animals’ odor and circulate fresh air. The noise was so constant
that no one even noticed it. If people had heard the fan, they could have turned it
off and used their noses sooner.
We live in a very visual world, and it can be hard to cede our focus to other
senses, and even more challenging since less used senses are harder to describe.
We’re not used to describing smells in concrete terms; we often resort to vague
qualitative words like “nice” or “awful.” But we need to be as thorough and
precise when gathering information with our other senses as we are with sight.
For instance, there is a distinct difference between a “musty” smell and one that
is “musky.” The same variation exists for sounds, tastes, and the physical feel of
things.
To master this skill of differentiating with our senses, make conscious use of
all of your senses in public and in private. When you’re on the subway or at the
grocery store or in your basement, note odors, and tastes, and sounds. I find the
best way to get my other senses fired up is to close my eyes for a moment. On an
airplane recently, I did just that and for the first time noticed the aromas of hand
lotion, perfume, and bacon. How did I possibly miss the smell of bacon on a
closed plane when my eyes were open? We were at cruising altitude; the bacon
didn’t just suddenly walk on board. My eyes were commanding all of my
attention; I needed to turn them off so my brain would allocate resources to my
other senses.

Thankfully, the more often you engage all of your senses, the more automatic
the process will become. And you’ll find that your other senses will enhance
what you see. We can practice this skill using art, the same way we use it as
visual data. We can look at a painting of a day at the beach and know what it
sounds like: waves crashing, seagulls squawking, children shouting. To prove it,
let’s analyze the following painting by Édouard Manet. I’ll give you a head start
and tell you where we are: A Bar at the Folies-Bergère, a cabaret music hall in
Paris.
What do you see?
Édouard Manet, A Bar at the Folies-Bergère, 1882.
This is a complicated painting, filled with people and objects. Let’s catalog the
facts, but this time we’ll make sure to incorporate all of our senses: visual, aural,
aromatic, and tactile. We don’t have to be holding the orange to our noses to
know it smells of citrus. We don’t have to have our own hands on the white
marble-colored bar to know it is rock hard and cool to the touch. We don’t have
to be in the room to know how loud it would be. These are facts we can deduce
without being physically present in the scene.
How many people are in this painting? It’s hard to tell, as many of them are
reflected in mirrors, so let’s estimate. Count one small section and then multiply;
I’d say there appear to be around fifty people in the background, with one
d
i th f
g
d Wh i th
i
bj
t? Th b
id

woman and one man in the foreground. Who is the main subject? The barmaid
or the mustachioed man in the black top hat in the upper right corner? What
about the woman in the far upper left corner of whom we can see only her
pointed green shoes—the trapeze artist? She’s the entertainment, one of the
reasons the crowds have gathered: to watch her. She could be the most important
part of the scene, but we’d never know if we hadn’t spotted her.
Let’s list some of the sounds we’d expect to hear. Glasses clinking. People
talking. Most likely music. Perhaps the tinkling of crystals in the chandeliers
from the movement of the air or the squeak of the hinges on the trapeze?
What might we smell? The oranges. The liquor. The flowers in the vase on the
bar. What about the flowers in the woman’s bosom? Perhaps she has them there
as a nosegay, to help shield her from other unpleasant odors, the smell of a mass
of people who rarely bathed in a confined space without air conditioning?
What would the air in the room feel like? We can’t see any windows, but we
can see clouds of smoke in the background, which suggests there isn’t a breeze
or good ventilation. What would the smoke smell like? Taste like?
Now let’s study the different perspectives in the painting. We’ll climb behind
the bar and stand next to the barmaid to see things from her perspective. What
does she see? Lights and chandeliers and smoke and people. According to the
mirror behind her, she is quite far away from the crowd. The reflection behind
her shows that the mustachioed man is the only one nearby. Where is he in real
life? Shouldn’t he be standing right in front of her, blocking our view? Since he
is not, are we him? Is the viewer meant to be the man in the top hat standing
right in front of her?
Let’s step into the man’s shoes. If we were him, what would we be seeking
from her? A drink, attention, the answer to a question, perhaps. Our perception
of her expression, stance, and response changes remarkably if we are him. When
we actively insert ourselves into the scene, her vacant stare could take on an
entirely new meaning. Instead of detached or downtrodden we might see her as
rude or lazy.
Now let’s zoom up and see things from an entirely different point of view:
that of the trapeze artist. How different would this scene look, feel, smell, and
sound from above? Both hot air and smoke rise, so the temperature would be
higher, the air thicker. The noise would likely be the same, if not a little quieter,
but the lights might be brighter as she hangs suspended above the shimmering
fixtures and the crowds. Being at the top of the room, she has nowhere to look
but downward. What does she see? The tops of a lot of hats. Like the little girl I
encountered in the airport, the trapeze artist does not get a lot of eye contact.
How might that affect her view of the scene? While the minutiae of so many
individual conversations might roll over the barmaid the trapeze artist is privy to

individual conversations might roll over the barmaid, the trapeze artist is privy to
none of them. Instead of being in the middle, she is truly removed and detached.
Is she paying attention to the crowd or preoccupied performing her job?
Striving to see the world from other people’s perspectives can make any scene
more vivid. But its value is far more than aesthetic. In fact, the ability to imagine
others’ viewpoints, reactions, and concerns is one of the most important
cognitive tools we humans possess, as it makes us not only more sympathetic to
others but more discerning when dealing with them—or when imagining how
we should deal with them.
We’ve seen how getting a new vantage point physically helps accomplish this;
now for even more insight, let’s put ourselves in someone else’s shoes more
completely. Instead of just standing where they’re standing, let’s examine what
the world might look like from behind their eyes.
MENTAL PERSPECTIVE
In To Kill a Mockingbird, Atticus Finch tells his daughter, Scout, “You never
really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view . . .
until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.” To do so is to elicit
empathy, which is a vital competency for collaboration, managing conflict, and
creative thinking in both professional and personal settings.
Forbes magazine calls empathy “the force that moves business forward.”
Jayson Boyers writes, “The reality is that for business leaders to experience
success, they need to not just see or hear the activity around them, but also relate
to the people they serve.”
I frequently work with professional fund-raisers, and I was called in to train a
team that wasn’t reaching the level of donations they had hoped for. They were
confounded, since it was their charity’s fortieth anniversary, a milestone they
had proudly advertised in all of their literature. They couldn’t understand why
the celebration of their longevity didn’t lead to increased contributions. The
problem was one of perspective. They were looking at the yearly campaign from
their own point of view: as employees. Their sense of pride, however, doesn’t
necessarily translate to anyone outside their organization. I told the fund-raisers
to look at their pamphlet from the donors’ perspective. A donor’s first priority
isn’t a charity’s age; it’s knowing their money is helping someone. In their
eagerness to advertise their anniversary, the employees had accidentally
minimized the good works they had done that year. The problem of the
decreased donations was solved by incorporating other points of view.

British philosopher and author Roman Krznaric asserts that empathy is also
“the key to having a successful marriage, getting your teenager to talk to you, or
stopping the inevitable toddler tantrum . . . Empathy is the demonstrative act of
stepping into the shoes of another person and understanding their feelings and
perspectives,” he says.
Practice actively putting yourself in others’ places both physically and
mentally. What does a finger-wagging reprimand look like from so far above a
child’s head? What do department-trimming budget decisions mandated from
the top look like from the manager’s chair? What does a missed bonus look like
for an employee who lives paycheck to paycheck?
Depending upon how wide the gulf is between you and the person you’re
trying to understand, you might need to go a little deeper to get a good look at
things from the other person’s perspective. The Emmy Award–winning
television show Undercover Boss does just that by disguising CEOs as new
employees and letting them see what life is like on the front lines of the
companies they own. While entertaining to watch, the social experiment has
yielded real-world results the executives say they couldn’t have gotten
otherwise.
Rick Silva, the CEO of Checkers and Rally’s, fast food burger chains with
twenty thousand employees and more than eight hundred restaurants, says, “The
circumstances are weird, but going undercover gives you the chance to really
connect with your workers.” Posing as trainee “Alex Garcia,” Silva learned that
some employees were abused by poorly trained managers, others worked
cheerfully despite debt and “Dickensian struggles” at home, and many hourly
staff members were frustrated by the incentive program that only rewarded
managers. “They wouldn’t be anything were it not for us,” Johanna, an
exceptional employee he worked alongside (and couldn’t keep up with), told
him.
Silva took many insights back to corporate headquarters and made many
changes. “I call [my good workers] ‘Johannas’ now,” Silva says. “And I’ve got a
lot of ‘Johannas’ out there and they don’t feel confident enough for all the right
reasons in talking to management.” To remedy this, a “coach-to-grow” pilot
program to identify the best employees was introduced, and the company began
giving bonuses directly to team members and not just their managers.
Many parenting and relationship experts recommend a similar trading-places
experiment when imagination just isn’t enough. Every Halloween, educational
consultant and writer Jennifer Miller challenges her readers to participate in a
Freaky Friday–like challenge in which caregivers and their children swap roles
and act as each other for one family activity. After doing it with her own family,

Miller reported, “I learned how uncomfortable and tough it is to really try and
put yourself in another’s place and perspective. It’s hard work. It requires
actively thinking about the other person, their beliefs, their daily habits, and how
they would authentically look and sound. There’s immediate accountability too
since the person you are attempting to imitate is watching you. After the game, I
noticed I was thinking frequently about what [my husband] might say in a
particular situation or how [my son] might react. Just this one activity has
heightened my own awareness of my family members’ outlooks.”
Empathy isn’t the only benefit of adopting someone else’s perspective. Doing
so can also help us with problem solving. Putting ourselves in the shoes of a
fictional or famous person can help us shift our line of thinking when we’re
stuck. Individually or as a group activity at the office or at home, select a well-
known person and try to find a solution using that person’s personality, history,
and viewpoint. How would Shakespeare approach your productivity problem?
What new features would give your product or service a competitive edge
according to Oprah? What would Spider-Man say about disrespectful language?
In our digital age, looking at things from all angles before we act is also
imperative for our own protection. When Marlene Mollan’s fifteen-year-old
daughter was unsure if she should post a photo from a Halloween party on her
Twitter account, she ran it past her mother to get a second opinion. In the
picture, Mollan’s daughter was standing, fully clothed and appropriately posed,
between two friends, muscular boys her age who had their shirts off.
“I’m not doing anything wrong in the picture, and neither are they,” the girl
said. “But I just wanted to make sure it wouldn’t look bad.”
Marlene Mollan knew that once posted, the photograph would live online
forever, so while she didn’t personally have a problem with it, she encouraged
her daughter to look at it from as many perspectives as possible.
“What does your boyfriend think of the photo, considering he’s not in it?”
Mollan asked.
“I showed him, and he’s fine with it,” she answered. “He knows those boys
and I are just friends.”
“What about how future boyfriends might perceive it?” Mollan asked.
“What do you mean?”
“It might scare someone off if they think you only date guys who look like
that. What if your future Prince Charming can’t bench-press two hundred
pounds?”
“Mom!”
“How do you think your boyfriend’s mother would view it?” Mollan
continued. “Or your grandmother? Your principal? Pastor? Future college

recruiter? Future boss?”
Possibly not well, her daughter conceded. After considering how others might
see her differently because of the photograph, she decided not to post it.
Just as important as seeing things from others’ points of view is making sure
they are privy to ours. Letting other people know what we experience adds both
to mutual understanding and to the aggregate of information that can be
collected.
During the search for Annie Le, not a single person on the Yale staff thought
to tell investigators about the fan running continuously in the lab where she
worked. They just assumed the police would hear it or know about it and turn it
off. How much sooner would they have found Le’s body if someone had
mentioned it?
Just because you see or hear or smell or know something doesn’t mean that
everyone else does. Be aware that things that are familiar to you may be
unfamiliar to others. If you live in New York City, it may be the omnipresent
noises of sirens. If you live in the country, it may be the chirping of crickets and
birds. Make sure you’re taking a complete inventory of your world when you
need to share it with someone else. To do this, ask yourself these simple
questions:
What am I tuning out?
What might I be taking for granted?
What would someone else coming into my world not know?
The more information you can gather, the more opportunity there is for
accurate assessment, which in turn leads to a higher chance of finding what we
seek, whether it’s the solution, the answer, or the truth.
THE ELUSIVE “WHY”
We’ve explored how to assess the who, what, where, and when. Understanding
other perspectives can also help us answer the elusive “why.” Why did she do
what she did? Why did he quit? Why did someone sabotage a system or throw a
tantrum or break up with us or leave town or burn that bridge? In most cases, a
problem is the result of a reaction, and reactions are caused by actions.
Understanding how others see things, what facts of life they might be dealing
with, can help to answer why they act as they do.
In 2013, I helped the Peace Corps design a training program for its sexual
assault response team. The program included a section on seeing things from all
perspectives in order to formulate the most effective response To provide for

perspectives in order to formulate the most effective response. To provide for
their volunteers’ continued safety, Peace Corps staff needed a better way to
identify how information is presented and perceived in situations involving
assaults of volunteers. For instance, if the facts of a volunteer’s story change
when she tells it to different people, this might seem to indicate that she’s not
telling the truth. Stepping into her shoes presents alternate explanations. Imagine
being a traumatized young woman, overseas, separated from friends and family,
trying to describe the nature of a sexual encounter to an older, male manager
who might resemble the assailant or the stern father who warned her against
leaving home in the first place. From this perspective, it becomes easier to see
why she might not be so forthcoming. Discerning that the volunteer might not be
comfortable relaying certain details to specific members of the team can help the
staff adjust their reporting protocols.
Similarly, while it’s imperative to find out what the victim knows about the
perpetrator, it’s just as important to look at things from the attacker’s
perspective. What facts about the perpetrator might have contributed to the
incident? Does he or his family have connections in local law enforcement or
influence in the local community? Does he have connections or influence with
the people the victim works or lives with? To get a complete picture of the
situation, the community’s perception of the incident also must be investigated.
What was their reaction? Are they supportive of the victim, and if so, will they
continue to be? Ultimately the question that must be answered is whether or not
the volunteer should return to her site. The only way to answer that question is to
see things from the perspective of everyone involved.
After JR helped give the world a new perspective on residents of Morro da
Providência, Rio’s civic leaders took notice. They finally ventured up the hill,
met with residents, and learned what it was like to live there under the thumb of
gang leaders, isolated by geography, having to walk down 365 steps just to get to
a grocery store. In 2010 the civic leaders implemented a revolutionary social
services program that included Pacifying Police Units to reclaim the area from
armed drug dealers and reestablish peace. Resident associations elected
presidents to bolster community pride. And in July 2014, a new cable car system
was inaugurated to connect the favela to the city below. The cable cars can
transport one thousand people per hour up and down the incline and are free of
charge. With beautiful 360-degree vistas from every cabin, the gondola is also
attracting a new type of person to the favela: tourists. They are coming in droves
for a beautiful new view of the city.
A NEW VIEW

Imagine that you are in a fishing village in the South of France, standing in front
of a window that opens out to the clear, blue waters of the Mediterranean Sea.
The same warm breeze that skims boats across the surface blows in through the
open glass. The village is a riot of color, from the local flowers that bloom year-
round to the brightly hued buildings that hug the pebbled beaches.
That’s just what the artist Henri Matisse enjoyed for nearly a decade when he
escaped the wet winters of Paris for a rented studio in the small town of
Collioure. The studio’s window, technically two large doors that opened onto a
tiny balcony, looked out over the town’s harbor. Matisse spent countless hours in
front of the window painting what he saw, capturing the colors he called
“explosives,” such as in this piece from 1905 simply titled Open Window:

Henri Matisse, Open Window, Collioure, 1905.
In 1914 he painted the same scene, titled French Window at Collioure, shown
here:

Henri Matisse, French Window at Collioure, 1914.
What happened? The scene outside the window hadn’t changed: it still held
the blue Mediterranean, colorful ships, and warm sunny days. In fact, according
to art historians at Centre Pompidou in Paris where the painting hangs, a closer
view reveals that trees and ironwork on the balcony are faintly visible, as they
were painted before Matisse applied a black color wash over them. What
scholars believe changed was the way the artist viewed the world.
Like perception, our perspective can change. It is not permanently fixed.
Many things can manipulate it: time, state of mind, new experiences through
which we filter the world. How a person feels about something today, how he

describes something today, may be very different from how he will feel about it
or describe it in the future. In a recent session I did with child abuse
investigators, one investigator acknowledged that what is going on in her
personal life can color how she “sees” the information on a site visit.
For Matisse, life in 1914 was very different from life nine years earlier. World
War I had recently begun, and France was suffering great casualties. The
German army had invaded Matisse’s hometown, trapping his elderly and ill
mother behind enemy lines. His friends were drafted, his brother was a prisoner
of war, and although he had tried to enlist many times, he was repeatedly
rejected for being too old to serve. Instead, the French military commandeered
his house in Paris for their headquarters, and he was exiled to his summer studio.
The actual vista outside the open window in Collioure had not changed. The
landscape wasn’t decimated by bombs or the town overrun by a foreign military.
Life continued in the Catalan village as it had. Except to Matisse, it didn’t look
the same.
Why is this important? Because our changing perspective can change our
observations. If we interviewed Matisse and asked him what color the sea was in
1914, and he said, “Black,” it would not be a lie. The sea might appear blue to us
but truly black to him. I highlighted this in the Peace Corps sexual assault team
training, that a victim could change the facts of her story simply because she
might remember things differently over time.
Current research suggests that the more we recall something, the more we
either remember or remake our memory of that thing, especially if it’s connected
to an emotional experience. Elizabeth A. Phelps, professor of psychology and
neural science at New York University, believes this is because of a direct line
of communication in our brain between the visual cortex, the amygdala, where
emotions are encoded, and the hippocampus, where memory is stored. When
something arouses our emotions, good or bad, the amygdala tells our eyes to pay
closer attention, giving our hippocampus more to store. However, while
emotional involvement heightens our confidence in our memories, it doesn’t
necessarily enhance their objective accuracy.
Being aware of this possibility can help us avoid making assumptions—
someone isn’t telling the truth now, or wasn’t before—that can put off those
we’re called to serve.
A SERVICE PERSPECTIVE
No matter what our jobs might be, we’re all in some sort of service to others: our
customers, our coworkers, our boss, our children, our partners, patients,

distributors, readers, end users, even our friends. Instead of describing only
experiences from our own reference point, we need to be attuned to others’
perspectives so that we’ll be better able to accommodate their needs and desires.
A perfect example of how someone I taught put this into practice for the
benefit of her clients and her career is oncology social worker Judy Galvan. Judy
set out to visit a terminally ill patient at the woman’s new hospice care facility
armed with a bright, scarlet blanket. She had heard the woman often spoke of
being cold, a common complaint of cancer patients. Judy had known the patient
for two years, had previously visited her at her home, where she lived proudly
and independently, and knew the woman resisted checking in to the hospital
until there was no other option.
“When I entered her hospital room, I was struck by how white, how stark, and
how vacant it seemed,” she told me. “Even though I’ve visited dozens of patients
in hospital settings exactly like this one, I took in this patient’s environment
differently.”
Having analyzed different perspectives in art, seeing things from a barmaid’s
and favela resident’s eyes, Judy stepped behind this patient and saw things from
her point of view.
“I noticed right away she was asleep in bed with her glasses on,” Judy recalls.
“As I laid the blanket over her, the contrast between the red blanket and the
whiteness of the entire setting reinforced my perception of her description: cold.
Cold means so much more than just lacking in temperature. There was nothing
on her walls, except a small activities calendar that was placed out of her line of
sight. She had one small window that overlooked a bland, urban landscape. And
her pallor matched the room.”
Determined to bring more warmth than just a blanket, Judy helped create a
more visually interesting environment in the room with colorful objects her
patient could see. She also arranged with the nurses to have the woman regularly
taken to a garden on the hospital grounds. The change in scenery dramatically
increased the quality of the woman’s final days.
Shifting our perspective lets us see things for the first time or see things anew.
The process can help us find both tiny details and earth-shattering, paradigm-
shifting ideas, and you can use that information to solve problems and uncover
new possibilities.
The final definition of perspective is the ability to view things in relation to
their true importance. To master this angle as well, we’ll sharpen our
prioritization skills by looking at a boat, a train, a bridge, a balcony, and a house
on fire.

7
Seeing What’s Missing
How to Prioritize Like an Undercover Agent
WITH THE GLOCK pistol in my hand, I had a terrible sense of déjà vu from my
graduate school police ride-along, only this time I was the one holding the gun.
And I was standing outside my own house.
My pulse was racing as I climbed the front steps. I had never even held a
weapon before, but I had no choice. I had heard that my son was alone in the
house with an intruder, and I was the only one nearby. As I entered the front
hallway, a man dressed in black ran in front of me, through the open back door,
and into the yard. I sprinted after him. I could only see him from the back. He
was holding a brown bag that looked bulky and heavy. He said nothing. I said
nothing. I simply pulled the trigger.
The kickback was loud and sudden; the gun almost hit me in the face. I had
aimed at his heart and hit my mark. He was dead.
The North Carolina police sergeant who had given me the gun couldn’t
believe it.
“He was retreating, you weren’t in any danger, and he didn’t even have a
weapon,” he scolded. “And that’s the only guy you shot?”
I couldn’t explain my action; no one was more surprised by it than I was.
When I’d arrived at the Integrity and Accuracy Conference for the North
Carolina District Attorney’s Office that morning, I was excited; prosecutors,
public defenders, and police officers would all be attending this event, the
purpose of which was to reinforce that in law enforcement everyone is on the
same side. I never expected that I’d end the day holding a gun, much less killing
someone.
After I registered my attendance, I was led into one of the hotel’s ballrooms
and told it was time for my FATS (firearm training simulator) testing. I was
informed that everyone at the conference had to do it.
They put a patch on my neck to measure my pulse, set me up in front of an
elaborate, realistic video screen system, and handed me a real gun.
The sergeant gave me a quick lesson in firearm safety, assured me that it
wasn’t loaded with ammunition, just a sensor, and stood back to let me begin.
I still wasn’t ready. “When do I shoot?” I asked.

I still wasn t ready. When do I shoot?  I asked.
“Ma’am,” the officer drawled, “shoot when appropriate.”
How was I supposed to know when that was? Who’s to say what’s
appropriate? And therein lay the lesson: the situation and stimulus for action are
different for everyone.
The video lit up. I was suddenly standing in a dark alleyway lined with rough
brick walls. I raised my hands in front of me as the officer had demonstrated; I
was to anticipate danger. The screen moved to simulate me walking, the walls
blurring as they passed my peripheral vision. An empty white plastic bag rustled
past my feet. A can of bright blue spray paint rested beneath an unfinished work
of graffiti as if someone had left quickly before completing it. As I walked, a
mangy amber-colored cat sitting on top of a dented, gray metal trash can hissed
at me. A man’s back came into view. He was stopped in the middle of the
passage a couple feet ahead of me. He wore baggy jeans and a leather jacket.
Greasy brown hair curled over his collar from beneath a black skullcap.
I stopped and stood still, though slightly wobbly, unsure of what to do. The
gun was cold and heavier than I’d expected; holding it at arm’s length made my
wrist ache faintly. Suddenly the man turned and lunged at me with a knife. I
lowered the gun and pulled the trigger.
The video stopped and the officer reappeared. “Um, darlin’,” he said, “you
fired at his feet.”
“I know,” I answered.
“Why?” he asked.
“I didn’t want to hurt him, I just wanted to stop him,” I explained.
“Ma’am, he did mean to hurt you,” he replied.
Without a pause, the second scene started. I was in a backyard. A wooden
fence about six feet high encased the patchy grass area on all three sides, the
slats so close together that the view beyond them was obstructed. An unplanted
bed of soil lined with large rocks hugged the fence.
Two men stood in the middle of the yard, struggling over something I couldn’t
see. They wrestled for control of an object, hidden by their callused hands. I
hesitated.
“You can talk to the video,” the policeman called out to me. “It’s interactive.”
New information, good to know.
“What’s going on here?” I said in my most authoritative voice.
The men stopped and looked at me. “Who is she?” one asked the other.
How did they know I was female? I wondered. Could they really see me? The
simulation felt more and more real.
The man on the right, burly with a stubbly beard and a good six inches taller
than me, let go of the scrawnier, clean-shaven man. “I’ll take care of her,” he

,
g
,
,
said.
He bent down, picked up a large rock, and advanced toward me. I stood my
ground. He lifted the rock and brought it down where my head would be. The
video stopped.
“Why didn’t you fire?” the officer asked me.
“He didn’t have a weapon,” I said lamely.
“A rock that size in the hands of a man that big is a weapon,” he said. “He just
killed you. And not in a pretty way.”
Fantastic.
The third video rolled. This time I was driving a car. An odd sense of
discomfort settled over me—in real life I don’t drive. As I pulled up to my
house, a plump, blond, middle-aged woman in a fuzzy pink bathrobe ran up to
my car window, her face creased with worry.
“Someone’s been casing your house,” she said. “I think they’re inside.”
I jumped out of the car.
“Isn’t your kid inside?” she said.
As if on cue, a small voice echoed from inside the house: “Mom!”
I went through the front door, arms raised, and saw the man with the bag
running away. Without hesitating, I shot him in the back, killing him.
“So when someone actually wants to kill you, you either don’t shoot or shoot
them in the foot,” the officer repeats, “but this guy, running away, without a
weapon, without threatening you, him you kill?”
It turns out I was the only one at the conference who’d shot at the last man.
When they asked me later to stand up and explain why I had, I still didn’t have a
good answer. It was a visceral reaction: if you hurt my child, I will kill you. I
didn’t have any proof that my child had been hurt, I didn’t have really good
justification for homicide, but I did it. I fired.
I spent many agonizing nights afterward trying to figure out why I pulled the
trigger when I did. Everything happened so quickly, my thoughts had barely had
time to catch up. My reactions were automatic and almost felt involuntary. But
they were mine, and I would have had to take responsibility for them if this had
been real life rather than a simulation. So what had shaped my reflexive decision
to fire?
Even in the short time frame of each simulation, I’d gathered plenty of
objective facts. I’d noted the gender, height, and facial features of my
companions as well as what they were wearing and carrying. I hadn’t made
assumptions about their character or morality. I’d taken in my environment, both
the big picture and small details. Although I couldn’t smell a video, I’d used my

other senses to take in textures and sounds. I’d heeded my own perceptual filters,
recognizing that being behind the wheel of a car made me uncomfortable. Even
my past experience came into play: not having any personal encounters with
violence from a knife or a rock meant I didn’t implicitly see them as fatal
weapons.
Very quickly I’d collected a lot of data and sorted it for objectivity or
subjectivity, fact or assumption, but what had made me act on only some of it
and not all of it? What had caused certain items to rise to the forefront and
influence my decision making? The way I prioritized the information.
The reason I didn’t shoot at the first two attackers but did fire at the last,
unarmed man begins and ends with my son. He is my number one priority. As
most parents undoubtedly do, I value my child’s safety even over my own life.
It’s critical that we know how we prioritize information because what we label
in our minds as most important is what we’re going to act upon. Up until now,
everything we’ve covered has dealt with assessing information and analyzing
what we’ve gathered.
How we prioritize that information, however, whether consciously or not, will
most directly affect our actions.
As soon as we have multiple data points, we have a choice: which will we act
upon? Our resulting actions are not always as extreme and physical as deciding
whether to shoot a stranger. We might have to make less life-threatening but still
critical decisions such as determining which pieces of information we’re going
to dedicate resources to pursuing and in what order.
We can’t physically or mentally follow up, hunt down, or investigate every
single piece of information we uncover, at least not all at once. In reviewing the
cognitive limits of the human brain and the myth of multitasking, we’ve learned
that a single human cannot do multiple things at once. Walking and talking, yes.
Reading a book about neural connections while interviewing a university
professor and his orangutan puppet? No. If we don’t consciously decide which
task to deal with first, our brains will choose for us based on our built-in
perceptions and biases. And that’s not always a good thing, as we can see from
the experience of Dr. Anna Pou.
When Hurricane Katrina hit on August 29, 2005, Dr. Pou, a respected
surgeon, was on duty at the Memorial Medical Center in New Orleans. She
volunteered to stay past her shift to care for patients and didn’t leave the hospital
for four days, while conditions within and outside the facility deteriorated. She
carried supplies, helped ration food, and took two-hour turns manually squeezing
ventilators to keep patients alive. All of her good deeds, however, were
overshadowed by decisions she made when prioritizing.

As floodwaters surrounded the hospital, it lost electricity, the sanitation
systems stopped working, food ran out, and the building’s temperature rose to
110 degrees Fahrenheit. At night the hospital was pitch black and frightening.
“We started hearing stories about murders, about gangs raping women and
children,” Pou told the Associated Press. “The women that had their children
there were really scared.”
People had to make tough decisions about how to care for and then evacuate
the more than two thousand people inside. Dr. Pou was one of those people. She
prioritized who needed to be moved, and in what order, and who could be left
behind based on the medical conditions she observed. For her efforts, she was
subsequently labeled a hero and a murderer. Although she had stayed, at great
personal risk, and for five days led a small cadre of healthcare workers to save
and evacuate patients, a year later, as Dr. Pou pulled up to her house after a
thirteen-hour surgery, she was arrested, handcuffed in her scrubs, and charged
with second-degree murder for the deaths of some of the elderly patients, all
with do-not-resuscitate orders. She had decided to sedate them in order to “help
[them] through their pain,” and they had subsequently died. The case was
eventually dropped when a grand jury refused to indict Dr. Pou, but not before
the charges had wreaked havoc on her personal and professional life.
Catastrophic events and emergencies can quickly, and without warning or
remorse, expose any foundation’s underlying flaws to you, your business, your
family, and sometimes the entire world. Following deadly accidents in 2013, the
New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority released a report that found
the Metro-North Railroad prioritized on-time performance over public safety.
Riders were understandably outraged. Also in 2013, the Arizona Division of
Occupational Safety and Health announced that nineteen firefighters lost their
lives in the previous summer’s Yarnell Hill fire because the Forestry Division
had prioritized protection of property over the safety of their workers, a finding
that devastated the victims’ families.
Mistakes from poor prioritization can follow us. Although he has moved on to
become the head of a wireless charging company, any future success Thorsten
Heins finds will always be accompanied by the postscript of his folly as the
former CEO of BlackBerry, Ltd. CNN reports that he was ousted for his “one,
crucial, overarchingmistake: he didn’t prioritize BlackBerry’s core business-
focused customers.” Instead, he tried to mimic the mass consumer success of
Apple and Android, a decision that led to a disastrous $1 billion writedown on
unsold inventory. Similarly, the reputation of the Daughters of the Republic of
Texas, the patriotic women’s group that has managed the locally revered Alamo
historical site since 1905, took a hit when the state attorney general’s office

revealed—and the New York Times reported—that the organization failed to
prioritize the preservation of the very site it was dedicated to. While $10 million
was allocated to expand the Alamo’s library, only $350 was reserved for
preservation-related projects each year, and the roof was allowed to leak for
fourteen years. The furor resulted in the governor and the Texas General Land
Office ending the Daughters’ 110-year reign as caretakers of the property.
After my own experience behind a Glock, I will never again judge anyone for
life-or-death decisions, but I cannot control whether I will be judged. Dr. Pou
was called to account for her decisions months later and was judged for them
outside the context in which she made them. We all run the same risk all too
often. Everything from managing relationships to budgeting finances can quickly
spin, or be spun, out of control. Having a clear understanding of our priorities
ahead of time can help alleviate much of the damage.
Conscious, planned prioritization is critical for more than just law
enforcement and medical professionals. Being able to rank information from
most important to least is essential for business, education, parenting, job
interviews, and even the SAT. Prioritization allows us to be more focused, more
efficient, and more decisive.
Many people are unaware of what their personal prioritization techniques are;
that is the case with most of the professionals I train. During a program I taught
that included 911 operators, I had all the participants pair up. One person would
face a screen at the front of the room, and the other would look away from the
screen and take notes. I put up a photograph and gave the observers one minute
to describe what they saw to their partner, who was instructed to make a sketch
based on the information the observer gave. Here is the photograph.

Joel Sternfeld, McLean, Virginia, December 1978.
To see your baseline prioritizing skills, take one minute and write down as
many objective facts as you can.
After I called time, we reviewed how successfully the duos had cataloged the
facts. Everyone told me about the pumpkins, some mentioning that they were
smashed in the foreground. I heard wonderful descriptions of fall colors and
leafless flora. Many had the full signage correctly noted: MCLEAN FARM MARKET,
SWEET CIDER. Some even mentioned the red apple painted on the sign at the right.
Unbelievably, some observers had completely neglected to mention the house
on fire. They assured me that they hadn’t missed it; they just hadn’t gotten to tell
their partners about that part yet because, as one of them explained, “we started
on pumpkins and worked our way back from the foreground, and then you called
time.”
Let me repeat: this group included 911 operators. I’m not trying to single
them out, they were terrific participants, but I think it indicates the enormity of
the challenge—and possibly the danger—we face when we lack a prioritization

plan. We should all have one. And simply going front to back isn’t a good one.
It’s a way to list information, but just listing information isn’t good enough. At
work or at home, we can’t just dump everything in no particular order onto
another person or into a report. We can’t assume anyone else has the time or
desire or skill to parse mountains of data from various sources. We need to give
the information some order, or someone else will, perhaps incorrectly. We need
to make sure that the important information doesn’t get lost or buried by
everything else.
To do this, we need a system to prioritize information. There are dozens of
methods, some with arcane monikers: high/medium/low, MoSCoW, tops and
bottoms, Pareto charts, Kano, matrices, scattergrams, and timeboxing. In the
medical world, they use the triage system to find and care for the most injured
first. In the military, reverse triage—which Dr. Pou employed in her hospital—is
used to evacuate first those most likely to live. Six Sigma has a project
prioritization matrix. SAP product integration uses value mapping. And while
the Pentagon uses the CARVER matrix, the National Association of County and
City Health Officials simply uses colorful poker chips dropped into shoe boxes
at meetings. It doesn’t matter which method you choose to prioritize; what
matters is that you do prioritize, making sure that you put the most important
information first.
To remind themselves to start a story with the most salient piece of
information, journalists say: “Don’t bury the lede.”
In order to prioritize, we must first sift through all available data and bring the
most important facts to the top. We can’t do this successfully unless we’ve first
collected everything that could possibly be collected, but once that’s done, we
need to whittle it down.
For instance, say you’ve just completed a home visit for a welfare check.
You’ve collected every fact you could find, from the nap of the carpet to the
contents of the magazine basket. You don’t, however, need to pass every bit of
information on in the formal written report. You don’t need to include that the
curtains in the living room were blue, but if they had bullet holes in them, you
need to note it, and you need to note it first.
The Baltimore Police Department does a great job of this in its sexual assault
investigation training. While its “Interviewing the Victim” guidelines packet is
detailed and thorough, including information such as where the victim should be
interviewed, how the report should be written, and if background checks should
be run, it begins with a single sentence: “Interviewing the Victim Detectives
shall prioritize the needs and comfort of the victim.” Placing this directive first
clearly and concisely highlights what an important part of the process it is. And

it is, since according to Captain John Darby of the Philadelphia Police
Department Special Victims Unit, the better a victim is treated, the more likely
the case will end with justice for the perpetrator.
Like observation, perception, and perspective, priorities will differ for each of
us and for each scenario. Different prioritization systems will work better for
different people. The one I’ve found to be the most helpful to the widest range of
people I teach is the three-prong approach outlined in the CIA training manual
The Psychology of Intelligence Analysis by Richard J. Heuer. To help organize
data and find the most important elements of any situation, you ask three
questions: What do I know? What don’t I know? If I could get more information,
what do I need to know?
WHAT DO I KNOW?
To answer this question, we’ll use the assessment skills we’ve sharpened in the
previous chapters. We’ll start at ground zero and just observe, then work on
collecting the who, what, when, and where. We’ll pay attention to our perceptual
filters and make sure we’re only drawing objective conclusions. We’ll then
change our perspective physically and mentally, reorienting ourselves to better
see both the small details and the big picture. Once we finish that process, we’ll
analyze all of the data and decide what’s most important.
Let’s practice with the following painting, called Time Transfixed by René
Magritte, currently in the collection of the Art Institute of Chicago. Use all of the
observation and perception techniques we’ve learned so far and list all the facts
you can find. You can write them down or just catalog them mentally; I just
want you to articulate what you notice. And I want you to notice what you
notice, so don’t keep reading until you’ve given it a really thorough once-over.

René Magritte, Time Transfixed, 1938.
Now check off everything you saw:
____ a train coming out of a fireplace; more specifically, a black and gray steam locomotive traveling out
of a fireplace and suspended several feet above the floor
____ smoke or steam emerging from the engine’s front-most smokestack
l d
i h
hi
fi
l
i h
l

____ a mottled grayish white fireplace with a mantel
____ a black clock with a round white face containing Roman numerals on the mantel
____ two brown metallic-looking candlesticks flanking the clock
____ a large gold-colored framed mirror mounted above the fireplace
____ the wood-grain floorboards; bonus points if you counted fifteen
What about the smaller details? Did you note any of the following?
____ that the locomotive has ten wheels, only six of which we can see
____ the red stripe along the side of the train and the red bumper on front
____ the light-brown wainscoting on the walls surrounding the fireplace
____ that the time on the clock appears to be 12:42
____ the shadow of the train in the fireplace pointing southwest
____ that only the left candlestick is reflected in the mirror
____ that the steam from the train flows up into the chimney instead of out into the room
Now let’s order the facts from both sections by numbering them in the chart
on page 157 from most to least important. Since the level of importance will
change for each situation and each person evaluating it, I’m going to give you
some parameters:
1. Let’s say you were called into an apartment, such as Linda Stein’s, to
investigate a murder. In column 1, number each fact according to what
might be the most important.
2. Imagine that this is the house of a missing person, such as Annie Le. How
would the order of importance change? In column 2, number each fact
according to what you now believe to be the most important.
3. Now it’s the drawing room of a billionaire and the scene of a massive art
heist. In column 3, number the facts in order of importance.
4. Let’s shift gears and imagine you’re an interior designer called in to
completely gut and renovate this space. Use column 4 to number the facts
according to what might be the most important.
5. Finally, if you’d been hired by a historical society to renovate and preserve
this room, what would be the order of importance of what you’ve seen? Fill
in column 5.
We can see how prioritization changes depending on circumstances. For a
murder investigation, the most important items would be the candlesticks as
potential weapons. For a missing-person search, it would be the time on the
l
k F
h i
i
ld b
h
i
h
l f b hi d E
h
h

clock. For an art heist, it would be the train that was left behind. Even when the
order of importance remains the same—both an interior designer and a historical
preservationist would be most concerned about the wood floor, wainscoting, and
fireplace surround—the reasons for those priorities are different: a designer is
looking at the scope of demolition, while a preservationist views the same things
with an eye toward refurbishment. Ultimately, there’s no single right answer, as
long as we are prioritizing what we know with a specific purpose in mind.
That said, we must still catalog and list the facts that may not be relevant to
the purpose at hand. We might have no idea what a train is doing in a fireplace,
but that doesn’t mean we can ignore it.
1. MURDER
INVESTIGATION
2.
MISSING
PERSON
3.
ART
HEIST
4.
INTERIOR
DESIGNER
5. HISTORIC
RENOVATION
 
 
 
 
 
 
a train coming out of a fireplace, or more
specifically, a black and gray steam
locomotive traveling out of a fireplace and
suspended several feet above the floor
 
 
 
 
 
smoke or steam coming out of the engine’s
front-most smokestack
 
 
 
 
 
a mottled grayish white fireplace with a
mantel
 
 
 
 
 
a black clock with a round white face
containing Roman numerals on the mantel
 
 
 
 
 
two brown metallic-looking candlesticks
flanking the clock
 
 
 
 
 
a large gold-colored framed mirror mounted
above the fireplace
 
 
 
 
 
the wood-grain floorboards; bonus points if
you counted fifteen
 
 
 
 
 
that the locomotive has ten wheels, only six
of which we can see
 
 
 
 
 
the red stripe along the side of the train and
the red bumper on its front
 
 
 
 
 
the light-brown wainscoting on the walls
surrounding the fireplace
 
 
 
 
 
that the time on the clock appears to be
12:42
 
 
 
 
 
the shadow of the train in the fireplace
pointing southwest
 
 
 
 
 
that only the left candlestick is reflected in
the mirror

 
 
 
 
 
that the steam from the train flows up into
the chimney instead of out into the room
Sarah Grant, The Furniture City Sets the Table for the World of Art, 2009.
During an assessment exercise I showed the photograph above—which is an
actual, unaltered photograph of an outdoor art installation in Michigan—to one
of my classes and asked a young man to describe it. He did a great job, except
that he failed to mention the table and chairs on top of the bridge. He left them
out not because he didn’t see them but because he “didn’t know what to make of
them.” That is not a valid reason for omitting a fact. It doesn’t matter if you
don’t understand it; someone else might. Ignoring the unknown can be
dangerous.
When email had just started to become mainstream in the mid-1990s, many
companies didn’t know how to handle the sudden influx of new customer
contact. One well-known corporation—a large, public entertainment destination
for happy families—simply ignored it. For months. Executives told their
customer communications department not to worry about email and not to
respond at all because they believed people were just sending comments “into
space” and didn’t expect a reply back. Two things quickly changed their minds.
The New York Times ran a front-page article about how Fortune 500 companies
were bungling their email policies; this company was not mentioned, but
management realized it could easily have been. And a tech-savvy employee who
was working on the company’s first website discovered that bomb threats were

being sent via email. Immediately, the company put together a team to figure out
how to manage this new reality of modern communication effectively. It was
lucky that ignoring the unknown didn’t literally blow up in their faces.
So we’re cataloging and still prioritizing what we see even if we don’t know
what we’re looking at. Now let’s look at what to do about the things we don’t
see.
WHAT DON’T I KNOW?
Answering this question takes skills very similar to the ones we used to answer
the previous question, but instead of searching for what’s there, we’ll search for
what isn’t. In many instances, what is not present is as important as what is. This
concept is called the “pertinent negative”in emergency medicine, and it’s
defined as “the absence of a sign or symptom that helps substantiate or identify a
patient’s condition.” For instance, a doctor with a patient complaining of
shortness of breath might listen for a crackling sound in the patient’s lungs. If
it’s not found, it can help rule out pneumonia. The crackling sound is the
pertinent negative: it’s usually present, but in this case it isn’t.
Knowing that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle studied medicine under the tutelage of
the notoriously observant Dr. Joseph Bell, it should come as no surprise that his
most famous fictional creation was exceedingly adept at using the pertinent
negative. We can see this skill in an exchange between Sherlock Holmes and
Scotland Yard’s Inspector Gregory while they’re investigating a murder in the
short story “Silver Blaze.” Inspector Gregory initiates the dialogue quoted
below, and Holmes responds:
“Is there any point to which you would wish to draw my attention?”
“To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time.”
“The dog did nothing in the night-time.”
“That was the curious incident.”
The dog’s failure to bark was the clue that broke the case and pinpointed the
murderer as someone the victim (and the victim’s dog) knew.
Within and beyond the world of medicine, the absence of an object, event, or
behavior can help identify or substantiate a situation. When we are observing
what we see, we must also note the important information we don’t see,
especially if we’re expecting it to be there.
Look again at the painting on page 154 and list what’s missing.
Did you note the following?

____ no candles in the candlesticks
____ no tracks under the train
____ no fire in the fireplace
Identifying the pertinent negative helps give our observations more
specificity. By articulating what is conspicuously absent, we are giving a more
precise description of what we perceive. When we purposefully state the
pertinent negative, we are more accurate. It isn’t enough to say that there are
candlesticks on the mantel. If we just say “candlestick,” at least half of our
listeners will assume there are candles in them. We have to specify that there are
no candles to debunk assumptions.
Most of my classes notice the missing candles, whether they state it or not, but
almost everyone forgets to mention that there is no fire in the fireplace. If you
ask people to draw a fireplace, sight unseen, chances are they will put some logs
and a fire in it. That’s what fireplaces are for. So the absence of a fire is
important information.
The pertinent negative can lead to the big break, the elusive solution, or a clue
we might otherwise never have gotten. In fact, it’s so powerful that just hearing
about it from a three-minute online video on my website helped solve a
homicide.
North Carolina District Attorney’s Office investigator Gerald Wright was
called to investigate a fatal boating accident. The report filed by the witnesses on
board claimed that their boat had unexpectedly rolled in the water, causing one
of the occupants to be ejected and killed. All the officers on the scene knew that
something about the situation wasn’t adding up, but they didn’t know what.
When Wright arrived to search the vessel, he found on the deck in the bow a
mesh bag that contained a collection of documents: ownership papers,
electronics manuals, insurance information. Nothing about them seemed out of
the ordinary until Wright recalled my lesson on the pertinent negative. What was
missing from the boating accident that should have been there? Water. He
realized that if events had played out as the witnesses claimed they had, the
papers in the boat would have been wet, and they weren’t.
His observation led to a complete investigation, including a forensic download
of the vessel’s navigation system that ultimately proved that it hadn’t rolled
over. Instead, it pitched to one side and ejected the passenger, who was then
struck by the propeller as the boat was steered back around to circle the victim.
The “accident” was reclassified correctly as a homicide.
I work with resident advisor programs on college campuses, and one of their
biggest problems is “Velcro parents” who can’t seem to let go of their children.
Th
i
di
f
RA’
i
i h
i

These parents can consume an inordinate amount of an RA’s time with anxious
phone calls: “I haven’t heard from my son in twenty-four hours. Is he safe?” The
RA can go look in the room, but RAs aren’t keepers or concierges; if the student
isn’t there, the RA generally has no idea where he is. Colleges are big, and
college students are exploring their newfound freedom; they often don’t check in
with their parents.
An RA can’t simply tell parents that their child is gone; it won’t ease the
parents’ minds or stop the checkins. Instead, I teach them to employ the
pertinent-negative search that investigators use when trying to determine if a
missing person is a kidnap victim or a runaway. Aside from the person, they
look at what else is missing. Where is the student’s phone, laptop, wallet, keys?
If those things are gone, the person most likely chose to leave and isn’t in
danger. RAs can employ the pertinent negative when assessing the big picture of
what might have happened: Is the student a loner, not checking in with others
regularly, or is a lapse in connection with parents and friends completely out of
character and therefore a real sign of danger?
Medical personnel can also tell a lot from who is missing; the absence of
relatives and friends in the hospital speaks volumes about a patient’s life and
support system. Teachers can note the same in parents’ level of involvement in
their child’s classroom, or lack thereof.
Actively cataloging what’s missing can also help us zero in on what we need.
Organizational consultant Terry Prince recommends looking at who, what,
where, and when from a “missing perspective” when project planning. “Who do
we not need? What should we not include? Where are we not going? When are
we not doing this?”
A teenager in Michigan used the pertinent negative to help the less fortunate
in her city. While walking through downtown Detroit for a Martin Luther King
Jr. Day procession, Hunter Maclean noticed something missing from her fellow
marchers. Although the temperature on the January morning was well below
freezing, most of the people walking, including many children, lacked hats and
gloves. Determined to fix the problem, Hunter started a collection at her high
school. Her charity, Warm Detroit, has since expanded to five other schools and
delivered more than two thousand hats and gloves to homeless and women’s
shelters in her area.
Acknowledging what we don’t know can be as important as identifying what
we do. This doesn’t just include the pertinent negative or what’s missing, it also
includes the information we gathered that is subjective, unclear, or based on an
assumption. We cannot act as if these things don’t exist. Admitting them up
front and labeling them correctly can lead to the extra data necessary to turn a
“not sure” into a “definite ”

“not sure” into a “definite.”
Many people leave out what they don’t know because they mistakenly think it
shows ignorance or a lack of hard work. Asking the question “What don’t I
know?” is not the same as throwing out an “I don’t know.” In truth what you are
saying is, “No one right here right now knows, and I was observant enough to
notice this important fact and open it up for others to help me find the answer.”
If we reframe our attitude about it, others will follow.
Our boss or project manager or partner wants to know if something isn’t
heading in the direction that was anticipated, if something isn’t working, and
what’s missing. The sooner we find out about an issue, the sooner it can be
fixed. Letting others know what’s missing shouldn’t be looked upon as a
shortcoming by us or our superiors. Instead, view it as an opportunity to further
investigate and collaborate.
Managers need to remove any stigma to allow their employees to feel
comfortable bringing unknowns to their attention. A corporate culture that
doesn’t support honest and objective observation and reporting because of
executive expectations will lead employees to fill in the gaps, which isn’t good
for anyone. For instance, in chapter 4 when we studied the risk of assumptions,
we reviewed some of the findings of the Iraq Intelligence Commission’s report
about the events leading up to the Iraq War. The report concluded, “Perhaps
most troubling, we found an Intelligence Community in which analysts had a
difficult time . . . identifying unambiguously for policymakers what they do not
know. Too often, analysts simply accept these gaps; they do little to help
collectors identify new opportunities, and they do not always tell decision
makers just how limited their knowledge really is . . . Analysts must be willing
to admit what they don’t know in order to focus future collection efforts.
Conversely, policymakers must be prepared to accept uncertainties and
qualifications in intelligence judgment and not expect greater precision than the
evaluated data permits.”
Imagine that your organization faced the same internal scrutiny the
intelligence community did. How would it rate in employees’ willingness to
admit what they don’t know and managers’ willingness to accept that
information? In analyzing data, collaboration is key. Everyone needs to know
what we know as well as what we don’t.
WHAT DO I NEED TO KNOW?
The final question to ask in any situation: if I could get more information about
this scene or situation, what specifically would I want to know? Asking this
question can help us prioritize potential follow up work by showing us where to

question can help us prioritize potential follow-up work by showing us where to
dedicate our time and resources. Of course, our needs for additional information
will vary depending upon our personal experience, job, and reason for looking; a
law enforcement officer will seek to fill different holes than a potential employer
will.
Let’s practice with Edward Hopper’s Automat painting on page 60. In chapter
4 we assessed it in detail, and in the end, there were many things we did not
know.
We did not know the following:
the identity of the woman in the green coat
her age
where she lives
where she works
why she is in the Automat
what she’s drinking
what’s she’s already eaten or drunk, if anything
her mood and overall personality
her reason for being out alone
her marital status
the name of the Automat
where it is located
what time it is
where the woman’s missing glove is
why it is missing
Look back over this list from the point of view of your job or primary daily
responsibilities. Now prioritize by number which answers would be the most
important for you to find out—which answers might lead to other answers. You
now have a personalized priority list explicitly showing what things you would
need to work on finding out first.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
To see the three-question prioritization method in action, let’s revisit my
surprising shoot-to-kill experience at the North Carolina FATS session and see
how I prioritized information in the third scenario with the man holding a bag
running out my back door. I’ve been doing this a long time, and it’s second
nature to me now, but here’s what transpired automatically in my brain:

What do I know?
My son is home alone.
There is a strange man in my house.
He’s running away carrying something.
What don’t I know?
Where in the house my son is.
If my son is safe or hurt.
Who the stranger is.
If the stranger has a weapon.
What the stranger is carrying in his bag.
What do I need to know?
Whether my son is all right.
In this instance, the home was my own, my son was crying out, and I had a
loaded gun. Without me even realizing it at the time, my priorities informed my
actions and resulted in the death of an unarmed man. The outcome might not
have been the same for someone with different priorities, but I’m grateful that
the simulated experience gave me a chance to review and practice prioritizing
outside of a real-life incident. Knowing what our priorities are ahead of time or
as soon as information presents itself will help everyone involved, before,
during, and after an event.
Now let’s practice prioritizing using our three-question method on the
following photograph:

What do we know? As we learned in the assessment chapters, let’s start with
who. There are four white women standing at a rough-hewn wooden railing.
Easy enough, yes? However, we don’t want to jump to conclusions, even on the
simple stuff. Are they women? Yes, they appear to be. Are there four of them?
Look again. Unless one of them has a bionic arm, there is a fifth person we
cannot fully see with her hand across the right shoulder of the woman to the far
left. So there are five people. Each woman we can see has a hand to her face.
One of the women is wearing glasses. All of the women have on long-sleeved
dresses and are wearing their hair swooped back from their face in a similar
style. The woman third from the left wears a watch on her left wrist.
I’ve had participants tell me that the women belong to a religious
organization. One was positive they were “Amish,” since she grew up in
Pennsylvania and knew what the Amish were like. While it might be a good
guess, it’s still an inference. Based on our observations alone, we have no proof
that they are Amish or religious in any way. They could be historical reenactors.
What other facts do we know? What about where? They are outdoors. We
can’t assume that they are in a rural setting or what kind of building they are in
front of, as we can’t see it. What about when? Someone told me that it looks like
a modern photograph even though the women are wearing old-fashioned
clothing. I agree. The photo was not taken one hundred years ago but is more
recent. How recent—1980? 2014? We don’t know because of their old-
fashioned dress. We can see that it is daytime, but that is all.
L t’ l
k t th
d
i
iti
ti
ti
h t d
’t
k
? W

Let’s look at the second prioritization question: what don’t we know? We
don’t know these women’s relationship to one another. We don’t know where
they are. We don’t know when this photograph was taken; what they are looking
at; why their faces are registering emotion that could be grief, horror, disbelief,
or sadness; or what they are feeling.
Finally, what do we want to know? Everything, of course, but let’s prioritize.
Looking back over what we don’t know, what one fact would answer the most of
our unanswered questions? The single most important question that would give
us the most answers is: what happened?
As it turns out, I can tell you. In April 2008, Texas authorities raided the
Yearning for Zion Ranch outside Eldorado, a compound owned by the
Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, a polygamous sect
led by Warren Jeffs. More than four hundred children were taken into custody.
This photograph shows some of the mothers watching the scene unfold. By
prioritizing all of the information we don’t know and boiling it down to “we’d
like to know what happened,” we just answered the majority of the other
questions: who the women are, what their relationship to one another is, where
this happened, and why.
While other people might have scrambled in different directions trying to
track down who the women were or where this took place, by narrowing our
focus to what we most wanted to know, we obtained the most answers in the
shortest amount of time.
URGENT VERSUS IMPORTANT
As you prioritize information, be aware of the difference between urgent and
important. Urgent concerns scream for our attention, but they usually offer only
short-term solutions. Important things contribute value in the long run. While
sometimes urgent tasks are also important, more often the urgent obscures the
important.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower was well known for prioritizing his daily
duties by sifting the urgent from the important; time management experts today
still recommend the Eisenhower Decision Matrix. Brett McKay and his wife,
Kate McKay, authors of the best-selling Art of Manliness advice book series,
explain why it’s so effective: “Urgent tasks put us in a reactive mode, one
marked by a defensive, negative, hurried, and narrowly focused
mindset . . . When we focus on important activities we operate in a responsive
mode, which helps us remain calm, rational, and open to new opportunities.”

Almost everyone today operates under resource constraints—a lack of time,
people, or money. Urgent is not likely to ever go away. Recognizing this stress
can help you cut through it.
Let’s look back at the pumpkin patch photograph on page 151. The house on
fire is definitely an urgent fact, but is it the most important? Let’s use our three-
pronged prioritization technique to find out.
What do we know? There’s a two-story, yellow painted house on fire being
attended to by a fire truck with a telescoping ladder behind a pumpkin patch at
McLean’s Farm Market in the autumn.
What don’t we know? Where the pumpkin patch and house are located. How
the fire started. Why the customer shopping for pumpkins seems so unconcerned
about the blaze in the background.
What is the most important piece of information we need to know that will
help us answer the most questions? The house on fire is urgent, but the more
important mystery concerns the dispassionate shopper.
Examining the shopper more closely might help us figure out why he’s so
blasé about the nearby fire. He is wearing a bulky, yellow coat, which
considering that the temperature might be chilly in autumn isn’t that striking. He
is also wearing a helmet and boots: rubber boots with the telltale colored stripe
on top. He is a fireman. Let’s analyze this new fact.
Why of all people would a fireman be casually picking pumpkins in the face
of a house fire? Could he possibly not know about it? In rural settings such as
this, the fire departments don’t comprise thousands of people as in a big city, so
chances are that he knows about the fire. And he’s still shopping. When is a
fireman not concerned about a fire? When he knows it was set on purpose as a
training exercise.
Photographer Joel Sternfeld happened upon this scene when he was traveling
across the country in his Volkswagen van. The title of his famous photograph,
published in Life magazine, revealed nothing more than a time and place:
McLean, Virginia, December 1978. Viewers and critics alike took it at face
value: damning evidence of professional incompetence, Nero hunts for
pumpkins while Rome burns. Sternfeld confirmed only later in his career that the
photo did in fact depict a controlled training exercise and a fireman taking an
honest break. Had someone, anyone, followed up on the most important fact—a
browsing firefighter—the truth could have been discovered much earlier.
WHAT OUR PRIORITIES SAY ABOUT US
What’s important to one person might not be important to another, but make no

mistake, how you prioritize can tell the world—your bosses, coworkers,
partners, friends, children—a lot about you.
Over the holidays a photographer in Erie, Pennsylvania, hoping to get a
heartwarming shot, visited a charity warehouse where local children were
allowed to pick any three things they wanted. Most chose toys or dolls. A few
chose new tennis shoes. But one child’s choice stood out: he selected Cheerios,
toilet paper, and toothpaste. Without saying a word, the child communicated his
priorities, and in doing so offered a peek into his personal life. Unlike the other
children, who were part of an after-school care program, this boy was homeless.
Before it was acquired by Delta, Northwest Airlines had a reputation for
prioritizing passenger comfort over the cost of fuel. Aviation enthusiasts who
tracked Northwest’s flight patterns recorded that the airline gave a wide berth to
turbulence, while other planes flew right through it. Knowing Northwest’s
priorities helped customers decide whether or not to use the airline based on
their own priorities: whether a smooth ride was more important to them than a
quick flight.
We must be conscious of what our priorities tell others. Does our boss know
the lengths we’ll go to to secure a new deal? Do our loved ones know they rank
higher than our professions? Does our date know she is more important than that
phone call? Do our kids know that spending time with them outweighs
everything? Whether we’re aware of how we advertise our priorities or not, we
are advertising them.
I took a group to see the painting Dowager in a Wheelchair by Philip
Evergood in the Smithsonian American Art Museum. It’s a very large—3 feet by
4 feet—very busy painting of a well-dressed elderly woman being pushed down
a crowded New York City street by a well-dressed younger woman. They pass
mothers with baby carriages, shoppers carrying parcels, people walking dogs.
They are bordered on the left by cars and a taxi, and on the right by an apartment
building.

Philip Evergood, Dowager in a Wheelchair, 1952.
The painting is a cacophony of color and movement and is painted from an
unusual perspective. Flowers bloom from window boxes. The naked backside of
a woman in red high heels can be seen through the window. The woman in the
wheelchair herself is covered with details. She wears a flower-patterned orange
and purple hat with a gauzy veil over her face, a purple choker, long black
gloves that creep well past her elbows, and three bracelets on one wrist. She has
on low black heels with a Mary Jane strap. Spectacles sit on her lap. And her

filmy lavender dress, hemmed with lace or revealing a petticoat underneath, is
see-through.
There’s a lot going on in the picture. How do you prioritize it? If the first
thing you say is “nipples” instead of “old woman in a wheelchair,” people might
wonder why. Be honest about what you see, but know that the order in which
you present that information reflects upon you. Take the time to organize your
observations and what you believe is critical, and be able to back up your
reasoning before you make your thoughts public.
  *
Prioritizing information, especially if we’re not used to doing it, might feel at
first like it’s slowing us down, but it’s an integral step in the organization and
analysis of information. Thankfully, as with all of the other skills described in
this book, the more we consciously prioritize, the quicker and more automatic
the process will become. And in the end it will save time and energy because it
helps to focus future action in the right direction.
Prioritization helps us order what we’ve already collected. We just need to
think carefully, especially in a professional context, about what we believe is
important before presenting our findings. The next step: learning how to
effectively articulate what we’ve discovered.

PART III
Articulate
The difference between the almost right word and the right word
is really a large matter—’tis the difference between the lightning-
bug and the lightning.
—MARK TWAIN

8
Making Your Unknown Known
How to Avoid Communication Breakdowns
IN 2001 THE DISAPPEARANCE of twenty-four-year-old government intern Chandra
Levy sparked a media frenzy when the investigation revealed that she’d been
having an affair with married congressman Gary Condit. In the absence of
information about her whereabouts, Levy became fodder for popular culture
including jokes on late-night talk shows and a name check in a hit song by
rapper Eminem (“How can one Chandra be so Levy?”). Her body wasn’t
discovered for over a year, her killer wasn’t prosecuted for eight years, and as
most of his case is tied to an alleged jailhouse confession, he has been granted a
new trial.
It was a sad, prolonged, and unfortunate situation for everyone involved, but
one aspect stuck with me for a long time: that a single word might have derailed
the entire investigation.
After Levy left her house, her friends and family had no idea where she was
headed. She literally disappeared without a trace, leaving behind her phone,
credit cards, and driver’s license. It took over a month to recover the last search
results on her laptop, which indicated an interest in Washington, DC’s, Rock
Creek Park, a 1,750-acre enclave nearly four times the size of New York City’s
Central Park.
On July 25, 2001, eighty-five days after she disappeared, dozens of DC police
officers assembled to search the sprawling natural area. Orders were to look one
hundred yards off all of the park’s roads. By the end of the day, they called off
the search, having found nothing.
It was later determined that the actual order was to explore one hundred yards
off all the park’s trails. Someone in the chain of command had changed a crucial
word. The assumption that “roads” and “trails” were the same thing dramatically
shrank the search area. Levy’s body wasn’t discovered for another ten months—
seventy-nine yards off one of the park’s trails. A single miscommunicated word
likely led to the delay of discovery and meant most of the forensic evidence that
could have positively identified her killer was gone.
Seeing what others don’t or what could change everything is only half the
battle. We can have prodigious observational and analytical skills, but if we’re

battle. We can have prodigious observational and analytical skills, but if we re
not effective communicators, it doesn’t do us or anyone else any good. A
discovery is useless to society until it’s communicated to others. We can spend
all the time in the world gathering and analyzing data, but if we don’t articulate
it correctly, no one else, including ourselves, will ever benefit from it. And yet
every day around the world lack of communication and miscommunication
cause problems that could have been avoided, including lost evidence, lost
opportunities, lost loves, even lost lives.
After an operation in southern Afghanistan on June 9, 2014, a special ops
group of American soldiers was returning to base when insurgents ambushed
them. A United States–chartered B-1 bomber answered their call for support by
swooping in and deploying two missiles . . . directly on top of the troops they
meant to protect. In one of the worst instances of friendly fire in Afghanistan in
over a decade, five Americans and their Afghan ally died. The official cause:
miscommunication.
In a three-hundred-page report released by the Pentagon, air force major
general Jeffrey Harrigian concluded that “had the team . . . communicated
effectively, this tragic incident was avoidable.”
I recently took a group of analysts to a museum in Washington, DC, and we
stopped in front of a large—over 6 feet high by 15 feet wide—painted image by
James Rosenquist called Industrial Cottage. It shows a gray-framed window in
the middle. To the left against a bright red background two strips of bacon hang
from a clothesline next to a steam shovel. The right side of the work has a
mostly bright yellow background punctuated by four drill bits. It’s odd and
colorful and a lot to take in, but the group I was with analyzes situations for a
living.
“How would you describe this?” I asked. Having already been through the “#1
and #16” painting and photograph exercise we covered in chapter 5, they were
ready to point out all the details, both small and obvious.
“There are three panels,” one participant declared.
We were standing inches from the work. Being so large, it was painted across
five separate canvases that were hung one beside the other. The gaps were not
painted over; they were clearly visible. Five panels. Not three.
“Well, it’s painted to look like three,” he amended. “Same difference.”
“Same difference” isn’t just a colloquial and ambiguous oxymoron; in this
case it’s incorrect. There is a difference. Physical panels are not the same as
thematic panels. Three is not the same as five.
Think about all of the situations where three versus five would make a huge
difference: in information that passes between military commanders and their
officers, doctors and their patients, pharmaceutical companies and their

,
p
, p
p
customers. Precision in objective description is just as important to accountants,
journalists, teachers, architects, engineers, chemists, analysts, stockbrokers,
human resource managers, researchers, archivists, assistants, even delivery
people. No person or business can afford to waste time and resources getting it
wrong.
In 2008 the global analyst firm IDC surveyed four hundred companies in the
United States and the United Kingdom and calculated the total estimated cost of
poor communication to be $37 billion a year. The loss in productivity per
employee per year resulting from communication barriers: $26,041. IDC
maintains that these figures are low, as they don’t include the cost of
miscommunication on brand, reputation, and customer satisfaction. A full 100
percent of the companies also reported that miscommunication put their
employees or the public at risk of injury, while 99 percent revealed that it put
their sales and customer satisfaction at risk as well.
Of course, our job isn’t the only area of our life that demands precise
communication. The same is true for our academic pursuits, personal interests,
and relationships. Sometimes our words are misunderstood or accidentally
repeated incorrectly; other times they come out wrong to start with, buried in
emotion or simply tossed out without proper thought or precision. The
importance of getting it right is compounded by modern communication
technology, since our instantaneous, continuous, universal connectivity increases
the likelihood of simple but devastating miscommunication. And those errors
aren’t likely to go away, since the Internet has an infinite memory. Whole Foods
CEO John Mackey is still living down the 2007 discovery that he created a
fictional identity on Yahoo message boards to compliment his company and
himself. In a March 21, 2015, broadcast, the host of NPR’s Wait Wait . . . Don’t
Tell Me, Peter Sagal, reminded his listeners, “Among [Mackey’s] many posts
about Whole Foods and what a great company it is, he said, quote, ‘I like
Mackey’s haircut. I think he looks cute.’”
A message as short as a tweet can be ruinous. People fired for their tweets
include a law fellow at New York University, a senior editor at CNN, a director
at the National Security Staff at the White House, and the chief financial officer
of public retail company Francesca’s Holdings. Firefighters, actors, teachers,
journalists, IT consultants, waiters, and even mechanics are among the people
who have found themselves holding a pink slip after sending out a single tweet.
A damning online post can not only hurt an employee, it can also bring derision
and damage to an entire company—just ask (or Google) Qantas, McDonald’s,
Vodafone, Kenneth Cole, or Chrysler.

In March 2015, former major league baseball pitcher Curt Schilling sent a
tweet congratulating his teenage daughter for committing to a Catholic
university’s softball team. College student Adam Nagel and recent college
graduate Sean MacDonald tweeted Schilling back with what USA Today politely
labeled “sexual violence and innuendo.” Nagel was suspended from his college,
scheduled for a conduct hearing to determine further disciplinary action, and
turned over to the police. MacDonald’s former fraternity publicly condemned
him, and he promptly lost his job with the New York Yankees. Headlines across
the country proclaimed YANKEES FIRE EMPLOYEE OVER VULGAR TWEETS without
mentioning that MacDonald was a new hire, only part-time, and had worked for
the team for a mere eighteen hours.
Even when they don’t originate on the Internet, communication missteps will
likely be recorded there for the world to read and judge ad infinitum. For this
reason, it’s more important than ever to be able to communicate effectively in
any form because whatever we write or say in public will also end up replayed,
ridiculed, or rewarded in cyberspace.
Effectively articulating what we see allows us to correct misperceptions
before they continue any further. We’ll never know if the person next to us saw
something differently if we don’t give voice to our observations and inferences
in both personal and personnel instances. Our partners can’t read our minds. We
might have deduced something about the job candidate incorrectly. We might be
misreading a potential donor. Expressing our perceptions gives other people the
opportunity to address or redress them. Effective communication also helps set
expectations. If we can’t articulate what we expect from others, we’re setting
them and ourselves up for frustration at best and failure at worst. Giving others
clear instructions, requirements, and goals helps us achieve progress,
completion, and success.
To hone our skills and help avert potential information-dissemination
disasters, we’ll turn again to the art world—although this time we’ll dig a little
deeper and discover that the secrets to good communication can be unveiled by
studying how art is created.
THE ART OF COMMUNICATION
I don’t think it’s a coincidence that two of the twentieth century’s most famous
and ferocious communicators—Winston Churchill and Adolf Hitler—were avid
painters. Throughout their lives, Churchill and Hitler produced hundreds of
works: landscapes, seascapes, still lifes of flowers spilling from vases, and even
the occasional portrait (Hitler painted Jesus’ mother, Mary, while Churchill

captured his wife, Clementine). It makes sense because artists are inherently
communicators, most compelled to share their message with the world no matter
what the cost. Or as Georgia O’Keeffe put it, the life of an artist is not driven by
success; rather, “making your unknown known is the more important thing.”
Artists know they are artists not because they’ve been recognized as such or
have a degree or win certain awards. They identify as artists because they can’t
help but create. Sculptor and MacArthur Fellowship recipient Teresita Fernández
articulated it this way: “Being an artist is not just about what happens when you
are in the studio. The way you live, the people you choose to love and the way
you love them, the way you vote, the words that come out of your mouth, the
size of the world you make for yourselves, your ability to influence the things
you believe in, your obsessions, your failures—all of these components will also
become the raw material for the art you make.”
To enhance our communication skills, we must do the same thing: recognize
that we don’t have to have the word communication in our job title or
department name to be a full-time communicator. We are all communicators
because we all have a constant need to communicate. Everything in our lives,
including what we see and how we choose to see it, becomes the raw material
for our communication. We can make sure we are using it wisely to make
masterpieces and not mistakes when we approach communication the same way
an artist prepares for, executes, and exhibits a work of art.
Regardless of how easy or effortless the finished product might seem, a
painting, sculpture, or any other work of art relies on a specific and almost
standard process. While the details of the process might vary from person to
person, those differences are only superficial; for instance, while a sculptor will
require different tools than a photographer, they will both need to learn the best
way to work with them, that is, wield a hammer or arrange a camera. The
underlying process is ultimately the same: the artist must marry a concept with a
medium, or what she wants to say with the mode she uses to express it.
Likewise, we will learn that regardless of what we are communicating and the
methods we use to communicate it, we can build the best message with the same
study of planning, practice, and thoughtful execution. The first step: prudent
planning.
CHOOSE WISELY
Although the finished product, particularly in modern and avant-garde artworks,
might seem to have required little thought, even Jackson Pollock’s abstract drip
paintings were not done haphazardly. Pollock famously stated, “I can control the

flow of paint: there is no accident.”
The artist must deliberately choose what materials to use. Pollock had to
decide what kind of paint would work best for his vision—choosing consistency,
color, amount, availability, durability, even price. Similarly, even though they
can come to us spontaneously and seemingly without thought, we should view
our words as the artist views paint: as a tool that must be carefully pondered and
selected before use. The single decision of what colors to use is extremely
important for artists. In the same way, we must decide ahead of time which
words we will use when communicating to make sure we are painting the most
accurate picture possible.
Think about the words you regularly use. What color are they? And are they
the best choice for your message? Are you covering your employees with a dark
red when a sky blue might be more effective? Do you wash your teenage son in
neon green when he might respond better to a subtle gray?
Of course, no color is inherently bad or good; it all depends on when and
where it’s used. Yellow might be perfect for a birthday party but not for a
funeral. The words we say to our friends at happy hour would probably not work
as well in a boardroom. To determine if we’ve chosen the right hue for the right
situation, we need only to ask ourselves if we’re using objective or subjective
words. Subjective words can be used, albeit still carefully, in social settings,
while objective should be used for everything else.
Just as we must be objective in our observations and inferences to keep our
investigation focused on facts, when we’re in professional or public situations,
we need to communicate using only objective language. This is especially true in
employee evaluations, human resources, and educational settings, and
heartbreakingly so in instances involving children.
One of my past participants, Anne Charlevoix, a special education teacher and
a member of her school’s multidisciplinary evaluation team, recalled how a
teacher once came before their committee insisting they create an intervention
plan for one of her first-graders. Asked to describe his need for assistance, the
teacher offered the following: “He is so lazy, he complains constantly, and he
never does his work.” When the team asked for specific examples of these
behaviors, the teacher struggled to provide them. She had made up her mind
about the child but was at a loss to explain why. She didn’t think she needed any
more reasons than that he was lazy and complained, but those reasons were her
subjective opinions. When Charlevoix completed an in-class assessment of the
student and recorded objective information about his performance, behavior, and
actions, the committee determined that the child had a personality conflict with
his teacher but that he didn’t need special services.
“Y
l
d
h
” h
ld
l
“ f h

“Your class made me so much more aware,” she told me later, “of the power
of the language we use and how easily we can create an inaccurate impression
when we speak subjectively.”
The easiest way to ensure that we’re communicating objectively is to
consciously choose objective words. Surefire, always safe objective words
include numbers, colors, size, sounds, position, placement, materials, location,
and time. Instead of saying “too much,” give the actual amount. Instead of “big,”
include a measurement, estimation, or comparison.
In most cases subjective language is easy to spot: it’s opinionated and not
based in fact. There are, however, some tricky subjective signal words that can
cause our listener to tune out or, worse yet, turn against us if we’re not careful.
Here are a few of them:
SUBJECTIVE
WORDS AND
PHRASES
TO AVOID
WHY?
HOW TO AVOID THEM
Obviously
Clearly
Because many things in this world aren’t obvious,
and even fewer are clear. (Remember Renshaw’s
Cow?)
Instead of saying “Clearly it’s x,” or
“Obviously y,” try using “It appears
that x is based on y and z.”
Never
Always
Never and always are not precise and are statistically
very improbable, therefore often used in
exaggeration.
Instead of saying “never” or
“always,” give a concrete, definitive
number. If that isn’t possible, it is
better to use “frequently” or
“seldom.”
Actually
In cases of correction, actually signifies that the
speaker is very sure the other person is very wrong
before an explanation is even offered. Leading with a
possible insult is not a great way to get results.
Instead of saying “actually,” try
using “I don’t believe . . .”
It goes
without
saying . . .
If something is important, then it goes with saying.
Just eliminate “it goes without
saying” from your vocabulary
altogether.
It can be especially easy to slip into the subjective when we’re critiquing,
correcting, or upset with the person we’re communicating with, but in doing so
we run the risk of alienating the very person we’re meant to help. For instance,
consider the word bad. Bad is an opinion, is open to interpretation, and has a
negative connotation. Using the word bad to describe how your child acted when
you were on the phone isn’t objective or particularly helpful to anyone involved
because kids can’t fix bad. (And feeling bad about themselves might make them
act even worse.) Instead, communicate using objective facts: “You were yelling
when I was on the phone.” Yelling is a concrete action, a behavior that can be

changed. Reporting that someone was yelling doesn’t convey personal judgment.
There’s no room for argument either: the child was yelling or wasn’t. The same
goes for a work situation. Rather than calling an employee’s quarterly sales
“terrible,” use indisputable facts: “You missed your sales quota by 30 percent.”
Another trick to help curb the subjective is to replace exclusive words with
inclusive. Instead of saying, “This doesn’t work for me,” instead use “What if
you tried . . . ?” or better yet, include yourself in the team with “Why don’t we
try . . . ?”
Like the artist who has chosen a color palette, we’ve chosen the words that
will work best, but we must go further. The artist will not go to the paint store
and ask simply for “blue paint”; a true artist will be more specific. Paint can be
watercolor, oil, or acrylic. Paint can come in a can or a tube or spray from an
aerosol. Paint can be thick or thin, toxic or even edible, fast-or slow-drying. Blue
can be indigo or cobalt or ultramarine.
To avoid similar confusion with our words, we must add specificity. Instead
of saying “car,” be more specific and say “SUV”; instead of “dog,” try “German
shepherd.” Similarly, we shouldn’t say “mother” if we can’t prove it; instead use
“woman with child.” Saying “on this side” isn’t specific enough, especially for
someone not standing where you’re standing and seeing what you see; instead,
give a position: “to the far left.” Rather than “thing” or “stuff” or “colorful,”
elucidate more precisely.
A lack of specificity in communication cost artist Christian Alderete dearly.
When Alderete was chosen by the city of Pasadena, California, to participate in
the pilot Neighborhood Enhancement Mural Program, he was thrilled. Backed
by a government grant, he spent over two months creating a colorful, Mayan-and
Aztec-themed, sixty-foot masterpiece and got thirty local kids involved as well.
Arts and Culture Commission chairman Dale Oliver called the mural
“spectacular.”
But just a couple of months after it was completed, someone painted over it
entirely, kids’ signatures and all.
The shopkeeper of the store decorated by Alderete’s art had received a letter
from Pasadena’s Planning and Community Development code compliance
program warning her to remove extraneous signage and repaint a wall in
disrepair or face being shut down. Which wall wasn’t specified.
Jon Pollard, the city’s code compliance manager, admitted that there was
“some miscommunication.”
Alderete put it differently. “It’s like a kick in the face,” he said. “It was
something living. Something I hoped to see become a landmark in the city.”
Businessman Joe Lentini also learned an expensive lesson about the

importance of specificity when he dined at Bobby Flay Steak at the Borgata
Hotel Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. When ordering drinks for his table of
ten, he told the waitress he didn’t know much about wine and asked her to pick a
bottle for him.
“She pointed to a bottle on the menu. I didn’t have my glasses. I asked how
much and she said, ‘Thirty-seven fifty,’” Lentini recalls.
Bobby Flay Steak has a twenty-four-page wine menu that offers more than
five hundred choices. The majority are less than $100 a bottle, with a selection
of “50 under $50” highlighted on the first page, so when Lentini received the bill
and saw that instead of the $37.50 he was expecting, he was charged $3,750, he
was aghast. He called the waitress over immediately and explained that he would
never have ordered such an expensive bottle of wine. She in turn brought over
the manager.
“I said the waitress told me it cost ‘thirty-seven fifty,’ not ‘three thousand,
seven hundred and fifty dollars,’” Lentini said.
While the waitress disagreed, other diners confirmed Lentini’s exchange. Don
Chin, the patron sitting on Lentini’s left, recalled what was said when the wine
was ordered. “Joe had asked for a suggestion on the wine and the waitress
pointed to a wine,” he said. “Joe asked the price and she said ‘thirty-seven fifty,’
not ‘three thousand, seven hundred and fifty,’ which is what I would have said,
so we all thought it was $37.50. We all had a heart attack [when the bill came].”
Instead of removing the item from the bill, the restaurant’s management
offered to discount the price of the bottle of Screaming Eagle wine to $2,200.
Lentini reluctantly paid, then took his story to the press.
When the story was picked up nationally, Borgata executive vice president
Joseph Lupo responded, “Borgata is confident there was no misunderstanding
regarding the selection. We simply will not allow the threat of a negative story
that includes so many unaccounted and questionable statements to disparage our
integrity and standards, which Borgata takes great pride in practicing every day.”
The restaurant explains that another person at the table was made aware of the
exact price of the bottle before the check was delivered, which that person
confirms; however, he asserts that the revelation occurred only after the bottle
was opened and drunk and the damage was done.
Simply because the Borgata management claims that there was “no
misunderstanding” doesn’t make it so. The fact that the two sides—business and
customer—do not agree about why the incident occurred is the very definition of
a misunderstanding. So let’s look at the miscommunication involved.
According to multiple accounts, the waitress signified the price of the bottle of
wine using a vague shortcut: “thirty-seven fifty.” Without the specificity of
d ll
d
h
i
f
i
d
di
S
i
“ h
h
d

dollars and cents, there is room for misunderstanding. Saying “three thousand,
seven hundred and fifty dollars” or “thirty-seven hundred fifty dollars” would
have removed any room for error.
The restaurant wine list is also not as specific as it could be to alleviate
potential problems. The prices of the hundreds of bottles of wine are listed
without dollar signs or decimal points or commas. Does “900” mean nine
hundred dollars or nine dollars? Especially considering that the steakhouse is
located at a tourist destination popular with foreign visitors, the lack of
specificity lends itself to miscommunication.
When the manager was called over to sort out the situation on the spot, before
it became public, he had further information about his restaurant’s wine list: of
the more than five hundred regular-size bottles of wine listed, only seventeen are
priced over $1,000, and only one bottle is more than $3,750. He knew that the
waitress served someone who professed not to know anything about wine the
second most expensive bottle among five hundred choices.
While it can be argued that Lentini and the Borgata and Bobby Flay Steak all
paid dearly for the miscommunication—was $2,200 worth the cost of negative
publicity?—the incident did produce one example of exceedingly good
communication in the form of the original article by reporter Karin Price
Mueller. In her piece for NJ.com, she reported only the facts of what happened,
where it happened, when, and with whom. She interviewed the people involved
directly, and didn’t name anyone who didn’t wish to be named, including the
waitress. She even pointed out possible perception errors to her readers: “We
weren’t at the table so we don’t know what was said when the wine was
ordered” and “We don’t know what the waitress did or did not say. We only
know what Lentini remembered, and what Borgata said it learned when it asked
the employees who were there.”
Specificity not only protects against miscommunication, it can also lead to
greater success. After taking my class, Lieutenant Tom Holt, who coordinated
the NYPD’s Grand Larceny Task Force, changed the way he communicated with
his twenty-four plainclothes officers. “Instead of telling my people that the guy
who keeps looking into one parked car after another is dressed in black,” he
explained, “I might say he’s wearing a black wool hat, a black leather coat with
black fur trim, a black hoodie sweatshirt, and Timberlands.” This new specificity
helped his department apprehend more of the shoplifters, pickpockets, and purse
snatchers who regularly stalked the Times Square area.
In the quest for specificity, however, remember to be wary of assumption.
When describing a painting out loud in one of my sessions, a student said that
the subject was “standing next to European architecture.” Sounds specific, yes?
“How do you know the man in the painting is in Europe?” I asked He didn’t It

“How do you know the man in the painting is in Europe?” I asked. He didn’t. It
could be a museum or a pavilion at Disney World. Instead of assuming a
location you can’t verify, describe the pillars and sconces that you see.
CONSIDER THE AUDIENCE
Although many artists and writers dream that their work will be seen by
everyone, the reality is that it can’t. Some audiences are larger than others, but
“everyone” is not a realistic goal. The viewer of a commissioned portrait of a
loved one will likely be a different person from a Coachella Valley Music and
Art Festival attendee, with a very different mind-set.
An artist’s knowing her audience and planning for it is a marker of
competence to seasoned agents, publishers, and collectors. Literary agent Susan
Ginsburg notes that one of the most common mistakes she sees in query letters,
especially from first-time authors, is the promise that a book will appeal to
“everyone.”
“Publishers need to know that they can position a book so that it sells well in a
particular market,” she says. “They can’t do that if the author doesn’t even know
who his audience is.”
Just as a sculptor must plan a piece based on where and how it will be
installed and exhibited—a work placed outside in a public space might require
different materials and viewing angles than one designed to be seen in a gallery
—we must plan for our audience when crafting good communication. Not
everyone will see the same way and not everyone will hear the same things
either, especially if we’re not tailoring the message to the person with whom we
are communicating.
After one of my classes, a medical student named Josh Bright came up to me
and shared how fine-tuning communication is an essential part of patient
interaction.
“I never thought of myself as a translator, but that’s essentially what we’re all
doing when we communicate effectively: we’re translating our message to one
another. When I see patients, they describe their complaints and concerns to me
subjectively because it’s about how they’re feeling. I then translate that into
objective symptoms that can be treated,” he said. “However, if I speak to them
from my own reference point, they might not understand. In fact, the medical
terminology generally confuses or alarms people. I have to translate my own
message of diagnosis into something that’s easily understood from their
perspective.”

The same applies to almost every exchange we have. To make sure our
communication is tailored to the people we’re trying to reach, research who they
are. In 2001, when Sara Blakely first created footless panty hose for her new
company, Spanx, she flew to London to cold-call the buyers at Harrods, Harvey
Nichols, and Selfridges as she had done successfully a few months earlier in the
United States with Neiman Marcus. Since her only product at the time was a
novel concept—you cut the feet off your control-top stockings?—she spent much
of her energy trying to explain what Spanx was and why people needed it.
While in London, she also landed a live interview with the BBC. Slightly
punchy from a combination of jet lag and nerves—the interview would reach
more than a million people—Blakely hoped to cover any anxiety with her
trademark thousand-watt smile.
Her male interviewer, as confused as everyone else to whom she had tried to
describe her new naughty-sounding shapewear, cut right to the chase: “So Sara,
tell us what Spanx can do for women in the UK.”
Blakely answered with a huge smile of confidence, “Well, it’s all about the
fanny. It smooths your fanny, it lifts your fanny, and it firms your fanny.”
Fanny wasn’t a word she regularly used, but she thought it sounded safe and
British and would help ease the minds of any uptight listeners. As the color
drained from her interviewer’s face, she got the feeling that she’d chosen the
wrong word.
“I think you mean bum,” the interviewer said, interrupting her.
“Yes, sure. Bum,” she conceded, recognizing the polite British word for
“bottom.”
When Blakely got off the air she found out that while fanny was a quaint way
American grandmothers might refer to a bum, in England it was a very crude
slang term for “vagina.” While she meant to simply describe how her product
would discreetly transform the appearance of cellulite on a woman’s buttocks,
she had instead announced on live radio that it would smooth, lift, and firm
women’s vaginas . . . and used a dirty, dirty word to do so.
Think about your audience. Do they call their customers guests, patrons,
members, or users? Are there certain words that are off-limits in their
environment, like fanny? Tailor your message accordingly.
When the Colorado Bureau of Investigation wanted current inmates to help
solve cold cases, they communicated the pertinent information of the unsolved
cases in an unusual way: by printing it on playing cards that were then
distributed for free in the county jails. The hope was that inmates would be more
receptive to the information if it was presented in a way that was accessible, easy
to read, and literally at their fingertips. CBI cold-case analyst Audrey Simkins

says the strategy worked. “We have gotten about four dozen calls, and are
opening the doors on those cases.” Currently used in seventeen states across the
country, the cold-case playing cards have been credited with solving forty cases
and generating hundreds of tips.
Just as we did with perspective to gather as much information as possible,
before we communicate we should step into the shoes of our potential audience
and make sure we’re including all of the facts that would be pertinent to them
but also translating that knowledge into a language that can readily be
understood and accepted.
CONCRETE PRACTICE
Once the artist has selected his materials and considered his audience, he is
ready for the next step: practicing. Practicing actually straddles the stages of
planning and execution, since it’s a little of both: we are planning for the final
product with an early execution of it.
While practice efforts are called different things in different creative
professions—the sketch, the rough draft, the model, the dress rehearsal—they
share a physical reality. Practicing art isn’t just thinking about something, it’s
doing it. Author Dani Shapiro writes, “Think of a ballet dancer at the barre. Plié,
elevé, battement tendu. She is practicing, because she knows that there is no
difference between practice and art. The practice is the art.”
In the same way, we must practice our communication skills if we are to
master them. Practice will not only help us fix the things that aren’t quite ready
for prime time but can also help us become more comfortable delivering our
message.
Not everyone is a born orator. Some of us are just naturally quiet, some are
paralyzed by the thought of opening our mouths, while many of us are more
comfortable behind our computers or in our laboratories. Thankfully, speaking in
public, speaking when we’re nervous, and speaking when we’re not used to
doing so are skills we can master with practice. And for those with a fear of
speaking in public, media trainer Bill Connor has good news: practice can trump
personality. “I’ve seen supremely self-confident men and women swagger up to
a podium full of bravado but lacking in preparation, only to completely bomb,”
he says. “They try to wing it, and find they’ve run out of material in 30 seconds.
I’ve also seen shy people take the time to prepare and practice, and then deliver
moving, funny, impactful messages in a way that influences audiences and
advances their own agendas.”

Quiet author Susan Cain’s number one tip for public speaking, especially for
introverts: “Practice it out loud, until you’re comfortable.” To do that, we just
need to speak.
It sounds elementary, and in many ways it is. We tell children to “use their
words,” but we frequently don’t, relying instead on electronics, photographs, and
vague gestures. We need to say what we see.
My son’s preschool teacher told me years ago that she didn’t think he was
verbal enough. She warned me of the well-documented links between language
development and literacy, and confessed that children with inadequate
communication skills were harder to test not just for kindergarten readiness but
also for other possible underlying issues such as developmental language
disorders or autism. She suggested that to encourage his verbal communication I
practice my Art of Perception exercises out loud with him. So I did. Everywhere
we went, instead of just talking to him as I normally had, I would encourage him
to describe to me in detail what he saw. We started talking about all the things
we saw and why we thought they looked that way, and he hasn’t stopped talking
since! In a great role reversal, as we walk the streets of New York City together
today, my son will say, “Did you just see who walked by?” or “I bet you didn’t
notice what just happened across the street.” He catches me at my own game and
often asks, “Could you explain that a bit more clearly?”
To practice our out-loud communication skills, look at the following painting.
What do you see? Write three or four objective sentences that best distill the
important information.

René Magritte, The Key to Dreams, 1927.
The painting is by René Magritte, who often painted words onto his images.
(We’ve already looked at two of his other works, the ham on the plate with an
eyeball in chapter 2 and the train coming out of the fireplace in chapter 7.)
Magritte once said that he aimed to make “everyday objects shriek aloud”—a
fitting goal for better communication.
This painting, The Key to Dreams, is part of a series in which Magritte
explores the nature of representation. Of the four pictures, three are incorrectly
identified by their captions; only the one in the lower right corner is correct. A
bag is labeled “the sky.” A knife is labeled “the bird.” A leaf is called “the
table.” Only the sponge is as it says it is. The juxtaposition of images and words,
especially presented in the style of a vocabulary primer or flash cards, gives us
pause. We are forced to take a step back and rethink what we are seeing.
Now let’s get you talking. Take the sentences you wrote about the painting, go
find someone, and read them aloud. Don’t show the person the painting, as that’s
often how we’re communicating: conveying what we see to someone who can’t
see it. This is simple yet valuable practice in verbalizing our findings.
To test how well you communicated the objective facts, ask the person to
draw the painting based on your description. If you find you haven’t included
enough information for the person to replicate it, go back and write a different
description that conveys the information more accurately.

THE IMPORTANCE OF EDITING: WHY SAYING TOO MUCH CAN BE
AS BAD AS NOT SAYING ANYTHING AT ALL
Those two little words at the end of the previous section—“go back”—represent
the third, and perhaps most important, stage in creating both art and
communication: editing.
Art is about more than just adding paint to canvas; many times it’s equally
about subtracting. Teresita Fernández’s advice to graduating art students, which
MIT Fellow Maria Popova called “an ennobling moral compass for being a
decent human being in any walk of life,” included the tip: “Purge regularly.
Destroying is intimately connected to creating.”
Amsterdam-born painter Jan Frank, known for his intricate ink drawings and
massive, modern plywood paintings, agrees. His goal with every work is to
apply “as little to the surface as possible . . . The more complex it becomes,” he
says, “the more I dislike it.” How does he know when a painting is finished?
“When I get the feeling that adding one more stroke would be one too many.”
Ralph Steiner, American Rural Baroque, 1930.
Editing includes knowing how much is too much and when to leave well
enough alone. As I was writing this chapter, I kept thinking of a famous

photograph from 1930 of an empty chair. The work, Ralph Steiner’s American
Rural Baroque, captures an empty wicker rocking chair casting a shadow on a
porch. The image is simple yet striking: the ornate patterns from the rocking
chair contrast with the straight lines of the wall, floor, shutter, and column. We
don’t expect an unoccupied rocking chair to make a statement, but it does. It
narrates a story about the eloquence of emptiness, about the romance of a past
era. To include a human presence would have ruined it both figuratively and
literally, as the wonderful design of the chair back would disappear.
Likewise, when we communicate, we need to make sure we aren’t obscuring
our message with “too much” by talking too much, using too many words, or
including unnecessary information. Former sales executive Jess McCann, author
of Was It Something I Said?, believes that our tendency to go overboard in both
professional and personal communication comes down to discomfort; we’re
uncomfortable either because of the act of speaking—due to our personality or
because we’re in a high-pressure situation—or because of the information we’re
meant to impart. We might have no trouble conversing with friends in a casual
setting, but when asked to deliver a poor quarterly earnings report or answer our
child’s questions about sex, we suddenly come down with a case of what
McCann calls “verbal vomit.” To counter this common problem, she
recommends using the KISS principle, an acronym adopted by the US Navy in
1960 to remind its designers that in many cases less is more. KISS stands for
“keep it short and simple” and is applicable whether we’re composing an email
at work or turning someone down for a date afterward.
Paralegal Cara W. was filled with anxiety about her first date with Dan. She
considered herself “unlucky” in love and was nervous that she would doom the
relationship before it ever started. How should she talk about her past
relationships? Keep from nervously monopolizing the conversation? Let him
know that she didn’t want to move too fast? McCann gave her the same answer
for every situation: prepare with KISS.
“Most of us stumble into self-talk because we don’t take any time to sit down,
think, and prepare,” McCann tells me. “We feel this innate need to say more, but
in most cases, we don’t need to elaborate. When we do, we just end up confusing
the person we’re talking to.”
She counseled Cara to make a list of the questions she was most worried
about, helped her edit the answers until they were short and simple, and then
made her practice answering them. Instead of telling Dan that she had gotten
physical too soon in past relationships and regretted it, McCann instructed Cara
to simply say, “I really like you, I just want to get to know you a little bit better.
I hope that’s okay?” Instead of answering the question “Are you seeing anyone

else?” with a long explanation about who and for how long, her fear of dying
alone, or how she had dated half the college football team, they crafted a simple
two-word answer: “Not exclusively.” When the night of her big date with Dan
finally came, Cara wasn’t her usual nervous self because she had prepped and
practiced what she was going to say. Armed with her edited answers, she was
able to enjoy the evening and really focus on connecting with her new friend.
Excellent communicators are concise. They make every word count. To
practice the skill of precisely distilling language, look at the following
photograph and describe it in just one sentence. Write only your observations,
devoid of assumptions and inferences.
Did you include any of the following words: “woman,” “child,” “church,”
“pew,” “sitting,” “hand,” “face”? Good, as those are the most important.
Hopefully you didn’t write “mother” or “her child,” as that would assume a
relationship that might not be true. What about “twelve,” the number of people
we can see? Great. You could have further differentiated the scene by stating
that of the twelve people we can see, ten are standing, while two, a woman and a
child, are sitting.
You might have noticed other details that are true but not important enough to
warrant inclusion in a single sentence, including: circular light, boots, striped
shirt, jeans, and cross-legged. Remember to prioritize.

Did you use the term “African American” in your sentence? Most people do,
but that’s a subjective inference, not an objective observation. You are assuming
that the people are in America and are in fact of African descent. Can you tell
where this photograph was taken? Are there any clues that would suggest
location such as a flag or writing of any kind? No. So, we cannot assume. The
people might be in Haiti, or they might be in America but of Jamaican descent.
Many people worry that using the term “black” would be construed as racist, and
“African American” would be more politically correct. I understand those
concerns, and we need to be thoughtful and never offensive, but going too far
with political correctness and perceived politeness can also keep us from
specificity and accuracy. Unless we know it for a fact, “African American” is an
assumption, and if the people are Haitian citizens, it’s incorrect. Don’t worry
about being politically correct, worry about being correct. “Black” is a
descriptive term. Black is an observation of what we see. It’s perfectly
acceptable and a more objective observation to describe the people in this
photograph as “black.”
Did you include any of these words to describe the woman: “upset,” “crying,”
“sad,” “agitated,” “distressed”? The little girl does appear to be comforting the
woman; her hand to the woman’s cheek is gentle, her face is calm, possibly
worried. But remember that the little girl is a child. She might not understand
what she is witnessing. The woman has her own hand to her face, which is
contorted by emotion, but can you tell what kind? Is she upset, sad, or agitated?
Is she crying? She might be, although we can’t see tears.
It’s tempting to immediately see the woman on the ground, her face contorted,
and assume she has collapsed in distress, but that is an assumption. It might be
true, but we need facts to back it up. Let’s look at the rest of the photograph.
What are the other people around the woman doing? Are they distressed? We
can only see the faces of four of them, but none of them appears to be upset.
Two look expressionless, and two others are smiling, one with hands in the air,
open, by her face. Maybe she’s clapping?
The body language of everyone besides the woman and child is also telling.
They are all looking forward, past the woman. No one looks at her or reaches
down to help her. If someone was in distress, wouldn’t the people around her
react? What about the man in the background center? What is he holding? I’ve
had people say it was a “gun,” but that’s incorrect. Look closer. It’s not a gun.
Also, the pews signify that the setting is most likely a church. The likelihood of
an unconcealed weapon in a church is small. The man is in fact holding a
microphone, possibly attached to a camera.
What is going on in the photo? The people are in a church, but are they

participating in a service, or is it just a meeting? Where is the church? Why are
the people gathered? Who or what are they looking at? When is this taking
place?
This is the important information that we do not know, that if we could find,
would help us tremendously. Since this is a photo and we have access to the
photographer, David Goldman, we can get answers to some of those questions.
Let’s see if we can piece the story together with some missing facts.
Who is it? The woman seated on the floor is Latrice Barnes. The child is her
daughter Jasmine Redd, age five. So we have confirmation of their relationship.
Do we know what is going on in the photo yet? No, but now that we have a
positive identification, we could possibly contact her.
Where is it? The First Corinthian Baptist Church in Harlem, New York. So we
are in the United States, but we still can’t assume everyone in the photograph is
African American.
When is it? Tuesday, November 4, 2008. Does that date have any
significance? Yes, it does. From the New York Times: “On Nov. 4, 2008, Barack
Obama was elected the 44th president of the United States, defeating the
Republican nominee John McCain. Mr. Obama, a United States senator from
Illinois who was the son of a Kenyan father and a white mother from Kansas,
became the first black commander in chief.” Notice the New York Times does
not call Obama the first African American president, it calls him the first black
one.
Latrice Barnes is on the floor of the church because she was overcome with
happiness at the historic election results. She might be crying, but they are tears
of joy and hope, not despair or anguish.
We are not expected to know more than we can observe, but we need to
correctly observe what we can. Our reporting should not include assumptions or
incorrect information that would lead someone else down the wrong path.
Let’s try another photo, but this time I want you to describe it in only five
words. You may not think you can say much with just five words, but that’s
exactly what the headline writer did when this image appeared in the New York
Times. If the headline writer could do it, so can you!

Did you use any of the following words: “teenagers, young people,” “sitting,”
“stoop,” “smiling,” “flip-flops,” “five”? All are good! I’ve heard “summer”
because of the teenagers’ dress, but it could be an unseasonably warm spring or
fall day; “warm” would be more accurate. Hopefully you didn’t include any of
the following assumptions: “NYC,” “flirting,” or “family.” Some of the
examples I’ve been given include “teenagers at stoop flip-flop party,” “teenagers
out enjoying warm weather,” and the witty but not terribly descriptive “four
teenagers and fifth wheel.”
The actual five-word headline for this photograph shocked me.
It read: “Teenage Summer, the Fasting Version.” What? Reading the
accompanying story enlightened me in many ways. The photo showed five
teenagers who were observing Ramadan, a monthlong period during which
Muslims fast from sunup until sundown. The article explained that to conserve
energy many young people wear flip-flops during Ramadan so they aren’t
tempted to participate in sports. The headline was brilliant in that it was correct,
objective, and provocative. It made me read the article to see what was going on
(which is generally the purpose of a newspaper headline), and I changed my
assumptions when I did. All because of five little words.
DON’T LET BAD PAINT DRY
Even with preparation and editing, artists aren’t always happy with their finished
composition. However, when they find that something they’ve painted isn’t

working for whatever reason—a hat is too large, a hand is slightly askew, a
beached whale is found to be an unappetizing addition to a seascape meant to
hang in a dining room—they don’t just shrug it off and leave it be. They correct
and rework. This process happens so often in the art world that there’s even a
name for it: pentimento, from the Italian word for “repentance.” Whether the
offending strokes are painted over or scratched off, they must be remedied as
quickly as possible lest they become permanent.
When John Singer Sargent was trying to make a name for himself in France,
he convinced the society celebutante, fellow American Virginie Amélie Avegno
Gautreau, to pose for him. Like the rest of Paris, he was enamored with her pale,
powdered skin, and what he called her “unpaintable beauty.” This seven-foot-tall
portrait debuted at the Paris Salon in 1884 to instant scandal in part because the
strap of Gautreau’s dress hung loosely off her right shoulder, a suggestion of
sensuality inappropriate for a married woman. Gautreau’s own mother
demanded that the painting be removed from the exhibition before the end of the
first day, crying, “My daughter is lost! All of Paris mocks her!”
Afraid the family would destroy it, Sargent took the painting into his own
studio and amended it to have the strap sit securely on Gautreau’s shoulder, as it
does today. But it was too late; his career in France was finished. Sargent had
hoped his enthusiastic model would be buoyed by its reception and pay him a
higher price than he could normally command. He was wrong. The Gautreaus,
and the rest of Paris, wanted nothing to do with him. He fled to London, telling
friends that he considered giving up painting altogether. Sargent kept the portrait
in his private studio until 1916, a year after Gautreau’s death, when he sold it to
the Met under the condition that it be renamed to erase all reference to the
model. Three decades later, the revised Madame X finally received the critical
and public praise it deserved.
Likewise, we must fix our communication mistakes as soon as we’re aware of
them. If we don’t, the long-term consequences can be damning.
In 2006, after thirty long hours of searching for thirteen miners trapped after
an underground explosion in Sago, West Virginia, the International Coal Group
finally had news for the families gathered nearby in a local Baptist church:
twelve men were recovered alive; only one had died.
“We were told they would be coming to the church to greet their families,” the
Reverend Jerry Murrell recalled. “They even told us which door they would
come in, and how to prepare, that immediate family members should line up
first. People were singing songs. Kids were dancing in the aisles. The
exuberance just began to build; it was just unbelievable.”

Albumen print from a scrapbook of photographic
reproductions of paintings by John Singer
Sargent.

John Singer Sargent, Madame X (Madame
Pierre Gautreau), 1883–1884.
As the reported “miracle” set the church bells ringing at midnight, company
executives learned the devastating truth: the opposite was true—only one man
had survived, and the other twelve had perished. Unbelievably, they waited two
and a half hours to correct the miscommunication. When the families were told
the truth, without an apology, according to one miner’s son, celebration turned to
pandemonium. People fainted, others lunged at officials, some threatened to go
home and get their guns. The long delay in correction made a terrible situation
even worse. A family friend told CNN, “We waited and waited. Loved ones and

families stood out on the porch wrapped in blankets waiting for their fathers or
brothers to come up and give them a hug.”
“In the process of being cautious, we allowed the jubilation to go on longer
than we should have,” Bennett K. Hatfield, International Coal Group’s chief
executive, admitted.
The mishandling of sensitive information caused the media to come down
even harder on the mining company and label it a “crisis upon a crisis.”
International Coal Group never recovered. The company’s stock, trading for $11
a share before the accident, fell to just above $1 in 2009. The company no longer
exists, having been acquired by Arch Coal in 2011.
Public relations executive Scott Baradell says it didn’t have to be; “Hatfield
should have met with the families as soon as it was evident that false hope was
spreading and told them this: ‘We’ve found the men, but we do not yet know
how many of them are alive. We are checking their vital signs. As soon as we
learn more, we promise you’ll be the first to know. Please be patient with us.’”
People will be more forgiving and patient with us when we own up to our
errors and correct them as soon as we discover them. Don’t let the paint dry or
the dust settle on a communication mistake. Instead, make it right as soon as
possible.
MAKING SURE THE MESSAGE IS RECEIVED
Once the work is finished, the artist has a final decision to make: how it will be
displayed so that it is best received. Should it be hung at eye level or rest on the
floor? Should it be framed or not? Will a frame enhance or distract from the
work?
Georges Seurat, known for his pointillism painting technique—using tiny dots
of color to create large scenes—left nothing to chance. He designed special
frames for his massive works, and even restretched his original 6-foot-by-10-
foot canvas of people relaxing on the shore of a lake, A Sunday on La Grande
Jatte, so he could add a border of red, orange, and blue dots to provide the
perfect visual transition between his work and the rest of the world. Van Gogh,
too, famously obsessed about how his paintings would be framed, painting plain
wooden frames with yellow crosshatches when he couldn’t afford traditional
gilded ones. Matisse called the four sides of a frame “the most important parts of
a picture.”
In many ways, the most important part of our message is also how we convey
it so that it is correctly received. All the preparation in the world won’t help if
we turn off our audience or make them tune out. The first thing we must pay

attention to is how we’re framing our message with our body language and
nonverbal communication.
Albert Mehrabian, professor emeritus of psychology at UCLA and a pioneer
researcher of body language, calculated that “the total impact of a message is
about 7 percent verbal (words only), 38 percent vocal (including tone of voice,
inflection, and other sounds) and 55 percent nonverbal.” Like a giant, gilded
frame that completely overshadows a subtle work of art, our tone, facial
expression, and posture can change the way someone receives our message. Our
subtext, intentional or not, can make the difference between engaging a listener
and driving her away.
Joe Navarro, body language expert and the author of What Every Body Is
Saying, advises that to deliver good communication with good nonverbal
communication, at least in America, we need to greet others with a firm
handshake and look them directly in the eyes. When shaking hands, a confident
grasp is firm, not limp and not crushing. Shaking too loosely can give the
impression that you are weak or can’t be bothered; alternatively, shaking too
hard can give an impression of dominance or aggression. Looking someone in
the eye when communicating, whether as speaker or listener, is also important
because it tells the other person that you are engaged and paying attention to
him. Of course, we don’t want to stare someone down or just glance fleetingly at
him; the right amount of time to look someone else in the eye is as long as it
takes to note eye color.
If you deal with people from other countries, you should research the basics of
acceptable nonverbal communication cues for that culture. I had a colleague who
often spoke to Japanese audiences and was mystified as to why, unlike every
other group, they never had any questions after her presentation. When she
found out that often in Japan, people don’t raise their hands to be acknowledged,
they simply look at the speaker and hope to be recognized, she felt awful. For
years she had seen people look expectantly at her, probably burning with
unasked questions, and she had never called on them. Every country and region
has its own etiquette, and the Internet makes it easier than ever to research
what’s proper and what’s not before you communicate with someone outside
your culture.
There is one gesture that we should universally avoid: pointing. Employees at
Disney are trained never to point in public because in many countries the gesture
is considered rude, but perhaps even more important, because it is ambiguous,
and lazy. If a guest asks, “Where is the nearest bathroom?” and the employee
just points into the distance, that employee is conveying that she doesn’t care,
that she hopes the guest will ask someone else a little farther down the way, and
h i
’
i i
h
l
id
I
d Di
l

she isn’t giving the guest any real guidance. Instead, Disney employees must use
specific instructions that include nearby landmarks. A more complete, more
helpful answer would be “The nearest restrooms are about twenty feet down on
the right, just past the bamboo gate. If you run into the spitting camel, you’ve
gone too far.” Pointing leaves far too much open to interpretation that can’t be
translated into the written word. “See that thing? Right there?” What thing?
Where?
Relying on pointing also short-circuits vital deductive analysis. Forcing
specific articulation increases our focus, will deliver a more detailed account,
and creates a superior memory of the observation. That’s especially important
when information is disseminated for years, such as when an eyewitness or an
officer, a caseworker or a teacher, has to repeat her description of an experience
later in court.
Most of the people I teach have real trouble with the no-pointing rule. Even
groups who you would think would naturally be more descriptive speakers, such
as journalists, can’t stop pointing, especially in a visually stimulating
environment such as a museum. It may take a little retraining of your hands, but
keep them lowered when you speak.
When I tell people they can’t point, invariably someone tries to circumvent
the rule by motioning with his head. No good. We must be aware of our
nonverbal communication, but we cannot let it replace our words. Body
language is not an acceptable substitute or shorthand for saying what we see.
THE SECRET
I was on a flight recently when the cabin crew told a joke: How do you keep a
secret from a flight attendant? Announce it over the intercom. As my son would
say, “It’s funny because it’s true.” Unlike the passengers, who hang on every
word from the cockpit, flight attendants tune out intercom announcements
because they’re not messages meant for them. They communicate with the
captain in different ways, generally with lights and those doorbell-like chimes
coded to avoid raising public concern.
Even though we can do our best to tailor our message to our audience,
tailoring content is no guarantee that they will listen. To help ensure that our
communication is received, we need to take a few final steps in our delivery. The
secret for doing this successfully entails what I call the three Rs: repeating,
renaming, and reframing.
The First R: Repeating

Andy Warhol established himself as the king of pop art with a simple idea: the
repetition of images. Whether it was Campbell’s soup cans or a grid of Marilyn
Monroe faces, once you saw a Warhol image, you couldn’t forget it—because
you saw it more than once in the same place. We can apply this concept to
communication, not by repeating ourselves but by asking our receiver to echo us.
Simply asking our listeners if they’ve heard us isn’t enough. Organizational
psychologist Dr. David G. Javitch advises, “Do not ask the person if he or she
heard you or understood you. The answer to both questions is almost always yes.
Why? Because no one wants the boss to think she’s ignorant or wasn’t paying
attention, or that she misinterpreted the message.” Instead, do what air traffic
controllers do with their pilots to make sure your message was received: ask
your listeners to repeat it in their own words. If the waitress at the Bobby Flay
Steak restaurant had the customer repeat the price, hearing “thirty-seven fifty”
said out loud again might have sparked him or one of his dinner companions to
question it and ask for a clarification.
If you’re uncomfortable asking someone to repeat the information verbatim,
you can prompt him by asking him to rank it. Javitch recommends, “Ask the
receiver what the most difficult, easiest or complicated steps will be to carry out
the task.”
The Second R: Renaming
Nine years after Picasso completed a large oil painting featuring five nude
females with angular and disjointed bodies, he was finally ready to let it out of
his studio for public display. As the work depicted prostitutes on the street
outside a brothel in Barcelona, Picasso had named it simply Le Bordel
d’Avignon (The Brothel of Avignon), calling it mon bordel (“my brothel”) for
short. The work itself was shocking enough thanks to the primitive, carnal poses
of the women, so Picasso’s friend André Salmon, the poet, rechristened it for the
1916 Salon to Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (The Young Ladies of Avignon), to
make it more palatable to a scandal-shy public. The name stuck, and the
painting, now on permanent view at the Museum of Modern Art, is considered
one of Picasso’s most influential works. Changing the name of the painting
didn’t change the content or composition in any way, but it did allow it to be
better received.
When we reach a barrier of understanding, a simple name change can be all
that’s required to overcome it. New York Times best-selling author Harvey
Mackay suggests, “Sometimes you can get what you want by calling it by
another name. Let’s say your opponent does not ‘renegotiate’ contracts. Okay.
What if we call it a ‘contract extension’? Your opponent says no to severance

pay? Okay, it’s a ‘consulting contract.’” As long as it’s an accurate synonym and
doesn’t change the meaning, think Shakespeare: “A rose by any other name
would smell as sweet.”
The Third R: Reframing
The curators at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC, have always
been proud that so many works in their collection are exhibited in their original,
artist-designed frames. However, they were shocked to discover in the 1990s
that not every frame was correctly matched to its intended artwork. Upon closer
examination, they found that the original Winslow Homer frame displaying his
work Right and Left was actually too small for the painting and obscured
important details. The frame was a perfect fit for a different Homer work that
lacked an original frame, Hound and Hunter. The frame was swapped and a
new, larger one created that allowed Right and Left to be fully appreciated.
If the information you’re trying to convey isn’t resonating with your audience,
try to reframe how you are presenting it. I’m reminded of an anecdote from the
mid-twentieth century that perfectly illustrates the impact of reframing our
communication.
An elderly blind man was sitting on a busy street corner at rush hour begging
for money. He had a cardboard sign next to his tin cup that read: BLIND. PLEASE
HELP. The cup was empty.
A young advertising copywriter walked by and saw the blind man, his sign,
and his empty cup, and noted that people walked right past him unmoved. She
took a pen from her pocket, turned the cardboard sign around, and scribbled a
new message on the back. She left it with the blind man and went on her way.
Immediately, people began putting donations in his cup. When it was
overflowing, the blind man asked a stranger to tell him what the sign now said.
“It reads: IT’S A BEAUTIFUL DAY,” the stranger said. “YOU CAN SEE IT. I CANNOT.”
Changing the way we present our information can drastically change how it’s
received. People are always surprised when I tell them that the average Art of
Perception seminar is three hours long. Three hours is a long time to listen to one
person speak, and while I do have a lot of information I want to impart, I’m
careful in how I frame it: with lots of interactive visuals, collaborative exercises
that require participants to get up and talk with their colleagues, and frequent
museum tours. By the end, most participants tell me they could stay with me
another three hours.
AN INVITATION

I recently attended an art exhibition in New York titled In the Studio, which
explored how artists represented their own workspaces in art. While vastly
different, the works were all personal statements on the artists’ relationship to
the sacred place where they create their messages.
German-born British artist Lucian Freud, grandson of Sigmund, depicted his
studio in a painting called Two Japanese Wrestlers by a Sink. Instead of showing
a serene room with large windows, easels, or a single brush, the image is almost
entirely taken up by an ordinary, rather dirty basin; the titular painting of
wrestlers is off to the side and severely cropped. The sink is more central to this
painting and to the process that produced Freud’s art than perhaps any other
single element. By showing it front and center, Freud reminds us that his art, his
creative communication, didn’t appear by magic but was the product of
planning, practice, and purpose.
In another piece, The Painter and the Buyer, a sixteenth-century self-portrait
sketch by Pieter Brueghel the Elder, Brueghel stands in his studio holding a
brush before an unseen canvas while an onlooker hovers over his shoulder. It’s
significant that Brueghel incorporated the viewer into a self-portrait, as it
confirms the artist’s recognition that his communication isn’t just about what he
wants to create but is equally about how others will see it. While an artist’s end
product might seem effortless and universal, it is neither. Rather, all works—at
least the good and memorable ones—are created deliberately with consideration
for the buyer, end user, or viewer.

Pieter Brueghel the Elder, The Painter and the Buyer, c. 1565.

Richard Diebenkorn, Studio Wall, 1963.
Finally, I had to stop before Richard Diebenkorn’s painting from 1963. I
found it remarkable because unlike his abstract landscapes, Studio Wall is more
representational and accessible: it shows the artist’s work hanging on the wall
and appears to offer the viewer an empty seat, inviting him into the studio, as it
were. That’s what both art and communication are: an invitation. An invitation
to let others into our brain, to let them know what we see and how we see it.
  *
Now that we’ve reviewed good communication skills in regular situations—
product launches, press conferences, social media interactions, theme parks,
restaurants, and even first dates—let’s explore how to keep our cool and keep
communicating effectively in times of stress and duress.

9
Big (Naked, Obese) Sue and the High School Principal
How to See and Share Hard Truths
WE’VE COVERED THE tenets of good communication for day-to-day situations, but
what about when we need to communicate but we really don’t want to—when
we’re confronting the difficult or stressful, the unsavory or even taboo, the
things that make us inherently uncomfortable? As much as we want to, we
cannot ignore them. If it’s real and concrete and factual and happened and is in
front of us, we have to deal with it.
For centuries philosophers and psychologists have debated why humans, as
Scottish skeptic David Hume put it, “avoid uncomfortable truths.” Is it egoism,
hedonism, or an attempt to maximize self-survival? No one has a definitive
answer. However, as we’ve learned in honing our observation skills, just because
we don’t know why doesn’t mean we can’t deal with our conscious ability to
turn away from things we don’t like. And turn we do. We deny and deflect,
pretend and pass the buck, but none of those evasive actions will erase our
having been presented with something and not dealing with it.
To avoid leaving information behind, we have to be able to describe things
accurately no matter what the situation. That need, however, is even more
pressing when it comes to troubling information because refusing to
acknowledge the information—let alone observe, analyze, or articulate it—can
make it worse. Ignoring things that trouble us will not make those things go
away. Like a spark that becomes a forest fire, they may even escalate or even
explode. And we may be held accountable for turning away from the problem
when it was smaller and more easily solved or contained.
To avoid being the captain of the Titanic who ignored the warnings of ice, we
have to face even the seemingly unfaceable head on. We have to, as the Navy
SEALs say, get comfortable with the uncomfortable. Combat veteran turned
digital marketing agency manager Brent Gleeson explains, “There have been
many times as a business owner that I have been in very uncomfortable
situations. That could be a difficult conversation with a team member, a lawsuit,
or dealing with a demanding board member. Discomfort comes in many forms.

But the more you embrace that as a reality, the wider your comfort zone
becomes.”
The more we confront and communicate about what makes us uncomfortable,
the better we’ll be at it. Let’s start by dealing with two paintings. We’re just
going to catalog their similarities and differences. (Don’t feel bad if you’re
thinking, “Before marriage and after” or “Wife and mother-in-law.” I’ve heard
them all. Just don’t say them out loud!)
Goya, The Naked Maja, c. 1795–1800.
Lucian Freud, Benefits Supervisor Sleeping, 1995.

Both paintings show women reclining on a couch, although in opposite
directions. The woman in the first painting has her eyes open, head lifted, and is
looking straight ahead. The woman in the second painting has her eyes closed,
her face slack and collapsed into the couch. Both women have brown hair. It
appears that the woman in the second painting has uncombed hair.
What about the couches? Don’t say one is “fancy” and one is “trashy”; those
are judgment words. Fancy and trashy mean different things to different people.
Instead, be specific. Talk about satin and velvet versus missing cushions and
stains. The couch in the first painting is technically a dark green, one-armed
chaise longue with ivory sheets and two pillows edged in lace. The second
painting shows a traditional two-armed, floral-patterned couch without any
cushions and dirty, ripped upholstery.
The first painting features a brown and amber background; we cannot see the
floor. The second painting has a wrinkled, gray sheet of fabric in the
background; the floor is wood-grained.
Anything else? I show these two images all over the country to thousands of
professionals and leaders every day, and one of the very last observations ever
uttered is that both women are naked. You can say “naked”; it’s a fact. They are
both turned in an almost full-frontal position with nary a scrap of clothing or
clever camouflage to hide their nudity. The first woman has her hands behind
her head; the second woman has her left hand on top of the couch and is cupping
her right breast with the other.
What about their weight? No one ever wants to mention that either. “Isn’t it a
social thing to say one is slender and one isn’t?” a participant asked me recently.
No, there is a major objective difference in their weight. To be more specific, the
second woman is more than just overweight, she is obese.
Obese is a clinical term defined by the Centers for Disease Control to describe
the weight of an individual with a body mass index (BMI) of over 30. For a five-
foot-nine-inch woman, that would be 203 pounds or more. It’s safe to say that
the woman in the second painting is obese. At the time of this painting, the
model, Sue Tilley, was 280 pounds. You’re not casting judgment or making fun
to say so, you are simply saying what you see.
I did have a doctor raise his hand and tell me that one woman was “perfectly
healthy” while the other was “morbidly obese.” I objected to his description, but
not for the reason you might think. “Morbidly obese” is the medical terminology
for anyone with a BMI of over 40, or over 35 with obesity-related health
conditions. And it’s not even the highest obesity rating; a BMI over 45 is
referred to as “super obesity.” The physician didn’t say “disgustingly” obese; he

gave a clinical definition. It’s his word choice for the woman in the first painting
that was an inference. Perfectly healthy? How could he tell? Maybe she had
schizophrenia! (He subsequently apologized for his incorrect inference.) The
comparison of the two works of art is as much about choice of words as it is
about tackling sensitive subjects.
We’ve become so afraid to say anything, we forget what facts are. Facts are
proven truths, not opinions. A good way to quickly sort through the difference?
Say what you see, not what you think.
SAY WHAT YOU SEE, NOT WHAT YOU THINK
It bears repeating not only because you need to stick to objective facts, but also
because you need to say what you see, even when you don’t like what you see.
Effective communication means being able to talk about any pertinent subject,
even that which is uncomfortable, unusual, or unsettling. You may not like
something, you may have a personal aversion to it, but that doesn’t mean you
can ignore it.
As I mentioned, I show these two paintings to every group, even religious
organizations. One time I was presenting to educational leaders from at-risk high
schools when a principal raised his hand and told me, “I don’t want to look at
those pictures. They disgust me!”
I explained that while it is never my intention to offend anyone, whether he
liked the pictures or not was irrelevant. We cannot turn away from things we
don’t like. The fact is, the women are naked. You have to deal with that. You
don’t have to like it. I can only imagine the difficult and even distasteful things a
principal at an inner-city high school is faced with. Turning away from them is
never an option.
Art, like life, isn’t always pretty. The images on the preceding pages aren’t
private pieces of pornography; they are iconic paintings that took the art world
by storm for different reasons. The first one, Francisco de Goya’s Naked Maja,
is said to be one of the first instances in Western art of an artist painting a nude
woman who wasn’t a mythological, historical, or allegorical figure. For his
crimes of “depravity” in painting it, the artist was brought in front of the
Inquisition. Painted around 1800, it has hung in the Museo del Prado in Madrid
since 1901. The second painting, Benefits Supervisor Sleeping, is a 1995 work
by Lucian Freud. It’s often colloquially referred to as Big Sue in honor of the
real-life model, Sue Tilley, a social services worker who spent three years posing
for the portrait. When Big Sue sold at auction for $33.6 million in 2008, it broke
the record for the most ever paid at auction for a work by a living artist.

Art is the perfect vehicle for learning how to communicate when we’re
uncomfortable. Of course the subject matter of art can be controversial or
unpopular, but more important, art is what it is to each and every viewer. It
doesn’t move, it doesn’t talk back, it won’t follow you home. It is static,
timeless, and does not judge you for how you interpret it. And therein lies its
power. Installation artist and photographer JR explains that art is about “raising
questions, and giving space to interpretation and dialogue. The fact that art
cannot change things makes it a neutral place for exchanges and discussions, and
then enables it to change the world.”
In 2013 I took a group at the Met through a temporary exhibit in an interactive
gallery called The Refusal of Time by William Kentridge. I gave them no
warning, we didn’t stop and read the labels, we just walked through a doorway
into a darkened room featuring a five-channel video installation with sound,
megaphones, and an “elephant” breathing machine. It was extremely dark and
very loud. Darkened screens filled the walls playing flickering, mostly black-
and-white movies of shapes being blown around, silhouettes of people dancing,
and scribbles. A booming, lumbering soundtrack of music and spoken word
played, while a moving sculpture resembling an Industrial Revolution–era
factory machine with exposed gears and a giant head endlessly and noisily
pumped its bellows in the center of the room.
We walked straight through the exhibit, and when we got out I turned and
asked the class what they had observed. It was a good test of short-term
situational awareness, as even though they were in the middle of a class about
honing their observation and perception skills, more than half the class was
completely tuned out, since I hadn’t given them explicit instructions to tune in.
One participant offered that it felt like being trapped in an old Silly Symphony
black-and-white cartoon where the giant flowers bend their knees and dance in a
disturbing rhythm. Creative, yes, but I didn’t want to know how the artwork
made them feel, I wanted to know what they saw. In the absence of a wealth of
observational data, other students filled in the gaps with their opinions.
“Uncomfortable,” said one. “I have no idea what that was,” said another.
Another participant got claustrophobic and “couldn’t wait to get out.” Another
simply declared, “I hated it.”
Yes, it was an assault on the senses. It could easily make anyone
uncomfortable. That’s true for a lot of things in this world. But we can’t let our
discomfort override our need to observe and be aware.
Let’s look at a painting that could be described as overwhelming. Five
hundred years before Where’s Waldo?, Dutch artist Hieronymus Bosch painted
The Garden of Earthly Delights, a massive triptych painted on three oak panels

almost 22 feet across and 13 feet high symbolically depicting the garden of
Eden, the fall of man, and hell. (It’s in the permanent collection at the Museo del
Prado, and well worth seeing in person if you can.)
Hieronymus Bosch, The Garden of Earthly Delights, c. 1500–1505.
Since the painting is so large, we’re going to zoom in on the detail in the very
bottom right corner:

Hieronymus Bosch, The Garden of Earthly Delights (detail), c. 1500–
1505.
It does not matter how we feel about this depiction. It is definitely strange. But
rather than talk about what we think, let’s talk about what we see.
I’ll start with the most important: in the upper left-hand corner, there’s what
appears to be a man, who looks like he could possibly be deceased, being
attacked by two rodent creatures. On the far right we have an anthropomorphic
pig wearing a veil resembling a nun’s habit. The pig is sitting upright and
leaning its snout against the ear of an adult human male, also sitting, who has his
right hand on its cheek. The man has what appears to be a piece of paper with
writing on it draped over his left thigh but otherwise doesn’t appear to be
wearing any clothes. In front of the man and the pig is a creature with the beak
of a bird, thighs like a human, and reptile feet wearing a large closed helmet
favored by medieval knights that covers most of its body. The creature has the
end of a feathered arrow sticking out of its right thigh and a severed foot hanging
from a curved spike protruding from the top of its helmet. An inkwell hangs
from the creature’s beak, which protrudes from the helmet’s visor, into which
the pig is dipping a quill held in its left front foot.
See, it’s not so bad if we just stick to the facts. Let’s try another painting.
What do you see?

William-Adolphe Bouguereau, Dante and Virgil in Hell, 1850.
This is generally the point where the people who were okay with the nude
women and the pig dressed like a nun begin to squirm a little. It doesn’t matter if
the painting makes you uncomfortable or brings up things you’d rather not think
about. It’s especially when we don’t like something or wish to avert our eyes
from it that it becomes essential that we’re able to describe it objectively, putting
aside both assumptions and emotions.
Really look at the painting. What’s going on? Does your perception of the
facts change the more intently you look? While at a cursory glance it might seem
that two nude men are wrestling out of playfulness, a show of strength, or
attraction, when we look more closely we instead see signs of aggression: a knee

in the back, fingers clawing at flesh, an open mouth at another’s neck. The 1850
painting by William-Adolphe Bouguereau is titled Dante and Virgil in Hell, and
it depicts a passage in Dante’s Inferno where Dante and Virgil are touring the
eighth circle of hell and witness a heretic fighting a con artist:
They smote each other not alone with hands,
But with the head and with the breast and feet,
Tearing each other piecemeal with their teeth.
It’s fine to be uncomfortable looking at this painting. It’s fine to not like it.
It’s not fine to ignore it, because it exists. It’s in front of you. It’s when we
ignore the facts or choose not to believe what we see that bad things happen.
BELIEVE WHAT YOU SEE
Sometimes the facts that are presented to us are so uncomfortable or
unbelievable, we block them out, to disastrous results. Psychologists have
borrowed the legal phrase “willful blindness”—in which someone tries to avoid
liability for a wrongful act by purposefully being unaware of the details—to
denote the things we purposefully choose, even unconsciously, not to see. Like
our other cognitive blindnesses, it can be overcome with conscious awareness.
Unlike the case with our other cognitive blindnesses, failing to overcome it can
have far-reaching consequences, as seen in the case that rocked Coventry.
In England, the idiom “sent to Coventry” refers to someone whom you can’t
talk to anymore because that person deserves complete isolation. Sadly, this
proved to be true for four-year-old local resident Daniel Pelka. In March 2012
the little blond boy was found starved and beaten to death by his parents—
despite authorities having been called to his home twenty-six times.
School officials had noted that on separate occasions Daniel showed up with a
broken arm, two black eyes, and “four dot-shaped bruises” around his neck. He
winced when a teaching assistant playfully ruffled his hair. Teachers noticed that
he was “wasting away,” all skin and bones with sunken eyes, his clothes
“hanging off him.” They documented that he was stealing food from other
children’s lunch boxes and eating scraps covered in dirt from the school’s
garbage cans and sandpit.
His stepfather claimed that the boy had broken his arm when he jumped off a
couch. It was determined that he had an “obsession with food.” His seemingly
caring mother claimed he had a medical condition that made him so skinny. His
pediatrician explained his poor growth and weight loss as symptoms of a

medical condition. Although the police frequently visited his house to deal with
violent domestic disputes, they never talked to Daniel or considered child abuse
(a perfect example of what happens when we don’t ask questions, as we learned
in the last chapter).
The official review of the case found, “The practitioners involved were not
prepared to ‘think the unthinkable’ and tried to rationalize the evidence in front
of them that it did not relate to abuse [sic].”
Daniel didn’t die because people failed to notice his condition. They did
notice. They did document. They did care. But they didn’t want to believe what
they saw in the aggregate. They didn’t want to confront the distressing reality of
abuse when analyzing the facts in front of them.
We need to believe what we see even when it means we might have to think
the unthinkable and say the unspeakable. We cannot ignore warning signs
because they seem to portend the impossible. The belief that she couldn’t sink
contributed to the Titanic’s tragedy. The belief that Lehman Brothers was too
big to fail contributed to its collapse. We can’t gloss over facts that we find
distasteful, distressing, or disturbing because the unimaginable happens every
day. We need to be able to communicate when it’s business-as-usual but also
prepare our business for the unforeseen, for the emergency, for the impossible.
To practice objectively analyzing both the “impossible” and the
uncomfortable, let’s move a bit closer to Bosch’s Garden of Earthly Delights
and analyze this detail:

Hieronymus Bosch, The Garden of Earthly Delights (detail), c. 1500–
1505.
It doesn’t have to make sense or relate to our lives for us to assess and analyze
it thoroughly. What’s going on in this picture? Write down a few sentences to
describe it.
Here’s what I saw: an anthropomorphic creature with the head of a small bird
sits in a circular chair on stilts while eating what appears to be a nude human
body. The creature has a cauldron on its head and its feet inside two urns and is
holding the bottom half of the human body in its mouth with its right claw
around both of the human’s thighs. Two more human forms appear to be in a
bubble underneath the creature’s chair. And five black birds, seen only in
silhouette, are flying out of the half-devoured human’s backside.
I don’t find it a particularly pleasant scene, but that doesn’t matter. Nor do I
find it very realistic, but it is real—that is, it’s an image that actually exists in the
world, so I can use it as visual data and describe it. And so can you.
More important, we can translate this skill of precisely assessing art that is out
of our comfort zone into handling difficult communication, because while
looking at paintings is most likely not part of your daily routine, managing
sensitive information is. We all have to deal with difficult situations and discuss
uncomfortable topics. Professionally, at some point we’re going to have to ask
for a raise challenge a new company policy reprimand an employee or resolve

for a raise, challenge a new company policy, reprimand an employee, or resolve
a dispute. Personally, at some point we’re going to have difficult talks with our
partner, our child, or our parents. Once again, the problem with ignoring
something is that it’s dangerous. Training surveillance agents in the intelligence
community is a constant reminder that things you don’t talk about won’t go
away. In fact, they may escalate, cause more damage, and increase your own
exposure. In contrast, the willingness to tackle difficult subjects and situations
can earn you the admiration of your boss, your customer, your potential donor,
and even your loved ones.
Children in particular need direct, forthright communication, especially
concerning troubling issues. Minimizing, sidestepping, or denying others’
concerns will not make the problem go away and can hurt the relationship we
have with them.
I once coached the headmaster of an elite Manhattan private school who had
the unenviable task of telling the parents of a teenage honors student that their
beloved baby girl had been giving sexual favors in the boys’ bathroom. The
conversation did not go well because the parents refused to have it.
“That is an outrageous accusation!” the mother fumed. “Our daughter would
never!”
The headmaster explained that it wasn’t an accusation or an assumption. The
girl had been caught by a trustworthy, tenured faculty member. The parents
stormed out, refusing to continue a conversation that might ultimately help get
their daughter the counsel or discipline she needed.
They were taken aback and possibly taken over by their emotions and
disbelief. However, turning away from it didn’t make it go away; in fact, it
possibly made the ordeal worse, especially if they swept the situation under the
rug at home the same way they did in the headmaster’s office. According to
family therapist Ron L. Deal, when caregivers turn away from an upsetting
situation concerning a child, the child often interprets it as the adult turning away
from her. This can lead to the child permanently turning inward, acting out with
negative behavior, or losing long-term trust in the parent figure. Deal says,
“Over time this goes a long way to increasing emotional distance in the parent-
child relationship and diminishing the parent’s voice with the child.” To prevent
this, the parents needed to rise above their discomfort with both their daughter
and their daughter’s educators and have an objective conversation about the
facts.
When we are emotionally overwhelmed and can’t seem to think straight, we
can always fall back on the same investigative model we’ve learned to use to
gather facts: who, what, where, and when. Instead of letting their emotions
dictate their response the student’s parents could have asked: “Who was

dictate their response, the student s parents could have asked: Who was
involved in our daughter’s activities?” “What exactly did the incident entail?”
“Where did this happen?” and “When did it occur?”
True leaders can handle an uncomfortable conversation as easily as a crisis.
They know how to digest and deliver bad news without displaying subjectivity
or emotion, even when they don’t like it. And in every course I teach, I can spot
these people immediately. They’re the ones who when everyone else says, “I
don’t like this,” or covers their mouth with their hands, or turns away, say with a
definitive nod, “Interesting.” Their brains are engaged, overriding their guts and
their body language.
Here’s how to be that person.
OUTSMART YOUR EMOTIONS
Just as with observation skills, the most important thing we can do to sharpen
our communication skills, especially in times of stress or duress, is to separate
the objective from the subjective. In assessing, we separate fact from fiction. In
analyzing, we separate inference from opinion. In stressful communication, we
must separate the message from any and all emotion.
Humans are emotional beings. Emotions are a natural part of who we are. As
the psychologist and emotion researcher Paul Ekman explains, we developed
emotions to deal with ancient threats such as saber-toothed tigers, and as a result
we often experience them unconsciously. “They have to happen without thinking
or you’d be dead,” Ekman says.
Emotions are also what we’re wired to pay attention to. If we didn’t have an
instant fear of becoming a tiger treat, our legs wouldn’t move us out of harm’s
way in time. Particularly in stressful situations, people will be emotionally
sensitive. Communicating emotionally with them will make them answer in
kind. Emotional volleying does not accomplish concrete work. Instead of
focusing on the information or task at hand, emotions can cause us to stew over
the personal.
When you convey information, especially to people who report to you, choose
your words and requests with care. If you include even a hint of negative
emotion—disappointment, disgust, disbelief, condescension, sarcasm, passive
aggression, or veiled insults—that’s what your listeners will hear first and hang
on to the longest.
I once worked with a woman who was particularly skilled at demeaning her
subordinates with corrections wrapped in insults. Unfortunately, while her
criticisms may have been valid, her reproachful tone and the wounded reaction
of the recipient made it very difficult for them to register One person on the

of the recipient made it very difficult for them to register. One person on the
receiving end of a red-lined rampage wasted days wading through and fixating
on the unnecessary censure before she could get back on track and fix the factual
issues.
Comments such as “Work on tone!” came across as in-print yelling. “You
need to do better” was taken as an insult. The writer obsessed over the reprimand
“This isn’t the way to do this. Google and Wikipedia are not valid sources.” As a
corporate communications specialist with a degree in journalism, the writer
knew Google and Wikipedia weren’t credible references, and she didn’t use
them. Did her boss think she did? Or was it just a derogatory censure? Instead of
bolstering her research, as the writer agreed she needed to do, she spent hours
prepping a defense of her skills. She was defensive and angry and eventually
reluctant to change anything.
Both the writer and her boss had the same goal: a well-written, well-
researched report done in a timely manner. Miscommunication that threatened to
undermine that was ultimately detrimental to both parties. It wouldn’t have taken
the boss any extra time to construct more helpful edits such as swapping “That’s
not what ‘ambivalent’ means!” with “‘Ambivalent’ means having mixed feelings
about something, no?” Doing so would have saved the entire team from the
resulting wasted time and interoffice drama.
That’s not to say that we can’t ever express emotion. If you need to convey a
feeling—I love you—use emotion. When you need to convey a fact—your
performance is below par—eliminate emotion unless that’s all you want in
return.
Since our own emotions can seemingly come out of nowhere and take us by
surprise—“You might not even know it until someone says to you, ‘What are
you getting so upset about?’” Ekman notes—the first step to mastering them is
getting to know them. Just as with our subconscious perceptual filters,
introducing a conscious awareness of our emotions into the communication
process will help us overcome them.
To start, Ekman recommends being aware of our facial expressions, our body
language, and any tension we might be carrying. If you catch yourself clenching
your jaw or tightening your shoulders, use it as a sign that you might be emoting
unwittingly. If you find that to be the case, do the same thing we do when
looking at art: step back, assess, and evaluate. Ask yourself, “Why am I
emotional? What could have triggered it? Did I misunderstand something?”
We must be aware of our own emotional triggers and signals because other
people around us can see them, sometimes before we do. Patients can tell when
we can’t wait to get out of their room. Kids can tell if we hate helping them with
their homework. That client can tell if we secretly think he’s ignorant. And the

t e
o ewo
.
at c e t ca te
we sec et y t
e s g o a t.
d t e
minute they see it, we’ve compromised the quality of our relationship, the care
or advice or instruction that we can provide, and possibly even our professional
or personal integrity.
Pretending our emotions don’t exist isn’t a solution. Trying to suppress them
might be not only futile—researchers at Queensland University of Technology in
Australia found that people who attempted to suppress negative thoughts in fact
spawned more of them—but harmful to our health. A 2012 experiment at Florida
State University recorded stronger stress responses based on heart rate from
people who tried to restrain their negative thoughts than from those who didn’t.
When it comes to negative emotions or thoughts, experts advise: let them flow
to let them go.
When you first approach a situation, before you communicate anything, give
yourself a few moments to work through your emotional response. In a session
with medical students at The Frick Collection, I split up the group into pairs and
assigned each pair a work of art to observe, study, and then present to the class. I
could tell from their body language that two young men—first-year medical
students—didn’t appreciate the portrait of a woman, Jacques-Louis David’s
Comtesse Daru, I asked them to assess. They stared blankly. They shifted their
weight. I finally said to them, “If you don’t like it, that’s fine. Just be able to tell
me why.”
Suddenly they found their tongues. They told me they thought the subject was
unattractive; she was cross-eyed, her hat looked like a shower cap, and her dress
was ugly.

Jacques-Louis David, Comtesse Daru, 1810.
“Great,” I replied. “Now tell me what you see objectively.”
Acknowledging and getting their subjective thoughts out allowed them to
break free of their reluctance and reticence and do what they needed to do. They
could then state that the woman’s gaze didn’t quite meet theirs, her cheeks
appeared overly puffy, her necklace of large green gemstones was prominently
featured; that she had horizontal creases in the flesh of her neck that contrasted
with the vertical earrings she was wearing; that she wore a white dress with an
empire waist and ornately patterned sleeves; and that her right arm was draped in
a patterned fabric and the viewer could see the suggestion of a folded fan in her
right hand

right hand.
In life as in art, we’re not going to like everything or everyone. When you
meet somebody you have to work with, a coworker or witness, a student or
supplier, and you instinctively just don’t like him, step back and ask yourself
why. Why don’t you like him? Specifically what don’t you like? You might
discover it’s because he looks like an ex-boyfriend or the teacher who humiliated
you in second grade. But once you recognize that, you’ll be able to see how
subjective and unimportant it is and move on.
MOVING ON
We can prepare and practice and do our best to be objective, but there will still
come occasions when we find ourselves in the thick of a heated, emotional
discussion. How did we get there? The possibilities are endless: a misperception,
a misunderstanding, a few poorly chosen words taken the wrong way. But
whatever the reason, we’re there. We’re staring at the uncomfortable painting of
the bird creature eating the man with more birds coming out of his backside.
And we need to get out. But how? By using the same techniques we learned in
the previous chapter: repeating, renaming, and reframing.
Repeat It
Just as we seek confirmation that our message has been received by having the
other person repeat it back to us, we can use the same strategy to turn the tide of
a heated debate. To do this, philosopher Daniel C. Dennett advises, “you should
attempt to re-express your target’s position so clearly, vividly, and fairly that
your target says, ‘Thanks, I wish I’d thought of putting it that way.’” Dennett
suggests then stating any points of agreement and anything you have learned
from the other person.
Charles Richards and his wife, Caroline, put this advice into practice and
found it kept them out of countless circular and painful arguments. They told me
how one day, Charles heard Caroline call his name from the bottom of the stairs.
There was no mistaking the tone: she was upset. He rushed out of their bedroom
and stood on the landing above her.
“What’s wrong?” he asked.
“I can’t take it anymore,” she said.
“What?”
“This,” she replied, pointing to a pair of socks and a book on the first step.
“What?” he repeated, slightly confused. He saw the items, but he didn’t see
the problem.
“These are yours yes?” She sighed “You left your socks by the back door

These are yours, yes?  She sighed. You left your socks by the back door
when you got home from the gym, and your book was in the living room. I
picked them up when I was cleaning and put them here for you to take upstairs.”
“Sorry,” he said, “I didn’t see them there.”
“But you walked right by them,” Caroline insisted. “Why do you always do
this?”
“Do what?” he said. “Not take my stuff upstairs?”
“Yes!” she answered. “You never do. You just leave it there for me every
time.”
“I do?” he said doubtfully. “You put stuff on the stairs purposefully for me to
take up?”
“Not specifically you,” she answered. “Whoever’s going up next. But you
walked right by it.”
“I honestly didn’t see it,” he said.
“How could you not see it when you had to step over it?” she replied.
Charles and Caroline admitted that they were both getting increasingly
agitated. To defuse the situation, Charles decided that instead of defending
himself or telling his wife how wrong she was, he would try to simply repeat her
concern.
“So you leave stuff on the steps for the next person going up to save you from
having to always run up and down them,” he said, “and when I walk right by it
without picking it up, it aggravates you, yes?”
“Yes,” she said. “A lot.”
“I really don’t notice it. It might as well be invisible to me,” he said. Then he
dug deeper into her concern. “But it’s not to you, is it? It’s the opposite. You not
only see it, you see it as an insult or something I’m doing on purpose?”
Caroline hesitated because he was right—that was how she saw it. For further
clarification, she then repeated his words.
“You really don’t see things on the stairs?” she asked. “Like it’s invisible?
That’s crazy to me because the pile on the stairs is so obvious to me, it might as
well be glowing. It practically shouts at me.”
“Really?” Charles answered. “It bothers you that much? It’s like visual
pollution to you.”
“Yes,” she said, relieved that he understood. In fact, he explained it better than
she had. It was like visual pollution to her. And he didn’t see it at all. “I had no
idea you didn’t see it,” she continued. “The stairs are your blind spot, then?”
Now it was Charles’s turn to be relieved. Piles of socks on the floor really
didn’t register in his field of vision, and he was glad his wife understood.
Instead of allowing the conversation to degenerate, Charles and Caroline
consciously chose to communicate better by repeating each other’s concerns. In

co sc ous y c ose to co
u cate bette by epeat g eac ot e s co ce
s.
doing so, they not only avoided having a fight, they came to better understand
each other and learned something new about the way the other saw the world.
Rename It
Another way we can try to extricate ourselves from the entanglements of a he
said, she said, what-did-they-really-mean debate is to rename it. Instead of
slogging through what exactly happened to get you there and whose fault it was,
wrap everything—all comments and feelings and innuendo and assumptions—
into a single package and give it a new name. Call a time-out, and then sum up
the entire messy situation for what it is and label it accordingly. Instead of
referring to the problem as a mess or disaster or even a problem, rename it a
miscommunication.
I’ve been on the receiving end of bungled plans, missed connections, and
confusion probably as often as I’ve caused them. We aren’t perfect. Sometimes
we forget or screw up or just say the wrong thing. In one of my latest calamities,
a new client flew all the way to New York City from Los Angeles to attend one
of my sessions for a future business opportunity, and no one showed up to my
presentation. No one. As if I hadn’t even been scheduled. I had been thorough—
booked and confirmed! This nice woman from California came all the way
across the country to see me in action, and instead she got to watch me show up
in an empty room. I was many things: embarrassed, upset, disappointed, even a
little angry, and I believe she was as well. But none of those subjective emotions
were going to change reality. The Art of Perception wasn’t going to happen that
day. And the client was leaving town the next. Screaming at the scheduler
wasn’t going to fix that. Nothing was.
Unfortunately, as much as I wanted to, I couldn’t wish the situation away or
pretend it never happened. It had. And I was worried about the resulting damage:
would she think I was unorganized or unprofessional? I could have made a big
deal about how it wasn’t my fault and tried to pinpoint whose it was, but that
would risk my relationship with the company that had hired me. To leave the
situation unaddressed could invite further confusion or stoke unspoken
animosity. I had to face the issue and put it to rest in a way that didn’t
compromise anyone’s reputation. To do so, I quickly labeled the entire event a
miscommunication.
A miscommunication is a fact. There is no blame or shame in a fact. When
you find yourself in a highly charged situation, drop all of the drama and opinion
and what-ifs—the “you didn’t tell me” or “we wouldn’t be here if”—and agree
to call the entire scenario a miscommunication. Doing so gives everyone a way

out and a reason to let go of the emotional attachment to any subjective points at
the same time. Once we’re dealing with a fact, we can move forward.
The client and the company and I were all relieved once I stepped up and
renamed the situation. The pressure was suddenly off. Miscommunications
happen. To everyone. Thankfully, we can usually fix them and try to prevent
new ones.
Reframe It
Finding a solution takes just one more step: reframing any outstanding concerns
as questions rather than problems. Questions make communication a give-and-
take; there’s a query and an answer. Questions give the person you’re
communicating with options and an out. Questions also protect you, the asker,
from the possibility that you have incorrect information or are working with an
assumption.
Instead of saying, “X is wrong,” reframe it: “Is it true that . . . ?” or “Did you
mean to . . . ?” Instead of asking someone, “Can I talk to you for a minute?”
which immediately implies a conflict or problem, ask instead, “Can you help me
with something?” Reframe the issue in the best possible terms, and the response
will be more positive.
I did want to know what happened to my group so I could be better prepared
should it happen again, so I asked the person who scheduled the session about it.
Instead of saying, “They should have been here!” I reframed it as a question:
“Where did everyone go?” And I learned that this company’s employees
periodically get called out on department-wide emergencies that can’t be
predicted. Knowing this didn’t help get my session back and wouldn’t guarantee
that it wouldn’t happen again, but it will keep me from inviting guests to that
venue next time.
I thanked the company representative and left, taking the client out for lunch.
In the end we had a great day, we got to know each other better, and I flew out to
Los Angeles the following month to conduct another session, which she was
able to attend.
Once we’ve learned to recognize and then eliminate emotion in our
information delivery, we can apply the good communication techniques we
learned in the last chapter.
A SPOONFUL OF SUGAR
If repeating, renaming, and reframing doesn’t work and the person you’re
communicating with still won’t let go until blame is assigned, go ahead and

assign it—to the situation. Try “I’m sorry there was a
miscommunication/misinterpretation/things weren’t clear.” Some people won’t
quit until they hear “I’m sorry,” and while you’re not saying it was your fault,
you are giving them a truthful concession, since chances are you’re more than
sorry to be stuck in this situation with them.
Also keep in mind Mary Poppins’s famous advice: “A spoonful of sugar
makes the medicine go down.” Coating our words with sweetness can help the
other person receive them more easily. While writing anything—a report, a press
release, a book—has its fair share of challenges and deadline pressures, there is
perhaps none so nerve-wracking as showing someone your first draft.
Thankfully, unlike other people I’ve had the misfortune of working with, my
editor, Eamon Dolan, is great at delivering difficult news with a liberal dose of
kindness. Early in my first communication from him, he wrote, “My notes take a
very matter-of-fact tone, but please imagine a ‘please’ in front of all of them. I
use a very direct style in my marginal notes for the sake of clarity and efficiency,
and I apologize in advance if any of them veer into brusqueness.” Those two
sentences at the start of our professional relationship made months of otherwise
hard-to-hear critiques not just bearable but many times delightful because he had
dismissed any doubts I had about his intentions.
THE RECEIVING END
We’re on our way to becoming objective-communication experts. But it’s
equally critical to address good communication when the tables are turned, when
we are on the receiving end of an emotional tirade and need the perfect response
to salvage an otherwise untenable situation.
First and foremost, no matter how upsetting the communication is, do not
react emotionally, orally or in writing. Instead, do what you did when you were
becoming emotionally self-aware: absorb, process, let the negative feelings flow,
then let it go. It’s probably harder to put emotion aside when you’re the one
who’s feeling insulted, especially if it’s coming from someone above you, but
it’s the only way to get ahead and win respect.
If the people communicating with you haven’t taken the time to segregate
their emotions, you have to do it for them. Ignore the subjective aspect of
whatever they’re telling you, and focus on the facts. Defend yourself from any
actual accusations, but forget the emotion they’re wrapped in. Letting the insult
go unanswered does not make you a lesser person. It makes you the opposite.
If the emotional upheaval keeps coming from the same person, try assessing
and analyzing that person objectively. Look for the facts. Ask yourself: Who is

this person? Where is he from? Why would she do this? You might uncover an
obscure fact—about his upbringing or home life or job history—that helps
explain his actions. The person might not change, but at least you’ll have a new
perspective to help inform your perception of him—which just might be enough
to defuse any future emotional bombs.
Bruce Vincot, a sales manager at Unicore, a manufacturing company, couldn’t
believe what he was seeing. When he got the call that a major customer was
canceling its contract, the rep in charge of the account didn’t handle the news
well.
“It’s not my fault!” the salesman screamed at his boss. “I’m not taking the
blame for this!” The young man then jumped out of his seat and left Vincot’s
office, slamming the door behind him.
Vincot’s emotions were instantly ignited. “The salesman is a punk,” he
thought. “That’s not how we did things twenty years ago. The amount of
disrespect . . .”
While Vincot’s initial reaction was to go after the rep and fire him on the spot,
he knew he needed to give himself a few minutes to calm down. This wasn’t the
sales rep’s first temperamental display, but he was the highest performer in the
entire company. Firing him would be an emotional relief but a financial mistake.
Vincot knew he would have a hard time explaining to his own bosses that he let
the number one salesperson go because he’d thrown a tantrum.
As he pondered how to handle this situation, an image from his Art of
Perception training came to mind: the two men fighting in Dante and Virgil in
Hell. While he didn’t connect to the painting when he’d first seen it, he could
suddenly relate. He felt his sales rep was attacking him while his bosses stood
by, coolly detached and watching, which rendered him helpless.
To defuse his emotional response, Vincot got out a piece of paper and used
the training; he would look at the exchange exactly as he would a painting and
simply list the objective facts. He began with the ones that bothered him the
most:
The sales rep slammed my office door.
The sales rep raised his voice and acted unprofessionally.
He caught himself. Was designating the yelling “unprofessional” objective or
subjective? He was fairly sure it would be considered unprofessional by most
professionals, but since it was not something he could prove, he crossed it off.
The sales rep raised his voice.

That fact could speak for itself, and anyone who read his report could choose
to label it unprofessional or immature or crazy. So, what had caused the
outburst?
Customer X canceled its contract.
Customer X was the sales rep’s account.
Both true and objective. Now, what about why?
Customer X felt our prices were too high.
Writing that fact down gave Vincot pause. It was a fact; he had spoken to the
customer himself. The customer canceled the contract because of price, not
because of the sales rep, not because the sales rep had yelled at him or slammed
the door of his office. Was there a connection between the cancellation and any
of the sales rep’s actions? Yes, there was. Vincot wrote it down:
The sales rep did not present new pricing in person, sent via email instead.
He knew because the rep had told him when he asked—admittedly with
disgust—“how in the hell” the contract was lost.
Writing down the objective facts did several things for Vincot. It gave him
time to calm down and let his own emotions subside before he acted; indeed, the
act of writing just the facts defused a lot of his own feelings. It highlighted his
own part in the exchange—Had he yelled first? Had that triggered his sales
rep’s explosion?—and systematically separating the objective from the
subjective put everything in perspective. The facts weren’t that bad. The sales
rep hadn’t assaulted him or yelled at him in front of a customer or his coworkers.
He had raised his voice and slammed a door. Was it really such a big deal?
Vincot himself had been in the trenches cold-calling for twenty-five years; he
knew the stress of the sales rep’s job. He took a moment to remember the rash
things he had done in his younger days when his emotions got the best of him.
Most important, the exercise made Vincot realize he’d been prioritizing the
wrong things. He had listed the sales rep’s behavior first, when the more critical
fact was that a major client had been lost. Focusing on that fact helped Vincot
create a secondary list of steps needed to rectify the true problem and keep it
from happening again. Was the company’s standard sales procedure of
presenting price in person clearly communicated to his team? Did it need to be
reviewed? Did they need more training?
By cataloging the objective, Vincot was able to eliminate emotion, find a new

y
g g
j
,
,
perspective, and prioritize what was really important for the success of his
company, his team, and himself.
Approach the difficult in life the same way you approach the difficult in art.
Take your time and gather the facts. Analyze them and prioritize them. Take a
step back and consider things from alternative perspectives. Consider your body
language and nonverbal communication and that of others. Be objective,
accurate, and precise. And know that the result of learning how to separate the
subjective emotions from objective communication is confidence.
I was having dinner with one of my former students recently, a manager at a
pharmaceutical company, who revealed that she was no longer intimidated by
difficult conversations.
“I used to dread it when I knew I had to have one,” she told me. “If I had to
give a bad performance review or terminate someone, I would be sick for days
beforehand, worrying about it. But what I learned from concentrating on the
objective and leaving the subjective by the wayside is that facts give confidence.
Facts are the truth. I found security and confidence knowing I was going to only
have to deal with facts.”
If we can factually describe a pig in a nun’s habit kissing a naked man, a bird
creature eating a human with more birds coming out of his backside, two nude
men wrestling in front of the devil, and Big Sue cupping her own breast, we can
likely navigate corporate downsizing, quarterly budgets, bad medical diagnoses,
employee evaluations, and even talking to our teens about sex.
Now that we have mastered the tenets of good communication even in bad
situations, in the next and final section, we’ll look at what unintentional
behaviors we might need to reconsider and which we might need to change.
We’ve learned how to assess, analyze, and articulate information. Now we must
use those skills in the real world, a world that isn’t still or objective. To do this,
we need to adapt. Adapt to our surroundings, adapt to less-than-ideal
circumstances, by adapting our own thoughts and behaviors.

PART IV
Adapt
We don’t see things as they are. We see them as we are.
—ANAÏS NIN

10
Nothing Is Black-and-White
Overcoming Our Inherent Biases
EVEN THOUGH SHE had been a nurse with the New York State Health Department
office for more than ten years, Lucy Agate had never had to investigate a case
like this. She arrived at the East Neck Nursing Center in Long Island, New York,
with a manila folder containing the accusations—NURSING HOME STRIPPER
SCANDAL, ELDER ABUSE, and GEEZER TEASER, the headlines screamed—along with
a copy of the lawsuit against the home filed by the son of one of the residents.
The New York Post had just run the story—“The elderly residents of a Long
Island nursing home saw their shuffleboards replaced by washboard abs when
they were subjected to a low-rent Chippendale’s striptease in the facility’s rec
room”—along with a large color photograph of an elderly woman in a
wheelchair seemingly placing dollar bills in the waistband of the large, muscular
man leaning over her wearing nothing but briefs.
“The outrage!” Agate tells me in her distinctly Long Island accent. “We got
angry letters all the way from California. The owners of the nursing home were
horrified: ‘We had no idea this was going on!’” Agate was called in to
investigate what had actually happened.
According to the lawsuit, Franklin Youngblood had been visiting his mother
at the nursing home when he discovered the offending photograph in a bedside
drawer among her belongings. When he confronted the staff about it,
Youngblood claimed they lunged at him and tried to take the photo away. He
also wanted to know how his mother had access to money when her cash was
supposed to be locked up in a commissary account.
Youngblood, members of his family, and his attorney held a press conference
outside the nursing home. Youngblood claimed that his mother, “a traditional
Baptist, hard-working lady,” had been “defiled” by the incident. The lawsuit
stated that when “nursing home employees subjected her to this disgraceful
sexual perversion,” the woman “was placed in apprehension of imminent,
offensive, physical harm, as she was confused and bewildered as to why a
muscular, almost nude man, was approaching her and placing his body and
limbs, over [her].” It further stated that the “vile” occurrence was done for the
“perverse pleasure and enjoyment of the Defendant’s staff.”

perverse pleasure and enjoyment of the Defendant s staff.
Attorneys for the nursing home held their own, competing press conference,
during which they claimed that the residents had wanted the event, and that
Youngblood’s own girlfriend had accompanied the woman to it. The Associated
Press reported that Youngblood’s family denied this but wrote in a decidedly
opinionated fashion: “In any case, that does not mean Bernice Youngblood was
not harmed by what she saw.”
Much hinged on what nurse Lucy Agate would see when she arrived to
determine whether the facility had failed to meet New York State standards for
quality of care.
Agate interviewed everyone involved: the residents, the caregivers, the
nursing staff, the managers, the owners of the home, Apollo the stripper, the
stripper’s agency, and the old lady in the photograph, Youngblood’s mother. The
objective facts surfaced when she systematically asked questions to find out
what she didn’t know and needed to learn.
How did a stripper get into the nursing home? The residents voted on their
monthly activity, and they voted to have a male stripper.
“A committee of residents requested it, and then all of the residents
democratically voted to have it,” Agate says. “The residents are adults. They’re
allowed to vote.”
Were the residents forced to go? No. In fact, the nursing home offered an
alternative activity for those who didn’t wish to attend.
Was the entertainment discriminatory against the male residents? Were only
females allowed to attend? No, men were invited to attend as well, and one did.
Were the residents taken advantage of financially to pay for the stripper? No.
The residents didn’t pay for it with their own money; the nursing home footed
the bill. Does that mean there was a fiscal misappropriation of taxpayer money?
No, the money came from the nursing home’s activities budget. The staff asked
corporate for permission for the stripper, and it was granted.
What about the tips the residents were doling out? Did that money come from
their commissary accounts? No again. Agate discovered that the residents do
have their own pocket money.
“They have the right to stick a dollar bill in a gentleman’s waistband if they
want to,” Agate says. “Not allowing them to would be a violation of their
resident rights.”
Most important, even though they had voted for it, did the residents feel
abused? Agate interviewed every one of them.
“They all said the same thing of the show,” Agate reveals, “that the home
should get a refund. Even the lady in the wheelchair said it was the worst lap
dance she’d ever gotten! They said the guy was terrible. He had been instructed

g
y
g y
not to bump, grind, touch anyone, or basically do anything. They were all
disappointed!”
How did media outlets across the country fall for the salacious story of a
stripper forced upon elderly nursing home residents? Because our perceptions
and internal biases affect how we act and how we expect others to act.
“Everyone was so quick to believe the photograph proved elder abuse because
we don’t want to see an elderly woman in a wheelchair as having sexual
desires,” Agate concludes. “The fact is, the residents are all adults, they all have
rights, and they are allowed to see a male stripper if they choose to.”
Up until now, we’ve dealt with our perceptual filters as blindnesses and
studied how they can affect our observations. We now know that when
something we see is not in sync with our expectations, we can subconsciously
make it align, either by missing important details or making assumptions that fill
them in or simplify them. To refine our model for improving observation and
communication skills, though, we must look at how these inherent filters can do
more than just make us miss something based on our background, mood, or
political affiliations. We need to examine how our perceptions can lead to biases
that affect our actions, and learn how to adjust for them accordingly.
Before we can learn to overcome our biases, however, we must understand
what they are. Bias can mean many things—although its connotation is usually
negative, and thus, no one wants to acknowledge a known bias. I ask almost all
of my classes to raise their hands if they are biased. Eventually some hands will
go up, but not without hesitation. I tell them what I’ll tell you: we all have
biases, we were born with many of them, and they’re not all bad.
  *
In scientific and sociological terms, a bias is a perceptual filter that doesn’t just
change how we see things but can affect our actions. For instance, our bias
toward sci-fi movies will cause us to buy a ticket for the newest blockbuster
regardless of the early reviews. Our bias against mall food courts will make us
go somewhere else at dinnertime. A bias can be that which we avoid and that to
which we’re drawn.
We’re biologically wired to have biases, and they aren’t inherently negative.
The problem arises when we refuse to recognize our biases, sort through them,
and then overcome the ones that are based on beliefs that are untrue, unhelpful,
or unfair to others. Ignorance of biases isn’t bliss, as they do exist in all of us
and, unchecked, can lead to stereotyping and bigotry.
Biologically, we’re all naturally biased toward the things we like, the things

g
y
y
g
g
we grew up with, the things familiar to us. Our brains readily identify with
things that reflect situations in our own lives because those are typically the
things that also mean safety, security, and ease. From an evolutionary
standpoint, this affinity bias, or the desire to be around people like us, arose
because people in our tribe or group or clan or cave tended to look like us.
People who didn’t could be dangerous marauders. Again, like many of our
inherent systems for sorting the world around us, identifying someone we
recognized as safe was automatic and done without thought. In today’s
multicultural, almost borderless world, the same safety parameters do not apply,
and we must overcome our natural affinity bias to avoid excluding valuable
“others.”
Aside from being drawn to people like ourselves, another bias that alarms
people—not being able to differentiate faces from an unfamiliar racial group, for
example, “all Asian people look alike to me”—is also inborn. Scientists have
documented what they call the “other-race effect” and have noted its presence
from infancy. This effect is only one of a host of biases we harbor unwittingly.
UNCONSCIOUS BIAS
Since our brains are exposed to more information than we could ever process,
mental shortcuts, many of which we’ve already studied, exist to help us
automatically prioritize and filter. Unconscious biases are one of those shortcuts,
and we all have them. They exist to quickly fill in the gaps for us so our bodies
are engaged to fight or flee ahead of our slower, conscious thinking. If our
ancestors didn’t have them, they might have ended up someone’s or something’s
prey before they even knew what was going on. Unconscious biases help us
make decisions, whether we know it or not.
Our unconscious biases apply to situations, information, and things—it’s why
when you’re on a diet you suddenly notice all of the delicious food commercials
on TV, or when you or your partner is pregnant other pregnant women seem to
be everywhere—but it’s when they’re directed at people that we need to be
cautious because our preferences can turn into prejudices.
José Zamora found out firsthand just how easily unconscious bias can lead to
prejudice. He had been looking for a job for months, submitting fifty to one
hundred résumés every day. Even though he had solid sales experience, he didn’t
get any feedback at all . . . until he was struck by a thought: he needed to change
his résumés. So he did, leaving all his work history and education intact but
deleting just one letter: the s in his first name. José became Joe. And the
interviews came pouring in. Zamora wisely concluded, “Sometimes I don’t even

think people know or are conscious or aware that they’re judging, even if it’s by
name, but I think we all do it all the time.”
He’s right, we do. Even in a blind hiring process, our brain still finds ways to
seek out the comfortable and cross off that which makes us uncomfortable.
Suppose you were walking down the street in London and you suddenly saw
this situation. What do you think is happening here?
Since we’ve just talked about prejudice, I’m sure you don’t want to jump to
the conclusion that the black man is a criminal being chased by the white
policeman. But if you did, you aren’t alone. I’ve worked with both white and
black police officers who readily admitted that, yes, that is what they saw, and
I’ve had white and black participants tell me the opposite. The important thing to
note is that different people from different backgrounds will have different
interpretations. Our culture and our personal experiences influence how we
perceive what is happening.
However, as we’ve seen throughout the book, we cannot rely on
interpretations or perceptions. We need facts. Let’s objectively assess and
analyze the photograph.
Who is in the picture? Law enforcement participants in my class have noted a
white man in uniform on the far left, and a black man on the right not in
uniform. The white man wears a custodian helmet, the traditional headgear worn
by constables in England; he appears to be a police officer of some kind. The
black man is wearing long pants and a long-sleeved coat over his shirt. Where
are they? On a street corner next to a concrete building with a crumbling façade
and graffiti, possibly in an urban area, although we can’t tell exactly where.
When is it? It appears to be daytime, and from the black man’s coat, a cooler
day Their clothing suggests the end of the twentieth century What are they

day. Their clothing suggests the end of the twentieth century. What are they
doing? Many participants in my class are eager to tell me that the white man is
chasing the black man. Why? We don’t know.
Even though we see a police officer, we cannot assume a crime has been
committed. Nor can we assume that the black man is guilty of anything. We
can’t even assume that one is chasing the other. In fact, they are both police
officers. The man on the right is an undercover detective. They’re both headed
the same way, both chasing an unseen suspect.
The photo was part of an ad campaign by the London Metropolitan Police
with the heading: “Another example of police prejudice? Or another example of
yours?” The campaign wasn’t to scold the public but to recruit new officers. The
text continued: “Do you see a policeman chasing a criminal? Or a policeman
harassing an innocent person? Wrong both times. It’s two police officers, one in
plain clothes, chasing a third party. And it’s a good illustration of why we’re
looking for more recruits from ethnic minorities.”
Another reason it’s important to know our biases, especially those that might
lead to prejudice, is because they can be transferred to others, consciously and
unconsciously. Convergence in the workplace happens slowly and subtly when
people who’ve worked together over time start to think the same way. Even
drug-and bomb-sniffing dogs are susceptible to minute, unintentional cues from
their handlers. Recognizing this can help us work through any prejudice or bias,
negative or positive, that we might be automatically adding to a situation that is
then picked up and spread by others.
As with our perceptual filters, to identify our biases we need to look inward.
What are our prejudices? Do they help or hinder our observations? Are we
selling the solution to a problem because it’s the right answer or because it lines
up with our biases and desires?
To illustrate this, I show my classes this photograph of a baby being held by
an older woman:

What can we see? The woman is smiling. She has earrings on, her hair is up,
her eyes are brown, her skin is darker than the child’s. The baby is very fair-
skinned and has blond hair. The baby appears to be a boy, but we can’t confirm
that. The baby wears a shirt with white and dark stripes, and his or her mouth is
open.
What could their relationship be? I get all kinds of answers for this. She’s the
mother, the nanny, a neighbor, the godmother, a teacher, a healthcare worker . . .
there are infinite possibilities. The only one I won’t accept is a hostage situation
because they look comfortable together.
Are they genetically related or not? Their skin color is different, their facial
features are different, but genes can do funny things.
One woman in New Orleans told me, “That is definitely the biological
mother! They have the same nose!” I told her that no, I knew that the woman in
the photograph was not the baby’s mother. She answered, “You’re racist by
saying she ‘can’t be’ the baby’s mother.”
That is quite an assumption, and I can tell you it’s quite untrue. I explained
that I didn’t say she “couldn’t be” the baby’s mother, I said I “knew” she wasn’t.
I knew not because I was assuming it couldn’t be true but because I have twenty-
seven hours of labor and a C-section scar proving that it’s not true. This photo
shows my son and the beloved babysitter we’ve had since he was three months
old.
The woman apologized and explained that she’d had the opposite experience

with a friend, a black woman with a light-skinned baby, who was constantly, and
she believed unfairly, referred to as her own son’s nanny. The woman’s
experiences informed her decision to confront me. The same thing happens to all
of us, whether we realize it or not. Our brain fills in the information gaps to form
our biases by grabbing similar data from things we’ve already experienced—for
better or worse.
EXPERIENCE BIAS
When I showed the same photo of my son and his babysitter during grand rounds
at a large urban hospital, the chief of emergency medicine raised his hand and
told me, “That baby has Down syndrome.”
“And what evidence do you have to support that?” I asked him.
“None,” he answered, “but I know it when I see it.”
Another doctor told me the baby had a thyroid condition, and he could tell
because the “neck was compressed from multiple surgeries.” Sorry, but my son
was just a fat baby with multiple chins. I’ve heard that my child is albino, obese,
and has emphysema because of his “barrel chest.” None of the above is true.
We don’t want to completely divorce ourselves from our experiences because
they can be valuable when we’re seeking information, but we need to be careful
not to let them radically skew what we see. Important decisions are underscored
by accountability, and if we jump directly to the conclusion we want to reach
without articulating the observations and perceptions that got us there, we can be
accused of being misguided by our biases.
To appreciate the effect experience has on our biases, look at this painting.
What do you see? Write down or say aloud everything you observe about the
painting. Don’t move on until you’ve really explored it.

Claude Monet, The Japanese Footbridge, 1899.
What did you see? A bridge? Yes. A footbridge, to be specific. Trees, one
definitely a willow dipping into a body of water. Is it a lake or a pond or an
outlet to the sea? We can’t tell. There are plants and rushes growing on the
banks. Lily pads float on the water’s surface; some hold flowers. The bridge
appears to be made of wood and is curved upward. We can’t see either end: the
left side is covered by foliage; the right leads off the side of the painting. It is a
painting, yes. Lots of greens and yellows and blues. In the water you can see a
reflection of the trees. There are no people or animals in the painting. It’s a close
view of nature, but we can’t see the sky. And if you’re an art lover or you’ve
ever seen an umbrella or notebook with this particular image on it, you might
know that it is a Monet.

But which one? Claude Monet painted 250 paintings of water lilies in his
lifetime; one hangs in almost every museum in the Western world. Eighteen of
them feature the Japanese wooden footbridge that spanned a pond near his house
in Giverny, France. They all have pretty much the same name—Water Lilies,
Pond with Water Lilies, Bridge over a Pond of Water Lilies—so that designation
wouldn’t do us any good even if we knew. At first glance, Monet’s water lily
paintings might look very similar, but there are definite differences among them.


How astutely did you see? Without turning back, pick out which of these three
Monet paintings is the same as the one you were previously studying.
I do this exercise in my classes, but I pair everyone up and have one person
face the front of the room while the other turns her back to it. One partner has to
describe the painting out loud, while the partner who can’t see it draws a picture
of it. Generally about half of the pairs choose the correct painting, and half
don’t. The ones who are successful say it’s because they specified that the bridge
was blue-green with flecks of pink, which differentiates it from the color of the
bridge in the other two. Some credit describing the circle of space in the water in
the foreground surrounded by lily pads. Fewer than ten have attributed it to
mentioning the drop shadow on the right and bottom of the original painting,
which instantly sets it apart from the others. How astutely did you see? The
correct answer is the painting in the middle.
Did you see the shadow on the right side and bottom of the image? If you
missed it, go back and look now. Is that part of the painting? Technically, no.
But I asked you to note “everything you observe.” The drop shadow is there. It
exists. I’m not trying to trick anyone; I want to illustrate that we must look at
everything, not just what’s right in front of us. We have to look outside the box,
in the corners, and off the page. Sometimes that’s where the answers are.
When I did this exercise with one of the most prestigious groups of military
intelligence officers in our country, one officer in particular was devastated that
he’d missed the shadow. He slumped in his seat, put his hand to his head, and
kept muttering, “Oh man, I can’t believe I missed the shadow!” A shadow is not
a big deal to most of us, but in his line of work, it was of critical significance.
Missing the shadow could mean the difference between rescue and failure, life
and death.
Later, as I mulled over his reaction, I realized that everyone in that room with
him was in the military. Why was he the only one who was visibly upset?
Possibly because he had an incident in his past or knew someone who did where
a shadow or other small detail made a big difference. His experience likely
colored his reaction. What we see because of our experiences can be beneficial
or disastrous, depending on how we handle it. Will we let our experiences lead
us blindly into action, like the woman who called me a racist at a public event?
To prevent such errors in judgment, we should recognize the role that our
experiences play and attempt to disengage from them in an attempt to search for
facts as objectively as possible.
That we all come from different perspectives and bring different experiences
and different eyes to each situation is what makes collaboration so important

and different eyes to each situation is what makes collaboration so important.
Look at this painting by Caravaggio. What do you think is happening here?
Cops generally try to determine what kind of crime is going on; financial
analysts think it’s about the counting of money; and counselors see a family
disagreement. Having different people bring their different experiences to the
table helps us see new viewpoints we might never have considered on our own.
But the first person in any of my classes to properly identify this scene was a
clergyman. Having studied paintings of the saints, he knew that it depicted
Christ calling Saint Matthew to be a disciple.
We won’t always have a priest with the right answer on hand when we need
him, but the experiences other people bring to a situation or problem can add a
new level of understanding that can move us all toward a solution or success.
Those experiences and perspectives can help us make better and more informed
decisions.
Consider this image from White House photographer Pete Souza:

White House photograph of the Situation Room.
There’s a lot going on in the scene. We can see the faces of thirteen people,
eleven men and two women, along with the hair of another and the elbow of still
another. Seven people are standing, while six are seated around a shiny,
rectangular, brown wood-topped table that holds five open laptops, a note pad, at
least four printouts, file folders, two disposable cups, and a pair of eyeglasses.
Everyone is wearing business attire except for one of the men at the table, who is
dressed in a navy blue, highly decorated military uniform. Everyone in the room
is looking at something out of frame to the left except for the military man, who
looks down at the computer keyboard in front of him.
When I asked a group from the US Army Asymmetric Warfare Group what
they saw, one officer offered: “The only guy in the photograph doing any work
is the guy in uniform.” That’s what someone in the military sees; that’s his
perspective. Is it true that only the military man is working? Possibly, possibly
not. Is it an objective fact? Since we can’t prove it either way, it’s not; it’s a bias
based on his experience. But we have two choices: we can use his experience to
make further assumptions—military guys are always the only ones working—or
use it to dig deeper for facts as Lucy Agate did with the nursing home stripper
saga—why does it appear that the military man is the only one working?
Looking at the photograph from this angle gives us a different perspective we
might not have considered. The military man is just one of thirteen people in the
room. Zeroing in on him and what he could be doing that others are watching
helps us find out more about the situation. It is in fact the Situation Room in the
basement of the White House. The current US administration and national

security team were receiving updates on the mission to find Osama bin Laden on
May 1, 2011, and watching a live feed from drones over bin Laden’s location. It
now makes sense that the officer is looking down, hands on the keyboard, and
everyone else is watching; he was in charge of Operation Neptune’s Spear, and
he was presenting their progress.
Personal experience is a valid resource that we can and should use to mine
visual data for more facts—as long as we adhere to three simple rules.
THREE RULES FOR WORKING WITH (AND AROUND) OUR BIASES
Rule 1: Become Aware of Our Biases and Boot the Bad
Ones
Our biases exist because we’re hardwired to make unconscious decisions about
others based on what we instantly perceive as safe, same, or comfortable. The
first step to overcoming them or using them to our benefit is to acknowledge
them. Knowing that biases are normal, universal, and not inherently bad can help
us deal with them wisely. There is power in acceptance. If we’re honest with
ourselves and mindful of how we see the world, we can recognize the biases we
need to work with or work against. No one has to know what we’re dealing with
in our heads; it’s a private self-revelation that can help us be better observers,
communicators, and generally better people.
Once we’ve recognized the biases in ourselves, we can then look at them and
determine if they can be used productively to gather more factual information.
To do this, ask yourself: Are my prejudices or my way of viewing things
limiting how I listen to and communicate with others? Are my biases helpful or
harmful to me and my success? If you find that they are detrimental, divorce
yourself from them before they do harm. If you can’t cut them, extricate yourself
from the situation.
Many military officers, the very people who secure our democracy, abstain
from voting in presidential elections to avoid their own internal dissension. They
recognize how it might affect their perceptions, attitudes, and behavior if their
candidate should lose. Whoever is elected president will be their commander-in-
chief. They choose to set aside their personal political preferences to be the best
employees possible.
Rule 2: Don’t Mistake Biases for Facts; Instead Use Them
to Find Facts
Our biases are not verified facts. They are feelings and experiences that make us
want to believe something, but they aren’t enough to create a conclusion.

g,
y
g
Instead, use them as a starting point to look further.
As we did in the last chapter with uncomfortable communication, we can turn
any questionable inferences our biases raise into actual questions and then use
those to investigate further for facts. Turn “The elderly residents felt abused by
the stripper” into “Did the elderly residents feel abused by the stripper?” Turn
“The guy in uniform is the only one working” into “Why does it appear that the
man in military attire is the only one working?”
Rule 3: Run Our Conclusions Past Others
Since we are so close to our biases, and many of them are unconscious, we need
others to help us discern which of our conclusions are faulty and which are not.
Retired FBI special agent Jean Harrison, with whom I’ve worked for many
years, shared a story with me about how she did just that.
Harrison was called in to investigate a homicide in the tightly knit Vietnamese
community of a large city. One of the women the FBI had interviewed on the
scene was withdrawn and practically expressionless. Special Agent Harrison’s
colleagues were convinced that the woman’s “aloof” behavior meant she was
lying. Harrison felt differently. For some reason, she believed that the woman
was telling the truth. She knew she couldn’t jump to that conclusion without
facts, so she examined what she was working with: both the visual data in front
of her and her own personal experience.
First, Harrison looked harder at the woman. She could see why the woman’s
demeanor and body language seemed standoffish to her colleagues. Her body
language training told her the woman was possibly being untruthful, but
something inside her said no. What bias could she possibly hold about the
Vietnamese woman? Then she realized it was from past experience. Growing up,
Harrison was exposed to many different cultures, including Vietnam’s. She
recalled many personal interactions in which the shy, cautious, and reserved
behavior of the Vietnamese women she knew as a child was misinterpreted by
Americans as defensive or deceitful.
Harrison explained her bias and her past experience to her colleagues and
asked if they thought it was possible that the woman was being misinterpreted.
Her colleagues agreed that it was and encouraged her to approach the woman
from a different perspective. Harrison did and discovered that the woman was
telling the truth. In fact, the Vietnamese woman, once she felt comfortable
enough to open up, went on to become the prosecution’s star witness and helped
solve the case.
Harrison didn’t throw out her personal experience; instead she analyzed it, ran
it past others, and made sure it was a valid source of input and not the sole

p
,
p
reason for a conclusion. She used it to find a conclusion, and a good one that her
organization needed.
  *
We all have cognitive biases shaping our decisions and stoking our actions. Like
our perception and perspective, our biases are unique and shaped by our own
experiences, beliefs, and biology. We need to be open to the same input from
others, both to learn their perspective and to help balance ours.
To effectively observe, perceive, and communicate factual truths, we must be
able to account for our biases and, in many cases, overcome them. And
thankfully, science shows that we can with simple awareness and conscious
replacement. To define this concept, Nilanjana Dasgupta, a psychologist at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst, has spent more than a decade
documenting successful interventions over our implicit biases, and confirms,
“These attitudes can form quickly, and they can change quickly, if we restructure
our environments to crowd out stereotypical associations and replace them with
egalitarian ones.” Jennifer Raymond, associate professor of neurobiology and
associate dean in the Office of Diversity and Leadership at the Stanford
University School of Medicine, concurs; “Just as one can overcome physical
habits such as biting one’s fingernails or saying ‘umm’ when one speaks, one
can suppress undesirable mental habits such as gender bias through deliberate,
conscious strategies.” Researchers at the University of Queensland have even
discovered that perceptual training during infancy will prevent the emergence of
the inborn other-race effect; babies who were regularly shown photographs of
different faces were able to later perform a level of recognition and race
differentiation that untrained babies were not.
The human brain is malleable. We can change our perceptions, make new
neural connections, and train it to think differently. Now let’s take the final step
and see how we can use it to navigate uncertainties.

11
What to Do When You Run Out of Gurneys
How to Navigate Uncertainty
IN 2012 I was invited to do a session for the nurses at the University of Colorado
Hospital in Aurora. Six weeks earlier the trauma and critical care units had
endured the aftermath of a mass shooting inside a local movie theater, and they
were still recovering from it. During the midnight screening of The Dark Knight
Rises, a man dressed in tactical clothing had deployed tear gas grenades and
fired into the audience with a pistol, a rifle, and a shotgun, killing twelve people
and injuring seventy others.
They told me how they’d coped with the sudden influx of wounded even
when they ran out of basic necessities such as gurneys. One of the nurses, a
young woman who looked fairly fresh out of school, reminded me that while
they were in the thick of the crisis, they knew less about what had happened than
people at home watching news reports about it. The hospital staff, emergency
workers, passersby, family, and friends didn’t know if it was a lone gunman or
part of a larger attack, if it was domestic or international terrorism, or if the killer
or killers had been caught. This particular nurse, still shaking, recalled that she
hadn’t known what to do, that she hadn’t had any information at the time, and
that she’d just wanted to quit.
How could she avoid feeling that way next time? she asked me. She didn’t
want to ever feel so unprepared, so lost and helpless, when things went wrong.
I wanted to tell her that things would never go wrong for her again. I want to
tell my son and everyone I care about and everyone I work with the same thing.
But things will go wrong for all of us. Life will present us with too many
uncertainties and too few gurneys. I call this place the gray area. In the gray area,
things aren’t clear-cut. Instead, they are weird, messy, noisy, and chaotic. The
lines between good and bad, guilty and innocent, rational and irrational, and
intentional and accidental are blurred.
The gray area is dangerous because it lends itself to sensationalism and
emotionalism. Make a mistake, and TMZ will make sure everyone knows about
it. You can go from miscommunication to damage control to disaster in the blink
of an eye. The headlines are full of stories about situations where it isn’t clear

who was right and who was wrong, and the subjective opinions of a crowd can
cause real damage, from lengthy investigations and lost business to death threats
for those involved. The longer we live and the higher we move up in our careers,
the more often we’ll find ourselves having to negotiate this nebulous place, to
make tough calls in perplexing situations.
I train many first responders in medicine and law enforcement, but in reality,
everyone is a first responder at some point. As we saw in chapter 4, flight
attendants are. Parents are on a daily basis; so are teachers. The same can be said
of employees, bosses, students, and anyone who is ever out in public, really. The
first people at the scene of an emergency, crisis, or crime usually aren’t the news
crews or emergency workers. They are regular people like you and me.
I took off my microphone, went into the audience, and sat with the nurse and
her colleagues. I told them my own first-responder story, how on 9/11 I was
exactly where you didn’t want to be. I was right there in New York City. I saw, I
smelled, and I heard things I never want to experience again. Every week when I
step on a plane, I ask myself, “Is this the one that’s going to go down?” Every
time I kiss my little boy good-bye, I think, “If something happens, how am I
going to get him?” I’ve been there. We all have been or will be. But we must go
on.
How do we do that? How do we move forward in life despite the things we
can’t un-see or undo? How can we be confident in all scenarios, even in the face
of constraint and chaos? How do we make decisions in a gray area where
nothing seems to make sense? With the same organized and methodical
processes we used in previous chapters.
In any situation, but especially in one that’s gray, we need to focus on what
we do know and let go of what we don’t. The nurse I met was stuck on the
unknown “why.” But as we’ve seen, we don’t need to know the why to move
forward. That’s the last piece of the observational puzzle and sometimes the one
that’s never filled in. On our list of priorities, “why” falls somewhere near the
bottom. Instead of standing around waiting for answers to the why, focus on and
objectively deal with what you can see: the who, what, where, and when. That’s
what the leaders in a small town in the South did the year before Trayvon Martin
was shot, and why you’ve never heard of Jasmine Thar.
In December 2011, two months before Trayvon Martin’s shooting gripped the
nation, sixteen-year-old Jasmine Thar was killed standing in her godmother’s
driveway two days before Christmas. She died in front of her mother, younger
brother, and other family members and friends. The bullet that killed her also hit
and injured two women. It came from a high-powered rifle across the street.
When the police went to the shooter’s home, they found a Confederate flag, a

noose, and neo-Nazi materials.
How did the local police manage to keep the peace in their town and keep the
situation from escalating into a national incident? By conscientiously choosing
open, inclusive, and objective information gathering and communication.
Time was of the essence, even though the young woman had already died.
Tensions ran exceedingly high. Perceptions and prejudices abounded as the
shooter, a twenty-three-year-old white man, maintained that the gun had
malfunctioned, while Jasmine’s black family believed the shooting was racially
motivated. On the surface, the notion that a man who possessed neo-Nazi
materials would accidentally shoot a young black teenager across the street did
seem unlikely, but before making any assumptions or bringing any charges, the
chief of police in Chadbourn, North Carolina, had the presence of mind to send
the gun to ballistics experts at the FBI to test for malfunction.
When we’re working in the gray area, we must be extra careful, because it is
likely that others will be scrutinizing our actions very closely. To get out in front
of the crisis, local law enforcement invited the spiritual leaders of the
community to participate in every step of the investigation.
When the FBI reported that the gun had in fact accidentally discharged, the
shooter was not indicted. Not everyone in the community was satisfied with the
findings—they didn’t bring Jasmine back to life—but the leaders in North
Carolina had effectively confronted the difficult perceptions head on, articulated
them, and kept all parties apprised of the investigation. They carefully sorted
through objective facts and subjective inferences. They kept the big picture in
focus—the community’s grief and need for answers—while taking care of the
small details, such as having the gun checked right away. Doing so kept them off
the map in the best possible way.
Johnson & Johnson provides another example of successfully navigating the
gray area. In 1982, when news broke that seven people had died after ingesting
Tylenol Extra-Strength capsules, panic spread quickly. The victims died within
minutes of consuming pain reliever laced with sixty-five milligrams of cyanide;
just seven micrograms is fatal. Advertising mogul Jerry Della Femina told the
New York Times, “I don’t think they can ever sell another product under that
name.”
The situation had many unknowns. How did the medicine get tainted? Who
did it? Was it chemical terrorism, a deliberate poisoning by someone outside
Johnson & Johnson, or the fault of the manufacturer? (Cyanide was available at
the product plants.)
Instead of waiting for answers or attempting to duck responsibility, Johnson &
Johnson acted quickly and decisively. Chairman James Burke prioritized the two
i
i
h
f
i
fi
“H
d

most important questions the company was facing—first, “How do we protect
consumers?” and second, “How do we save this product?”—and proceeded to
work on answering them.
The company immediately stopped production and advertising and recalled all
Tylenol capsules from the market—approximately 31 million bottles valued at
more than $100 million. It also offered to exchange all of the millions of Tylenol
capsules already in consumers’ homes. Going further, it offered counseling and
financial assistance to the victims’ families. It put up a reward for any
information about the poisoned pills and pledged not to put any Tylenol products
back on the market until they were more securely protected. They spent more
money and time developing new three-part tamper-resistant packaging that
included stronger glue on the boxes and both printed plastic seals and foil stamps
on the bottles. Johnson & Johnson did all this before it was ever determined if
the company was at fault.
The company also opened lines of communication with all news media outlets
to ensure that warnings were distributed to the public and established
relationships with local police departments, the FBI, and the Food and Drug
Administration.
Johnson & Johnson never got its “why.” The case was never solved and
spawned several copycat crimes across the country. But rather than letting the
unknown paralyze them or obsessing over what they didn’t know, the company
set its priorities on taking care of what it could, and as a result produced a
corporate miracle. Johnson & Johnson completely recovered its market share
and reestablished Tylenol as one of the most trusted brands in America. How?
By objectively handling the facts and not letting the subjective suck them under.
SUBJECTIVE PROBLEMS, OBJECTIVE ANSWERS
That some situations aren’t straightforward and might never have definitive
answers doesn’t mean we can’t address them. When the problem or scene or
challenge we face is nebulous, morally ambiguous, or otherwise in the gray area,
consider it a subjective problem, then deal with it objectively.
A problem is a problem. Handle the subjective ones the same way you have
learned to handle the objective ones. Gather what facts you can by looking at
both the big picture and the small details, step back, consider other perspectives,
analyze, prioritize, ask questions, and communicate clearly and concisely.
In 1993, a Denny’s restaurant outside of Washington, DC, was accused of
racially discriminating against customers. Six black uniformed Secret Service
agents claimed they weren’t served as quickly as their white counterparts
b
f th i
Th
it
l i
d th t th d l
d b th

because of their race. The waitress claimed that the delay was caused by the
large size of the Secret Service contingent—twenty-one people entered the
restaurant together, with the six black agents sitting at one table—the complexity
of their orders, and the black agents having ordered last. The proof of the alleged
prejudice? The waitress was seen rolling her eyes after turning to leave the black
agents’ table. The result? A class action lawsuit. Discrimination is hard to prove.
Did the waitress do it on purpose? Only she knows.
Denny’s Corporation didn’t waste time with the subjective—did the waitress
discriminate or not?—but rather immediately handled it objectively,
understanding that it must overcome public suspicion at once by showing a clear
opposition to racism and a respect for its customers in general. Denny’s took
responsibility, apologized, made restitution, instituted new policies, and
communicated directly with the public that whether the accusations were true or
not, the company wouldn’t accept even the appearance of racial bias at its
restaurants.
Gray areas will differ in size, importance, and context, but they will arise in
both our professional and personal experiences. In either situation, a subjective
response can increase the risk of negative escalation and, even more dangerous,
obscure the facts. We must respond objectively even when the situation itself is
subjective. In doing so, we might not be able to eliminate hard-to-solve
problems, but we can minimize our risks when things get messy.
BEING CREATIVE WHEN RESOURCES ARE STRETCHED
Adapting our skills for success in a less-than-perfect world means not only
managing the gray, subjective areas around and within us, it also means doing
the very best we can with what we have. In situations with shocking shortfalls—
in information, time, materials, manpower, money—leaders cannot shut down or
walk away. In a crisis we don’t get to fill out an acquisition report or complain to
our boss. We throw someone over our shoulder and do what needs to be done
without the luxury of all of the information, and in a stressful time crunch.
Nobody has enough money. No one has enough time or manpower. Everyone’s
resources are stretched. But that doesn’t have to be a bad thing.
As necessity is the mother of invention, so can constraints bring out the best in
us. Tightened circumstances force us to rethink, reframe, and do things
differently, instead of conducting business as usual.

El Anatsui, Skylines, 2008.
In art, this is called “objet trouvé,” making new art from found objects. Ghanaian
artist El Anatsui is famous for it. As you can see, he creates magnificent, room-
size pieces that look like glittering mosaics from afar and are assembled to
resemble woven cloth. Up close, you see that they’re made of countless tiny
pieces of metal, pinched, twisted, and shaped, linked together with copper wire.
Get even closer and you can read words on the metal: Dark Sailor, Top Squad,
Chelsea.
One day on a routine scavenger hunt for free, local material to work with, El
Anatsui discovered his medium. It was plentiful along the roadsides in West
Africa, thrown away with the trash: metal caps from liquor bottles. Using it to
make art, he in turn makes a statement. The layers of his work are many: it is
repurposed beauty; it’s a comment on world issues such as industrial waste; it’s
a communal endeavor made by teams of people; it’s endlessly flexible, never
hanging the exact same way twice; it’s inexpensive, created from literal trash;
it’s large and powerful and yet portable enough to fold down and fit into a
suitcase.
If the son of a fisherman born on the Gold Coast can do this with discarded
bottle caps and wire, what can we do with our own finite resources? How
creative can we get?

El Anatsui, Oasis (detail), 2008.
The need to be resourceful doesn’t just come around with quarterly budgets.
It’s ever-present in our personal finances, in our parenting needs, in our
education system, in our government, and especially in emergencies. We can
have confidence in the face of chaos when we know we can be creative with our
resources no matter what the situation. To prove that we can deal effectively
with a deficit, we’re going to use the observation, perception, and
communication skills we’ve learned throughout the book to analyze works of art
that are not finished.
THE ANXIETY OF THE UNFINISHED
The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York alone has more than two dozen
unfinished works on view—not hidden in the closets or tossed aside but up on
the wall installed next to their finished treasures. Why? Because art historians
believe that they afford us the opportunity to study the process and appreciate
the hard work, skill, and inspired thought that precede an object’s completion.
Life, after all, is a work-in-progress, and everything isn’t always finished off
with a neat bow on top.
Not everyone enjoys looking at unfinished works, however. Blank spaces
where faces should be, missing hands, and visible scribbles can make some
visitors extremely nervous. They’re uncomfortable not because they have
obsessive-compulsive disorder but because they are human.
H
l t
h
th t
h l gi t
l i

Humans crave completeness, so much so that some psychologists claim we
have an “incomplete” complex. Whether it’s unopened emails, loose ends at
work, or undone home-remodeling projects, things that aren’t finished hang over
us like a weight and haunt the corners of our minds. The unfinished occupies our
brains because humans, as evidenced by numerous studies around the world,
have a need to finish a task once it’s been started. The search for closure stems
from the brain’s preference for efficiency. A completed task is a closed loop. An
incomplete one is an open loop that uses up cognitive energy searching for a
solution or worrying that there isn’t one yet.
The phenomenon of incomplete tasks dominating our thoughts is called “the
Zeigarnik effect.” It’s named for Russian psychologist Bluma Zeigarnik, who
was in a café in the 1930s when she noticed that the waiters had exceptional
recall skills only for the orders they hadn’t yet filled; the minute they set the
food and drink down, they were relieved of the pressure of thinking about it.
Many believe that the Zeigarnik effect is why television shows ending in
“cliffhangers” convince us to tune in next time, and how quiz shows suck us in.
Dr. Tom Stafford from the psychology and cognitive science departments at the
University of Sheffield in the United Kingdom writes, “You might not care
about the year the British Broadcasting Corporation was founded or the
percentage of the world’s countries that have at least one McDonald’s restaurant,
but once someone has asked the question it becomes strangely irritating not to
know the answer (1927 and 61%, by the way).” Stafford, author of Mind Hacks,
even credits the Zeigarnik effect for the enduring success of the game Tetris.
Invented by a Russian scientist in 1984 and still going strong thirty years later,
Tetris has been played by an estimated one billion people because “it takes
advantage of the mind’s basic pleasure in tidying up—and uses it against us.”
Incomplete things cause us stress. In his book Getting Things Done,
productivity consultant David Allen argues that the major cause of everyday
anxiety is that we all feel we have too much to do and not enough time to get it
done, which frustrates us because our brains subconsciously obsess over the
incomplete. According to Allen, the obsession is relatively democratic for all
tasks including “everything from really big to-do items like ‘End world hunger’
to the more modest ‘Hire new assistant’ to the tiniest task such as ‘Replace
electric pencil sharpener.’”
Incomplete things that threaten our productivity aren’t limited to the tasks on a
to-do list. They also include everything we’ve internally agreed to do, such as
the implicit understanding that we’re obligated to answer every email, return
every phone call, and answer every question that’s asked of us. The stress of the
incomplete can affect corporate managers and news bureau editors as easily as
students or stay at home parents We don’t have to keep a conscious tally of how

students or stay-at-home parents. We don t have to keep a conscious tally of how
many incomplete things are circling in our brains to know that they sap our
energy and attention. Backlogs drive us crazy.
And so, as with other things that cause us discomfort, we avoid them. Which
makes them worse.
Instead of evading the incomplete tasks, we’re going to trick our brains into
not being caught in that infinite open loop by dealing with them as if they were
complete. And we’ll do it—you guessed it—with art.
FINISHING THE UNFINISHED
Famous artworks are left unfinished for the same reasons projects, promotions,
and problems in the workplace remain undone, unfilled, and unsolved: politics,
disasters, indecision, changes in direction from above, death or illness, lack of
time, money, or resources. The ability to pick up where someone else left off is
invaluable, especially now, when the national annual employee turnover rate
across all industries is over 40 percent, and new workers are expected to
successfully complete projects they didn’t start. If we can separate our subjective
emotion concerning an unfinished project—our disappointment or frustration at
having to work with the less-than-perfect—from the objective facts, we’ll find
that in many ways, working with the incomplete is no different from working
with the complete.
Take a look at this unfinished sketch by Gustav Klimt:

Can we objectively assess and analyze it? Yes. The important elements are all
there.
Who is it? A woman with dark hair, a long face, light eyes, dark eyebrows,
and a thin nose. We can see the slender fingers on her right hand resting on her
lap; her left hand is not visible. She appears to be alone. She wears a choker of
black ribbon and lace that suggests she’s from the early twentieth century, or at
least dressing in the fashion of that time.
What is she doing? Sitting, looking straight ahead as if posing for a portrait.
Where is she? It appears that she is indoors, possibly in a studio or other
nondescript location.
When is it? Probably daytime, judging by the lighting. We cannot tell the time
of year.
What don’t we know? Her name, her relationship to the painter, where she is
posing, what the remainder of her dress or covering looks like, why she is there,
why the painting wasn’t finished.
What would we like to know the most if we could get more information?

What would we like to know the most if we could get more information?
What would answer the most important questions? Who she is.
Even though the painting itself is unfinished, we can use the objective facts
we know to find out more.
We know the work is by Klimt. Why is it only half completed? Investigating
what Klimt was working on near the end of his life, we can discover that the
sketch is the beginning of a portrait he painted in Vienna from 1917 to 1918. It
was left unfinished when he died suddenly of a stroke at the age of fifty-six.
So we now have a time and a place. Following those leads, with a little
historical research we can uncover that the portrait Klimt was working on in
1917 was of a woman named Amalie Zuckerkandl, and from that the story
blossoms.
Amalie Zuckerkandl knew all the right people. She was the sister-in-law of
Klimt’s good friend Berta Zuckerkandl, an art critic, journalist, and literary salon
hostess, and a friend of Therese Bloch-Bauer, sister-in-law of one of Klimt’s
biggest patrons, the Jewish sugar baron Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer. Ferdinand
Bloch-Bauer commissioned the portrait of Amalie along with at least seven
others, including two of his wife, Adele. The Nazis entered Vienna in 1938,
spreading chaos for both Jewish citizens and resident artists. While her daughter
Hermine was able to hide safely in Bavaria, Amalie was executed in a
concentration camp.
The painting of her was at that time hanging with the other Klimts in
Ferdinand Bloch-Bauer’s Vienna palais. Although Bloch-Bauer managed to flee
to his castle in Czechoslovakia, he hired a lawyer in Vienna to protect his
property; that lawyer turned out to be a high-ranking SS officer who then helped
liquidate his estate for the Nazis. Bloch-Bauer’s Vienna palais eventually
became a German railway center and is now the Austrian rail headquarters.
The painting of Amalie was lost for a few years but is believed to have come
into the possession of Amalie’s non-Jewish son-in-law, who sold it to an art
dealer. The dealer kept the painting in her private collection and donated it to the
Austrian Gallery in 2001 when she died at the age of 101. In 2006 an Austrian
arbitration panel ruled that all stolen works including Portrait of Amalie
Zuckerkandl (unfinished) be returned to the Bloch-Bauer heirs, but then changed
its mind and decided that Amalie should stay in Austria.
We never would have unearthed this rich, riveting story if we had shied away
from the Klimt because it was unfinished. Instead, we tackled it the same way
we tackle any finished work: with a methodical plan and a process. Being
prepared to use our skills in less-than-ideal circumstances where important
things are missing will prepare us for the curveballs that can bench other people:
layoffs, firings, sudden departures, bad hires, drastic changes in policy, rules,

ayo s,
gs, sudde depa tu es, bad
es, d ast c c a ges
po cy, u es,
and regulations. We need to make a go of it even when we have only incomplete
information or resources. I did just that late one night at a hotel in Washington,
DC, and I was more than satisfied with the possibly life-saving result.
I’m often in the capital for business and stay at the same hotel downtown so
often, they’ve given me birthday gifts. However, during one stay I was awoken
at 2 a.m. by screaming outside my door.
“I’m not going to let you do this to me again! I’m calling 911, I swear I will!”
a woman’s voice rang down the hallway.
I got out of bed and looked out my peephole; I saw nothing. As an
experienced solo traveler, I knew better than to open the door and possibly put
myself in harm’s way. The screaming continued.
I had a very incomplete picture of what was going on. I didn’t know who was
involved, how they knew each other, or the context of their communication. But
I could hear the tone in the woman’s voice, and it told me she might be in
trouble.
I called the front desk and reported what I had heard. I was very careful to
articulate only what I knew: what I had heard being said, where, and when. The
front desk summoned the police.
An hour later I got a call from the hotel asking if I would give my statement to
the officers now on the scene. I was the only “ear witness” to the argument, the
only person in the hotel who had called to report the incident. I’m sure I’m not
the only person who heard the screaming. It was very loud and lasted a good
while. I believe that other guests didn’t call in because they were put off by the
incompleteness of their information. They didn’t know what was going on, so
they ignored it. I didn’t know either, but my entire professional career from
attorney to education director to The Art of Perception president has taught me
not to ignore anything.
During my interview, I was forthright about what I knew and didn’t know.
What I’d heard was incomplete, therefore both my observations and my
perceptions were incomplete. But that lack of information didn’t preclude me
from cooperating. I relayed the facts I knew, leaving out the subjective, my
opinions, and my assumptions: At approximately 2:15 a.m. I woke to screaming
in the hallway outside my room, 226; I went to the door, looked out the
peephole, and saw nothing; I heard a woman’s voice scream and relayed exactly
what I had heard, as I remembered it; I also heard a male voice with her but
could not make out what he said; the screaming and arguing continued for at
least fifteen minutes.
The police found the woman from the hallway hiding in the lobby behind
some furniture. She had been unwillingly employed as a sex worker and was

g y
p y
fighting with her pimp. Instead of this being a he said, she said situation,
however, the police had an impartial third party on record confirming that the
woman said what she did, that it wasn’t a lover’s quarrel as the man was
claiming. As a result, the police were able to intercept a prostitution ring that had
been operating out of the hotel.
We can employ the same techniques with other incomplete things in our lives.
For instance, say it’s the long list of bold, unread emails in your in-box that’s
currently clogging your brain. Instead of letting the subjective take over—I’ll
never get to all of them! There are too many!—look for the objective facts the
same way you would with a finished piece of art. Start with numbers. Count how
many you receive a day, and figure out how many you can reasonably answer.
Determine when they come in, then schedule a time each day when you can
focus on nothing else but email.
Ask yourself, what are the differences between the incomplete and the
complete in this case? Incomplete emails are both read and unread but still
unanswered. Complete emails are read and replied to. Can you do something to
treat the incomplete as if it were complete? Perhaps you could read the emails all
at once without answering them but with an eye toward sorting and prioritizing
them. Don’t have time to answer every one as quickly as you’d like? Remove
that stress by doing what you would do for completion: answer them but with an
autoresponse. Inc. columnist Kevin Daum suggests, “Thanks, I got this. I’m a
little busy but I will respond within a day or two.”
Amazingly, just planning to put this new email protocol in place, planning to
attack the incomplete as if it were complete, alleviates much of the stress that
causes us to avoid it in the first place, whether we’re successful at implementing
it or not. In a series of studies in 2011, psychologists at Florida State University
found that the mere act of planning not only eliminated the mental interference
caused by unfulfilled goals, it freed cognitive resources, which ultimately
facilitated the attainment of that goal. Or as Dr. Stafford puts it, “[Our] mind
loves it when a plan comes together—the mere act of planning how to do
something frees us from the burden of unfinished tasks.”
As we’ve seen throughout this book, the ability to see clearly, process, and
communicate in any situation brings with it big benefits both professionally and
personally, including job security, personal safety, financial gain, and universal
respect—huge rewards for an easy and almost automatic process that anyone,
with a bit of practice, can master.

Conclusion: Master Work
WHEN FUTURE CNN Hero Derreck Kayongo stepped out of his hotel shower with
questions about a tiny bar of soap, he never dreamed that one small observation
could have such a large, international impact. In the five years since he was
inspired to found Global Soap Project, Kayongo has seen his initial idea for
reusing refuse multiply many times over. What started as simply taking
discarded bars of soap from American hotels, disinfecting them, and distributing
them to people in his native Uganda who had no way to even wash their hands
quickly turned into a hygiene revolution. His charity has since evolved to help
curb the spread of Ebola in Sierra Leone and work with midwives to stop
preventable puerperal sepsis, also known as “childbed fever,” which regularly
kills newly delivered mothers in developing countries. And in an initiative that
brings his entrepreneurial and humanitarian journey full circle, Kayongo now
provides micro-loans to local soap makers, like his father, so they can contribute
to making their own communities healthier.
Most surprising, though, are the transformations Kayongo has personally
witnessed. During his very first delivery of five thousand newly recycled bars of
soap to a village in Kisumu, Kenya, things didn’t go according to plan.
He recalls, “The mamas lined up with their children, smiling and laughing, as
I piled the bars on little tables. I told them the story of the soap. I said, this is no
ordinary bar of soap. It has been made lovingly by American volunteers just for
you. This is the soap of hope.”
When he returned the next morning to see how the women liked the soap, he
learned that most of them had been afraid to use it.
“You said it was the soap of hope,” they told him. “That it was made lovingly
just for us. We could not use something so precious!”
“Oh no!” he remembers saying. “I told them, you must use it! You must go
bathe!”
Then one of the villagers, a thin woman with large, dancing eyes, came up to
him and confessed that she had used her bar but not in the way he imagined.
She said, “I took the bar of soap, it smelled so beautiful, and I put a little bit of
water on it and I applied it all over my whole body.”
“All over?” Kayongo asked.
“Yes, all over,” she said, smiling. “And I did not rinse it off.”
“Why?” he asked.

She answered, “Because I have never smelled like a girl before.”
Kayongo was overwhelmed with the realization that when we recognize and
act upon even the smallest of things, we have the power to change lives.
This is the true lesson of seeing what matters—that noticing the overlooked,
the ordinary, or the seemingly unimportant can not only help solve our initial
problem or cement our success, it can also produce unexpected, paradigm-
shifting, and beautiful by-products. Side effects that impact us and the world
around us more than we ever thought possible. The unwrapped bar of soap saves
lives. A grainy photograph of a cow evolved from a lesson on visual acuity to a
military training program that accurately detected enemy aircraft during World
War II. A zipperless zipper inspired by burrs in nature changed the fashion
industry but also made living and working in space possible.
What I teach is not rocket science. With all due respect to the rocket scientists
of the world, I think it’s better. Because when you reawaken your senses and re-
engage your sense of inquiry, the possibilities for transformative change are
endless.
While I’ve gotten thousands of testimonials through the years from past
participants of The Art of Perception, I was surprised and delighted to receive
the first one for this book before it was even published. It came from the only
person who could have given it, since no one else had been able to read the book
yet: my editor, Eamon Dolan, a first-rate professional communicator who I
didn’t think needed additional lessons in perception.
After months of being immersed in my world (and my manuscript), he was on
the subway headed to work when he noticed a woman across the aisle who
seemed uncomfortable. She was searching through her purse frantically, and she
appeared to be sobbing. When she started coughing and gasping, a couple of
people asked her what was wrong, but she couldn’t talk. As the train pulled into
a station, a few passengers just looked at one another as if wondering what to do,
and one tried to comfort the woman.
Eamon ran out of the car and down the platform to the middle of the train,
where he found the conductor with her window open.
“You need to take this train out of service now and call for medical
assistance,” Eamon said. “There’s a woman in the second car—I think she’s
having an asthma attack, and she can’t find her inhaler.”
The train stayed in the station, cops and EMTs arrived, and they took care of
the woman. As they helped her off the train, she was still breathing heavily, but
she’d stopped coughing and could talk. She confirmed that she was having an
asthma emergency and couldn’t locate her rescue inhaler. Since 80 percent of
asthma deaths can be prevented with normal medical treatment but often occur

when adults forget to carry an inhaler, Eamon may have saved this woman’s life.
“Before I edited your book,” he told me afterward, “I wouldn’t have done that.
Not because I didn’t give a damn but because I wouldn’t have observed as
closely as I did, acted as quickly as I did, or communicated as well as I did.
Working on your book gave me the habit of observing my surroundings better—
so I knew that the woman and I were in the second car from the front of the
train, I noticed the woman behaving oddly, and I remembered that conductors sit
in the middle of trains and usually open their windows in stations, unlike the
motormen, who sit at the front.”
Visual Intelligence hadn’t just sharpened his observation skills; it also helped
him establish a new pattern of thinking. As he went on to list the processes he
had instantly engaged in, he might as well have been walking me through the
chapters of the book. He recognized that other passengers saw the situation
differently, and he didn’t let that alter his own perceptions (chapter 3). He noted
the who, what, when, and where of the scene (chapter 4). He perceived details
such as the specific number car he’d boarded (chapter 5), he analyzed the scene
from different angles (chapter 6), and he guessed what was missing: an asthma
inhaler (chapter 7). He also told me that chapter 7’s lesson on how to prioritize
information on the fly had stuck with him, so he knew to tell the conductor the
most urgent thing first: to stop the train rather than pulling out of the station.
And he packaged his observations with a message tailored specifically for his
listener (chapter 8).
“You made me more alert to word choice than I would have been otherwise,”
he said. “So I used the MTA’s language—‘out of service,’ ‘medical
assistance’—so the conductor might take in my message more easily and
quickly.”
He concluded that Visual Intelligence had given him the courage to act fast
and make an educated guess about what was ailing the woman despite having
incomplete information (chapter 11). I understood this last bit the best—and the
rush of happiness that comes with it—because it’s how I felt after the police told
me I’d helped bust a prostitution ring in the hotel. When you tap into your visual
intelligence, you are transformed—into a super sleuth, a case cracker, and a
guardian angel all in one. You feel like you’ve uncovered a secret world that’s
been right there all along.
Every day I’m fortunate enough to watch as people from around the world—
high school teachers, intelligence operatives, Fortune 500 CEOs, students, civil
servants, and stay-at-home parents—uncover a power they didn’t know they had.
The same power you have. It’s why I can’t stop teaching The Art of Perception,
and why I am so thrilled to share the same “secrets” with you. I cannot wait to
h
b
h
h
lif
d h li
f h
d
b

hear about how you change your own life and the lives of those around you by
using the faculties and fantastic abilities you were born with.
Remember in your quest for the big picture not to lose sight of the small
details.
Don’t be afraid of complexity, and don’t rush to judgment. Step back and take
things apart one layer at a time the way you would a complicated work of art.
Start at ground zero. Prioritize by importance. Make sure you’ve considered all
of the data possible. Did you miss a mahogany table?
Always ask questions, especially of yourself. No matter how “obvious” it
seems to you, state what you see, because it’s possible that no one else will see
it. Don’t forget the basics; say that one scene is a photo and one is a painting. To
crystallize your communication, assume that the person you are communicating
with can’t see what you’re seeing at all. Ask yourself, “Was I as clear as
possible? Did I ask the right questions to elicit the answers I need?”
Make sure you are only dealing in objective facts. Describe what you see
without letting your emotions and assumptions block your perception. Don’t
divorce yourself from your experience, but be conscious of it and how it might
affect you so it doesn’t lead you toward faulty assumptions.
When we choose to see the world differently, with a critical eye, we are
choosing to be exceptional. To help you realize how far you’ve come and how
exceptional you now are, I invite you to go back and look at one of our very first
paintings, The Portrait by René Magritte on page 23. What was first a simple, if
odd, still life—or perhaps a picture skimmed over without thought—is now ripe
with possibility. Note the relationships and juxtapositions, the smudges and the
sharp reflections, the textures, the smells, the realistic, and the fantastic. What do
you see now that you didn’t before? The painting itself did not change. You did.
Now you’re seeing what matters.

Acknowledgments
THERE ARE SO many people to whom I owe a debt of immeasurable gratitude for
making this book possible. First and foremost are my father and sister, Robert
Herman and Jane E. Herman, without whom The Art of Perception never would
have happened. They, along with my mother, Diana S. Herman, who died in
2010, have been teaching me to see what matters since I was a young child.
Their ideas, insights, edits, willingness to embrace new perspectives, and
stalwart support in every aspect of my work have been invaluable to me and are
appreciated beyond measure.
I am deeply indebted to Heather Maclean, without whom Visual Intelligence
would not exist. Her vision, insight, creativity, intellect, collaborative spirit, and
most especially her good humor are unparalleled. Simply put, it is an absolute
delight to work with her. My gratitude to Heather must encompass an
acknowledgment of her husband, Calum Maclean, for his cooperation,
encouragement, and willingness to brainstorm with us throughout this project.
My agent at Writers House, Susan Ginsburg, has been a voice of reason and
support, and a morale booster since the day we met. It was she who saw the
potential for this project long before I did, and I am eternally grateful to her.
Before I met Susan, however, fate conspired for me to cross paths with her
Writers House colleague Robin Rue. Our chance encounter and delightful
conversation set this whole initiative in motion, and I am indebted to Robin for
her incredible foresight. I offer my heartfelt thanks, too, to Stacy Testa, also at
Writers House, for her kind assistance with every aspect of this book.
My thanks to my editor, Eamon Dolan, at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt for his
scrupulous eye, fierce intellect, and willingness to embrace The Art of
Perception for the new and different perspectives it offers. I am grateful, too, to
Courtney Young, who saw the potential for this book in its nascent stages and
provided the momentum to initiate its journey. I am deeply appreciative of the
delightful help of Rosemary McGuinness, editorial assistant at Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, whose attention to detail and calm demeanor sustained this project,
and of Naomi Gibbs for all her assistance. I want to express my gratitude to the
whole wonderful team at Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, including Taryn Roeder,
Ayesha Mizra, and Debbie Engel. My thanks also go to Margaret Wimberger for
her nimble and precise copyediting of this book and to Lisa Glover for her
discerning eye and patience.

The Art of Perception began at The Frick Collection in New York. My
colleagues there were unfailingly generous in their support of the program, both
during my years as Head of Education and beyond. I am indebted to Peggy
Iacono, Susan Galassi, Colin B. Bailey, Elaine Koss, Rebecca Brooke, Martha
Hackley, Kate Gerlough, and Penelope Currier. My heartfelt thanks to the late
Charles Ryskamp, director emeritus of The Frick Collection, whose
encouragement to pursue museum education provided fertile ground for the
development of The Art of Perception, and to Samuel Sachs II, former director
of The Frick Collection, whose support of my endeavors in the Education
Department was formative. Two additional individuals from The Frick
Collection whose knowledge and insights have contributed so much to The Art
of Perception and whose wonderful friendship have supported my work on the
manuscript are Chari LeMasters and Serena Rattazzi.
Many sessions of The Art of Perception have been conducted at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. My thanks to former associate
director of education Kent Lydecker and former Chairman of Education Peggy
Fogelman, and to Marlene Graham, senior manager of the Ruth and Harold D.
Uris Center for Education, for their generosity in accommodating the program
for the New York City Police Department.
The Art of Perception also has been conducted at the National Gallery of Art
in Washington, DC, and my sincere thanks to Lynn Russell, head of education,
and Kimberly Hodges for their generosity in making the National Gallery’s
collections accessible to the intelligence community. Thanks also to former
director of education at the Smithsonian American Art Museum in Washington,
DC, Susan Nichols, for her willingness to host the program there on so many
occasions.
I believe that The Art of Perception would never have been created if it were
not for my formative experience as a docent at the Princeton University Art
Museum. The docents’ generosity in sharing and imparting their knowledge of
museum education has been instrumental in connecting me with audiences in
museums around the world, and I am enormously grateful to them.
On a personal and professional note, I owe a debt of gratitude to Linda
Friedlander, curator of education at the Yale Center for British Art, who, along
with Dr. Irwin Braverman, professor of dermatology at Yale Medical School,
initially designed a program for medical students to enhance their observation
skills as part of that school’s Humanities in Medicine program, and who so
graciously shared her knowledge and insights with me.
My thanks to New York City police commissioner William Bratton and
former police commissioner Raymond Kelly and the New York City Police

Department for launching The Art of Perception in the law enforcement
community, in New York and in communities across the country. The NYPD’s
imprimatur and support of this training initiative, in so many divisions, have
been inspirational. Specifically, I would like to thank Captain Daniel Sosnowik,
retired inspector Timothy Hardiman, Lieutenant Mark Albarano, Detective
Ahmed Mahmoud, Officer Heather Totoro, and Officer Anita Carter.
My colleagues at the Federal Bureau of Investigation—and there are too many
to name—have my gratitude for their willingness to embrace The Art of
Perception, in so many facets, as part of the FBI’s ongoing training programs. I
have learned so much from each of them.
There are so many friends and colleagues I have met through The Art of
Perception or who have given their unwavering support to my efforts to extend
the reach of this program that I can’t name them all, but I would like to cite a
few: Dr. Charles Bardes, Sarah Miller Beebe, Christine Butler, Ellen Byron,
Monica Chandler, Jacob Eastham, Beth Farcht, Peter Forest, Elise Geltzer,
Bobbi Goodman, Ed Hobson, Rachele Khadjehturian, Audrey Koota, Dr. Lyuba
Konopasek, Richard Korn, Marilyn Kushner, the Lehrer family, Melissa
Malhame, Bob Mattison, Robin McCabe, John and Carla Murray, Sheri
Mecklenberg, Anne Radice, Donna Cohen Ross, and Allegra Stanek.
My son, Ian, to whom this book is dedicated, has been absolutely central to
every aspect of The Art of Perception and this book. He has looked at countless
works of art with me and engaged me in an ongoing dialogue that has been the
light of my days. His willingness to share his view of the world with me and his
untiring support have helped me to see what matters every single day.

Notes
Introduction
1 It was very: Christine DiGrazia, “Yale’s Life-or-Death Course in Art
Criticism,” New York Times, May 19, 2002.
2 The Wall Street: Ellen Byron, “To Master the Art of Solving Crimes, Cops
Study Vermeer,” Wall Street Journal, July 27, 2005.
3 After taking The: Neal Hirschfeld, “Teaching Cops to See,” Smithsonian,
October 2009.
4 “I felt like I had”: Quoted in Mike Newall, “A Course Uses Art to Sharpen
Police Officer’s Observation,” Philadelphia Inquirer, May 18, 2013.
5 “put a human face”: Elizabeth Day, “The Street Art of JR,” Guardian, March
6, 2010.
1. Leonardo da Vinci and Losing Your Mind
7 “I want to make sure”: Kayongo quotations from interview with author,
September 2014. To find out how you can get involved, visit Global Soap
Project at www.globalsoap.org.
8 “I’m not a”: According to Global Soap Project, hotels in the United States
alone discard an estimated 2.6 million bars of soap every day.
9 In 2011, Kayongo: Ebonne Ruffins, “Recycling Hotel Soap to Save Lives,”
CNN, June 16, 2011.
10 “a major disaster”: Joel Greenberg, “Coat, Backpack, Sweat: Close Call in
Israeli Cafe,” New York Times, March 8, 2002,
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/08/world/coat-backpack-sweat-close-call-
in-israeli-cafe.html.
11 What made him see: Velcro Industries BV, “Velcro Industries History and
George de Mestral,” http://www.velcro.com/About-Us/History.aspx.
12 Her invention, Eggies: Lori Weiss, “One Woman’s Egg-Cellent Idea Is
Turning Her into a Millionaire,” Huffington Post, January 9, 2013,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/04/one-womans-egg-cellent-id-
marlo-thomas-it-aint-over_n_2412204.html.

13 “When you ask”: Leander Kahney, “John Sculley on Steve Jobs, the Full
Interview Transcript,” Cult of Mac, October 14, 2010,
http://www.cultofmac.com/63295/john-sculley-on-steve-jobs-the-full-
interview-transcript/.
14 “knowing how to see”: Michael J. Gelb, How to Think Like Leonardo da
Vinci: Seven Steps to Genius Every Day (New York: Delacorte Press, 1998).
15 Not only does: Society for Neuroscience, Brain Facts: A Primer on the Brain
and Nervous System, 7th ed., www.brainfacts.org.
16 “It’s definitely not”: Dr. Sebastian Seung, interviews with author, September
2014. A huge thank-you to Dr. Seung. For a fantastic book about brain
science, be sure to read his Connectome: How the Brain’s Wiring Makes Us
Who We Are (New York: First Mariner Books, 2013).
17 The retina isn’t: The Encyclopedia of Neuroscience officially classifies the
retina as “a true part of the brain displaced into the eye during development.”
Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, ed. Larry R. Squire (Philadelphia: Academic
Press, 2009), s.v. “retina.”
18 I have seen: I joined the EyeWire community at www.eyewire.org in August
2014; Joe Palca, “Eyewire: A Computer Game to Map the Eye,” Joe’s Big
Idea, NPR, May 5, 2014.
19 With 100 million: Michael Land, Encyclopedia Britannica Online, accessed
August 11, 2015, http://www.britannica.com/science/photoreception, s.v.
“photoreception; biology,” and s.v. “Sensory Reception: Human Vision:
Structure and Function of the Human Eye.”
20 “Some of the”: Palca, “Eyewire.”
21 Scientists have discovered: Lauran Neergaard, “At Age 40, Both Brain and
Body Start to Slow,” NBC News, Associated Press, November 3, 2008;
Karlene K. Ball, Daniel L. Roenker, and John R. Bruni, “Developmental
Changes in Attention and Visual Search Through Adulthood,” The
Development of Attention: Research and Theory, ed. James T. Enns (New
York: North-Holland, 1990), 489–92; Meghomala Das, David M. Bennett,
and Gordon N. Dutton, “Visual Attention as an Important Visual Function: An
Outline of Manifestations, Diagnosis and Management of Impaired Visual
Attention,” British Journal of Ophthalmology vol. 92, no. 11 (November
2007): 1556–60.
22 Fortunately for all: Marian Cleeves Diamond, “The Brain . . . Use It or Lose
It,” Mindshift Connection vol. 1, no. 1, reprinted in Johns Hopkins School of
Education website,
http://education.jhu.edu/PD/newhorizons/Neurosciences/articles/The%20Brain

23 “exorbitant stockpiles”: Jennifer L. Roberts, “The Power of Patience,”
Harvard Magazine, November–December 2013.
24 In 1908: Melinda Beck, “Anxiety Can Bring Out the Best,” Wall Street
Journal, June 18, 2012.
25 “We are all”: Alexander Graham Bell, “Discovery and Invention,” National
Geographic vol. 25 (June 1914): 650.
26 Today more people: Yue Wang, “More People Have Cell Phones Than
Toilets, U.N. Study Shows,” Time, March 25, 2013; and Victoria Woollaston,
“How Often Do You Check Your Phone?” Daily Mail, October 8, 2013.
27 A 2005 study: “E-mails ‘Hurt IQ More Than Pot,’” CNN, April 22, 2005.
28 A fifteen-point deficiency: Travis Bradberry, “Multitasking Damages Your
Brain and Career, New Studies Suggest,” Forbes, October 8, 2014.
29 Our brain’s prefrontal: ABC Science, “Impacts of MultiTasking,” Australian
Broadcasting Corporation Science in conjunction with the University of
Queensland’s School of Psychology, Queensland Brain Institute, and Science
of Learning Centre, National Science Week 2011,
http://www.multitaskingtest.net.au/.
30 The Journal of: Steve Sisgold, “Is Too Much Juggling Causing You Brain
Drain?” Psychology Today, February 26, 2014.
31 In the hospitality: Ragina Johnson, “The Battle at the Hilton and Beyond,”
Socialist Worker, October 20, 2010; “Creating Luxury, Enduring Pain: How
Hotel Work Is Hurting Housekeepers,” Unite Here, April 2006.
32 While the changes: Jane Levere, “America’s Dirtiest Hotels,” ABC News,
July 27, 2011.
33 In 2012, scientists: Lawrence LeBlond, “Hotel Rooms Swarming with Nasty
Bacteria,” Red Orbit, June 18, 2012.
34 “You have time”: Adam Savage, “Commencement Keynote Address” (Sarah
Lawrence College, May 18, 2012, http://www.slc.edu/news-
events/events/commencement/adam-savage-commencement-keynote-
address.html).
35 “Rushing leads”: Adam Savage, “Get Noticed. Get Promoted” (speech,
Maker Fair Bay Area, San Mateo, CA, May 19, 2013).
36 In 2013, researchers: Pam A. Mueller and Daniel M. Oppenheimer, “The Pen
Is Mightier Than the Keyboard,” Psychological Science, June 2014.
37 “You can’t even”: Justin Massoud, “Beyoncé Tells Fan ‘Put That Damn
Camera Down’ During Show,” K94.5 FM, July 18, 2013.
38 “blocked by a throng”: Daphne Merkin, “All Those Phone Lights? A Don’t,”
Glamour, September 2014.

39 Dr. Sebastian Seung: Arvind Suresh, “Citizen Powered Neuroscience with
Project EyeWire—Using Your Neurons to Map the Brain!” Discover, May 20,
2014.
40 “Students need to”: Meredith Raine-Middleton, “A Picture of Health,”
University of Texas Houston Medicine, May 30, 2003.
41 “explicitly designed”: Roberts, “Power of Patience.”
42 “If I have ever”: Isaac Newton, The Principia: Mathematical Principles of
Natural Philosophy (1687; repr., New York: Snowball Publishing, 2010).
43 We’ve already started: In The Art of Scientific Investigation, scientist
William Ian Beardmore Beveridge writes that exceptional observation skills
are more important than “large accumulations of academic learning,” and
defines observation as “not passively watching but an active mental process.”
W. I .B. Beveridge, The Art of Scientific Investigation (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1957), 104.
2: Elementary Skills
45 In 1877 an: Katherine Ramsland, “Observe Carefully, Deduce Shrewdly: Dr.
Joseph Bell,” Forensic Examiner, August 18, 2009.
46 “Where is your cutty pipe?”: Ibid.
47 “I knew she had”: Ibid.
48 “What is the matter”: Carolyn Wells. The Technique of the Mystery Story
(Springfield, MA: Home Correspondence School, 1913).
49 “Hip-joint disease, sir!”: Ibid.
50 “Hip-nothing!”: Ibid.
51 “Gentlemen, we have”: Joseph V. Klauder, “Sherlock Holmes as a
Dermatologist, with Remarks on the Life of Dr. Joseph Bell and the
Sherlockian Method of Teaching,” AMA Archives of Dermatology and
Syphilology vol. 68, no. 4 (October 1953): 368–77.
52 “The gentleman has ears”: Wells, Technique of the Mystery Story.
53 “Glance at a man”: Harold Emery Jones, “The Original of Sherlock
Holmes,” Conan Doyle’s Best Books in Three Volumes: A Study in Scarlet
and Other Stories; The Sign of the Four and Other Stories; The White
Company and Beyond the City (New York: P. F. Collier & Son, 1904).
54 “elementary” talents: Ibid.
55 “Use your eyes”: “Fiction Imitates Real Life in Case of True Inspiration,”
Irish Examiner, November 4, 2011.
56 “Most people see but”: Wells, Technique of the Mystery Story.

57 “You see, but you”: Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, The Adventures of Sherlock
Holmes (Vancouver: Engage Books, 2010), 6.
58 It helps establish: Daniel B. Schneider, “F.Y.I.,” New York Times, June 28,
1998.
59 To watch the performance: You can watch an excerpt of his lecture online at
the Princeton Alumni Weekly website: Michael Graziano, “Video:
Consciousness and the Social Brain (Excerpt),”
http://paw.princeton.edu/issues/2014/04/23/pages/0973/index.xml.
60 “attention schema theory”: Graziano’s groundbreaking attention schema
theory posits a completely different approach to explaining consciousness by
arguing that awareness is a physical essence. For more information, I highly
recommend reading his book Consciousness and the Social Brain (New York:
Oxford University Press, 2013), or the following articles: Anil
Ananthaswamy, “How I Conjure a Social Illusion with Ventriloquism,” New
Scientist, June 9, 2014; and Y. T. Kelly et al., “Attributing Awareness to
Oneself and to Others,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA vol. 111, no. 13 (2014): 5012–17.
61 “We don’t magically”: Dr. Michael Graziano, interviews with author,
September 2014. A huge thank-you to Dr. Graziano for his patient
explanations and wonderful hospitality. For more about Dr. Graziano’s
attention schema theory and the neuroscience of a consciousness, check out
his highly readable book Consciousness and the Social Brain.
62 They re-created: Daniel J. Simons and Christopher F. Chabris, “Gorillas in
Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for Dynamic Events,”
Perception vol. 28 (May 9, 1999): 1059–74.
63 Eighty-three percent: Alix Spiegel, “Why Even Radiologists Can Miss a
Gorilla Hiding in Plain Sight,” Morning Edition, NPR, February 11, 2013.
64 Investigators did not: After ten years of appeals, during which time he was
allowed to remain free, Kenneth Conley’s conviction was overturned and he
was exonerated and allowed to return to the police force with back pay. His
charges were not dismissed because of the court’s sudden belief in
inattentional blindness, however, but because it was discovered that the
prosecutor at the time had failed to turn in all evidence. Conley continues to
serve with the Boston Police Department and was involved in the capture of
Boston Marathon attack suspect Dzohkar Tsarnaev in 2013. “Kenneth
Conley,” National Registry of Exonerations, A Joint Project of Michigan Law
and Northwestern Law,
http://www.law.umich.edu/special/exoneration/Pages/casedetail.aspx?

caseid=3120; and Kathy Curran, “New Details Uncovered About Suspect’s
Arrest,” WCVB5, ABC News, April 26, 2013.
65 “You Do Not Talk”: Christopher F. Chabris et al., “You Do Not Talk About
Fight Club if You Do Not Notice Fight Club: Inattentional Blindness for a
Simulated Real-World Assault,” Iperception, June 9, 2011; and Alix Spiegel,
“Why Seeing (the Unexpected) Is Often Not Believing,” Morning Edition,
NPR, June 20, 2011.
66 “proper seeing”: Henry Oakley, “Other Colleges Say—,” The Technique,
student newspaper of Georgia Institute of Technology, December 9, 1949,
https://smartech.gatech.edu/bitstream/handle/1853/19396/1949-12-
09_33_43.pdf.
67 Likewise, multiple studies: Todd W. Thompson et al., “Expanding Attentional
Capacity with Adaptive Training on Multiple Object Tracking Task,” Journal
of Vision vol. 11, no. 11 (September 23, 2011): 292; Hoon Choic and Takeo
Watanabe, “Changes Induced by Attentional Training: Capacity Increase Vs.
Allocation Changes,” Journal of Vision vol. 10, no. 7 (August 2, 2010): 1099;
and Jennifer O’Brien et al., “Effects of Cognitive Training on Attention
Allocation and Speed of Processing in Older Adults: An ERP Study,” Journal
of Vision vol. 11, no. 11 (September 23, 2011): 203.
68 The success of: Karen N. Peart, “Artwork Can Sharpen Medical Diagnostic
Skills, Yale Researchers Report,” Yale News, September 4, 2001.
69 A two-year study: The study found that medical students who attended the
visual training session in the art museum increased their diagnostic skills
related to dermatological lesions by 56 percent. See Jacqueline C. Dolev,
Linda K. Friedlander, and Irwin M. Braverman, “Use of Fine Art to Enhance
Visual Diagnostic Skills,” Journal of the American Medical Association vol.
286, no. 9 (September 2001): 1019–21.
70 “statistically significant”: Peart, “Artwork Can Sharpen.”
71 “I had no idea”: Dr. Allison West, interview with author, June 28, 2014. I
am indebted to Dr. West not just for sharing her experiences with me but for
working tirelessly to make sure that the Art of Perception program would
continue at NYU Medical School.
72 She is now: “The Graduates,” Best Doctors, New York, June 3, 2012,
http://nymag.com/health/bestdoctors/2012/medical-school-graduates/.
73 “Powers of observation”: W. I .B. Beveridge, The Art of Scientific
Investigation (New York: W. W. Norton, 1957), 105.
74 “man who sees”: “Read Any Good Records Lately?” Time, January 4, 1982.
3: The Platypus and the Gentleman Thief

76 After picking the: Adam Green, “A Pickpocket’s Tale,” New Yorker, January
7, 2013.
77 “Almost every single”: Ruth Oosterman, interview with author, April 2015.
You can read more about Ruth at her website, www.ruthoosterman.com, and
her blog, The Mischievous Mommy, http://themischievousmommy.blogspot.ca,
and purchase prints at her Etsy shop, Eve’s Imagination:
https://www.etsy.com/ca/shop/EvesImagination. Other references for this
story: Ruth Oosterman, “Through a Child’s Eyes,” The Mischievous Mommy,
September 8, 2014,
http://themischievousmommy.blogspot.ca/2014/09/through-childs-eyes.html;
and Rachel Zarrell, “This Artist Turns Her 2-Year-Old’s Doodles into
Gorgeous Paintings,” BuzzFeed, September 7, 2014. Ruth Oosterman,
interview with author, April 2015. You can read more about Ruth at her
website, www.ruthoosterman.com, and her blog, The Mischievous Mommy,
http://themischievousmommy.blogspot.ca, and purchase prints at her Etsy
shop, Eve’s Imagination: https://www.etsy.com/ca/shop/EvesImagination.
Other references for this story: Ruth Oosterman, “Through a Child’s Eyes,”
The Mischievous Mommy, September 8, 2014,
http://themischievousmommy.blogspot.ca/2014/09/through-childs-eyes.html;
and Rachel Zarrell, “This Artist Turns Her 2-Year-Old’s Doodles into
Gorgeous Paintings,” BuzzFeed, September 7, 2014.
78 It can color: Daniel L. Schacter, Daniel T. Gilbert, and Daniel M. Wegner,
Psychology (New York: Worth, 2011): 125–71.
79 “reflections on terror”: Don DeLillo, “In the Ruins of the Future: Reflections
on Terror and Loss in the Shadow of September,” Harper’s Magazine,
December 2001.
80 “wonderful”: Holland Cotter, “The Beast in the Human, and Vice Versa,”
New York Times, April 25, 2013.
81 “subversive”: Allison Meier, “Apartheid Subversion in the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine,” Hyperallergic, May 1, 2013.
82 “disturbing”: Marion Dreyfus, “St. John and the ‘Divine’ Art of Jane
Alexander,” American Thinker, June 2, 2013; and Sarah Roth, “New
Installation Brings South Africa to St. John the Divine,” Columbia Daily
Spectator, April 22, 2013.
83 “off-putting considering”: Alex and Ben, “St. John the Divine,” Snap It.
Taste It. Blog It., snaptasteblogit.com/st-john-the-divine.html.
84 Tony Matelli’s February: Jess Bidgood, “At Wellesley, Debate over a Statue
in Briefs,” New York Times, February 6, 2014; and Keerthi Mohan, “Near

Nude Statue of Sleepwalking Man ‘Freaks Out’ Students; Should the Statue
Be Removed?” International Business Times India, February 8, 2014.
85 “Each person comes”: David A. Fahrenthold, “Sculpture of Near-Naked
Man at Wellesley Has Its Critics,” Washington Post, February 5, 2014; Jaclyn
Reiss, “Realistic Statue of Man in His Underwear at Wellesley College Sparks
Controversy,” Boston Globe, February 5, 2014.
86 Experimenters at the: Vinoth K. Ranganathan et al., “From Mental Power to
Muscle Power: Gaining Strength by Using the Mind,” Neuropsychologia vol.
42, no. 7 (June 2004): 944–56.
87 Scientists at the: Tori Rodriguez, “Mental Rehearsals Strengthen Neural
Circuits,” Scientific American, August 14, 2014, accessed August 10, 2015,
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/mental-rehearsals-strengthen-
neural-circuits/.
88 The moment we become: John F. Kihlstrom, “The Cognitive Unconscious,”
Science vol. 237 (September 18, 1987): 1445–52.
89 confirmation bias: Daniel Reisberg, Cognition, 3rd ed. (New York: W. W.
Norton, 2005): 469–71.
90 That wishful seeing: Pacific Standard Staff, “There’s a Name for That: The
Baader-Meinhof Phenomenon,” Pacific Standard, July 22, 2013. Pacific
Standard Staff, “There’s a Name for That: The Baader-Meinhof
Phenomenon,” Pacific Standard, July 22, 2013.
91 it is less well known: David Dunning and Emily Balcetis, “Wishful Seeing:
How Preferences Shape Visual Perception,” Current Directions in
Psychological Science vol. 22, no. 1 (February 2013): 33–37.
92 In the Netherlands: Guido M. van Koningsbruggen, Wolfgang Stroebe, and
Henk Aarts, “Through the Eyes of Dieters: Biased Size Perception of Food
Following Tempting Food Primes,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology vol. 47, issue 2 (March 2011): 293–99.
93 In New York: Emily Balcetis and David Dunning, “Wishful Seeing: More
Desired Objects Are Seen as Closer,” Psychological Science, December 2009;
Kohske Takahashi et al., “Psychological Influences on Distance Estimation in
a Virtual Reality Environment,” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience vol. 7
(September 18, 2013): 580.
94 One reporter investigating: David G. Wittels, “You’re Not as Smart as You
Could Be,” Saturday Evening Post, three-part series, April 17, April 24, and
May 1, 1948.
95 Daniel Simons and: Graham Davies and Sarah Hine, “Change Blindness and
Eyewitness Testimony,” Journal of Psychology, July 2007.

96 Apollo Robbins: Brain Games, season 2, episode 11, National Geographic
Channel, braingames.nationalgeographic.com.
97 Considering that: Natalie Angier, “Blind to Change, Even as It Stares Us in
the Face,” New York Times, April 1, 2008.
98 He was so: You can follow Mark Hirsch’s photo journal That Tree online and
purchase prints or his book about the lonely bur oak at: http://thattree.net;
Huffington Post Staff, “‘That Tree’: Photographer Mark Hirsch Becomes One
with an Oak Tree in Lovely Documentary Project,” Huffington Post, May 29,
2013, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/29/thattree-photographer-
mark-hirsch-becomes-one-with-an-oak_n_3347786.html.
99 “foreign land”: Mark Hirsch, “How a Tree Helped Heal Me,” CBS Sunday
Morning, September 16, 2013.
100 “the knowledge that”: Bill Weir, “Apollo Robbins: King of Thieves,”
Nightline, July 12, 2013, ABC.
4. Delta Employees Do It on the Fly
102 For four days: Faith Karimi, Steve Almasy, and Lillian Leposo, “Kenya
Mall Attack: Military Says Most Hostages Freed, Death Toll at 68,” CNN,
September 23, 2013.
103 The deadly confusion: Michael Pearson and Zain Verjee, “Questions Linger
After Kenya Mall Attack,” CNN, September 25, 2013, and “Source: Store in
Besieged Kenyan Mall Run by Attackers or Associates,” CNN, September 27,
2013; and Dashiell Bennett, “Tragic and Heroic Stories from Survivors of the
Kenyan Mall Attack,” Atlantic Monthly, September 27, 2013.
104 From 2005 to: KGW Staff, “History of Shootings at Malls Worldwide,”
KGW-NBC Portland, December 12, 2012; and John Swaine, “Al-Shabaab
Mall Threat ‘All the More Reason’ to Avoid Shutdown, Says Homeland
Security Chief,” Guardian, February 22, 2015.
105 In our current: Knowing the Risks, Protecting Your Business: A Global
Study, Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, 2012, www.freshfields.com.
106 Those who did: Hannah McNeish, “Hero Helped American Family Survive
Kenya Mall Terror,” USA Today, September 27, 2013.
107 Many others: Dana Ford, “Kenya Mall Attack Survivor Plays Dead to
Live,” CNN, October 10, 2013.
108 The BBC reported: Karen Allen, “Kenya’s Westgate Siege: ‘Militants Hired
Shop to Hide Arms,’” BBC News, September 27, 2013.
109 “their eyes focused”: Vivian Ho, “Absorbed Device Users Oblivious to
Danger,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 7, 2013.

110 And since bruises: Tomika S. Harris, “Bruises in Children: Normal or Child
Abuse?” Journal of Pediatric Health Care vol. 24, no. 4 (July 2010): 216–21.
111 If just one: Calculated using the Specialty Coffee Association of America’s
2011 survey of the cost of the components of a 16-ounce cup of coffee
equaling $1.17; Specialty Coffee Association of America, “SCAA Quarterly
Growth and Trends Survey (April–June 2011),” Specialty Coffee Chronicle,
July 7, 2011.
112 For instance, location: Jaclyn Reiss, “Realistic Statue of Man in His
Underwear at Wellesley College Sparks Controversy,” Boston Globe,
February 5, 2014.
113 “a schlumpy guy”: Ibid.
114 “prominent”: Sebastian Smee, “Threshold States and Dark Wit in Standout
Show by Tony Matelli,” Boston Globe, February 15, 2014.
115 Yet citing that: Maggie Lange, “Statue of Undressed Man Terrorizes
Wellesley College,” New York, February 5, 2014.
116 “connect the exhibition”: Reiss, “Realistic Statue.”
117 Assumptions are dangerous: Lemony Snicket, The Austere Academy (New
York: HarperCollins, 2000).
118 Tomasevic explained : Bennett, “Tragic and Heroic Stories.”
119 “Its principal causes”: Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the
United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction, Report to the
President of the United States, March 31, 2005,
www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/wmd_report.pdf.
 
5: What’s Hiding in Plain Sight?
121 You can visit her: Mrs. John Winthrop, by John Singleton Copley
(American, Boston, Massachusetts 1738–1815 London), 1773, is currently on
view in Gallery 748 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City.
You can also view the painting online in the museum’s collection at
http://www.metmuseum.org/collection/the-collection-online/search/10531.
122 “refrigerator blindness: Andrew J. Macnab and Mary Bennett,
“Refrigerator Blindness: Selective Loss of Visual Acuity in Association with a
Common Foraging Behaviour,” Canadian Medical Association Journal vol.
173, no. 12 (December 6, 2005): 1494–95.
123 On October 30: Bruce Lambert, “Real Estate Agent Found Slain in 5th Ave.
Home,” New York Times, November 1, 2007; Max Abelson, “Remembering
Linda Stein,” New York Observer, November 1, 2007; Robert Kolker, “Death

of a Broker,” New York, November 18, 2007; and Laura Kusisto, “Linda Stein
Murder Trial: The Photos,” New York Observer, February 17, 2010.
124 Lowery had entered: John Eligon, “Trial Begins for Woman Accused of
Killing Linda Stein,” New York Times, January 25, 2010.
125 Lowery admitted that: Associated Press, “Seymour Stein, Sire Records
Founder, Testifies at Linda Stein’s Murder Trial,” Huffington Post, February
4, 2010, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/02/05/seymour-stein-sire-
record_n_450475.html; and Kolker, “Death of a Broker.”
126 Detectives discovered that: Patrick O’Shaughnessy, “How Personal
Assistant Natavia Lowery Killed Celebrity Realtor Linda Stein, Who
Wouldn’t Back Down,” Daily News (New York), February 28, 2010.
127 In its place: Melissa Grace, “Linda Stein Murder Trial: Suspect Natavia
Lowery Sent Odd Text Messages on Day of Realtor’s Slaying,” Daily News
(New York), February 19, 2010.
128 “The pants were”: Melissa Grace and Bill Hutchinson, “Jury Finds Natavia
Lowery Guilty of Celebrity Realtor Linda Stein’s Murder After Short
Deliberation,” Daily News (New York), February 23, 2010; Lowery was
sentenced to twenty-five years to life for the second-degree murder of Linda
Stein, and received an additional two years for larceny. See Beth Karas,
“Personal Assistant Gets 27 to Life in Celebrity Realtor’s Murder,” CNN,
May 3, 2010.
129 For no physiological: Steven B. Most et al., “What You See Is What You
Set: Sustained Inattentional Blindness and the Capture of Awareness,”
Psychological Review vol. 112 (January 2005): 217–42; and Ethan A. Newby
and Irvin Rock, “Inattentional Blindness as a Function of Proximity to the
Focus of Attention,” Perception vol. 27, no. 9 (1998): 1025–40.
130 However, our cognitive: John Gosbee, “Handoffs and Communication: The
Underappreciated Roles of Situational Awareness and Inattentional
Blindness,” Clinical Obstetrics & Gynecology vol. 53, no. 3 (September
2010): 545–58.
131 If our eyes: David Owen, “The Psychology of Space,” New Yorker, January
21, 2013.
132 “The world is terribly”: Sheila M. Eldred, “How Our Brains Miss the
Obvious,” Discovery News, May 22, 2013.
133 Without it, we: Arne Öhman, “Has Evolution Primed Humans to ‘Beware
the Beast’?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America vol. 104, no. 42 (October 16, 2007): 16396–97; and Gervais
Tompkin, “Survival of the Focused,” GenslerOnWork, November 11, 2013,
http://www.gensleron.com/work/2013/11/11/survival-of-the-focused.html.

134 “We need to”: I am indebted to Dr. Tversky for her patient explanations of
how the brain uses memory, categorization, and spatial cognition. Interview
with author, June 27, 2014.
135 This instant organization: Ming Meng, David A. Remus, and Frank Tong,
“Filling-in of Visual Phantoms in the Human Brain,” Nature Neuroscience
vol. 8,no. 9 (August 7, 2005): 1248–54; Melanie Moran, “The Brain Doesn’t
Like Visual Gaps and Fills Them In,” Exploration: Vanderbilt’s Online
Research Magazine, Vanderbilt University, August 19, 2007.
136 This skill accounts: Marguerite Reardon, “Americans Text More Than They
Talk,” CNET, September 22, 2008; and Sherna Noah, “Texting Overtakes
Talking as Most Popular Form of Communication in UK,” Independent, July
18, 2012.
137 The company consciously: Yoni Heisler, “Inside Apple’s Secret Packaging
Room,” Network World, January 24, 2012.
138 “People can feel”: Bruce Jones, “Success Is in the Details: How Disney
Overmanages the Customer Experience,” Talking Point: The Disney Institute
Blog, January 9, 2014.
139 It’s not a: “Virgin Atlantic Wins Top Customer Service Award,” Virgin
Atlantic press release, January 19, 2009.
140 “We get all”: The tagline appeared on the Virgin Atlantic company website
under “Virgin experience” when accessed June 22, 2014, http://www.virgin-
atlantic.com/gb/en/the-virgin-experience.html.
141 Marcus Sloan wasn’t: This and following quotations from “Marcus Sloan”
interview with author, June 29, 2014. I am deeply indebted to him for
speaking with me about his experiences as a high school math teacher and for
his exemplary dedication to his students. Sloan taught at a public high school
in the Bronx, New York, from 2004 to 2007.
142 Passing the mathematics: John Hildebrand, “Regents Rule Change Aids
Special Education,” Newsday, October 9, 2012. The graduation rate at Sloan’s
school was 75.5 percent in 2005, and 53.6 percent in 2006. “2006 Graduation
Rates in New York High Schools,” New York Times, April 25, 2007.
143 “economically disadvantaged”: High School State Rankings, U.S. News &
World Report, 2014 Academic Indicators.
144 The school suffered: Ibid.
145 He cites an: University of the State of New York Regents High School
Examination, Mathematics A, given on Thursday, June 15, 2006 from 1:15 to
4:15 p.m., “Question 39: A person measures the angle of depression from the
top of a wall to a point on the ground. The point is located on level ground 62

feet from the base of the wall and the angle of depression is 52°. How high is
the wall, to the nearest tenth of a foot?”
146 Even better: the: Percentage of students who met standard for Mathematics
A portion of Regents Exam for 2006–2009 per New York City Department of
Education via
http://www.schooldigger.com/go/NY/schools/0008705181/school.aspx.
Was the increase in the Regents scores directly related to Sloan’s students’ art
training and new appreciation for seeking out details? It can’t be proven, but
it’s worth noting that the year after Sloan left the school, taking his unique
style of teaching with him, the school’s percentage of students who met the
Regents mathematics standard fell back to 44 percent and sank even lower, to
36 percent, the following year.
147 “Most people falsely”: Marc Green, “Inattentional Blindness &
Conspicuity,” Human Factors, January 4, 2011, and “Do Mobile Phones Pose
an Unacceptable Risk? A Complete Look at the Adequacy of the Evidence,”
Risk Management, November 1, 2001.
148 The State Farm insurance: State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance
Company, “Managing Blind Spots,” April 8, 2013.
149 Perception requires attention: Michael A. Cohen, George A. Alvarez, and
Ken Nakayama, “Natural-Scene Perception Requires Attention,”
Psychological Science vol. 22, no. 9 (September 2011): 1165–72; and L.
Pessoa et al., “Neural Processing of Emotional Faces Requires Attention,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America vol. 99, no. 17 (August 20, 2002): 11458–63.
150 If we did: Papers of John and Hannah Winthrop, 1728–1789, Harvard
University Archives.
151 In our multitasking: Jessica Keiman, “How Multitasking Hurts Your Brain
(and Your Effectiveness at Work),” Forbes, January 15, 2013.
152 A new study: Clara Moskowitz, “Mind’s Limit Found: 4 Things at Once,”
Live Science, April 27, 2008.
153 “multitaskers are terrible”: Leo Widrich, “What Multitasking Does to Our
Brains,” Buffer, June 26, 2012.
154 “terrible at ignoring”: “Interview with Clifford Nass,” Frontline, February
2, 2010, PBS.
155 “Any time you”: Camille Noe Pagán, “Quit Multitasking (and Start Getting
More Done),” Forbes, January 21, 2010.
156 When the brain: Christopher D. Wickens, “Multiple Resources and Mental
Workload,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society vol. 50, no. 3 (June 2008): 449–55.

157 “focus is a mental”: Jenna Goudreau, “12 Ways to Eliminate Stress at
Work,” Forbes, March 20, 2013; and Sandra Bond, “Why Single-Tasking
Makes You Smarter,” Forbes, May 8, 2013.
158 The human brain: Jon Hamilton, “Think You’re Multitasking? Think
Again,” Morning Edition, NPR, October 2, 2008.
159 Second, relax for: Geil Browning, “10 Ways to Rejuvenate Your Brain
While You Work,” Inc., September 10, 2012.
160 Excessive noise and: Carol F. Baker, “Sensory Overload and Noise in the
ICU: Sources of Environmental Stress,” Critical Care Quarterly vol. 6
(March 1984): 66–80.
161 Many famous people: David Biello, “Fact or Fiction? Archimedes Coined
the Term ‘Eureka!’ in the Bath,” Scientific American, December 8, 2006.
162 Sir Isaac Newton: Steve Connor, “The Core of Truth Behind Sir Isaac
Newton’s Apple,” Independent, January 18, 2010.
163 “Often when one works”: Henri Poincaré, “Mathematical Creation,” The
Monist, July 1901.
164 “heavily laden”: John Eligon, “Trial Begins for Woman Accused of Killing
Linda Stein,” New York Times, January 25, 2010.
165 At 11:32 P.M.: “File No. 1-0016, Aircraft Accident Report, Eastern Air
Lines, Inc., L-1011, N310EA, Miami, Florida, December 29, 1972,” National
Transportation Safety Board, Washington, DC, June 14, 1973.
166 “It looks like”: CVR transcript Eastern Air Lines Flight 401, December 29,
1972, Aviation Safety Network.
167 After examining the: “File No. 1-0016.”
168 The pilots could: Cockpit recordings show that the captain repeatedly told
the second officer to go down and physically look at the landing gear beneath
the cockpit, but his instructions were initially ignored. The second officer did
leave and return complaining of the darkness and his inability to see. After the
crash, investigators determined that the both the visual indicator light for the
nose gear and the nose wheel well service light were in place and operational.
See ibid.
169 Instead, 101 of: Ibid.
170 Educators believe that: “Visual/Spatial Learning,” Study Guides and
Strategies website, www.studygs.net/visual.htm, accessed June 30, 2014.
171 When caseworker Joanna: Interview with author, 2014. Joanna Longley is a
pseudonym for a real practicing caseworker.
6. Keep Your Head on a Swivel

173 In June 2008: “Troops Held Over Rio Gang Deaths,” BBC News, June 17,
2008.
174 The eyes were: A huge thank-you to JR for allowing me to use his work. For
more information on his worldwide exhibitions, to buy prints, or to find out
how to get involved in his latest project, visit his website at http://www.jr-
art.net/.
175 “The favela is”: Raffi Khatchadourian, “In the Picture,” New Yorker,
November 28, 2011.
176 He notes how: Inside Out: The People’s Art Project, directed by Alastair
Siddons (New York: A Social Animals production in association with Notting
Hills Films, Tribeca Film Festival/HBO, 2013).
177 “I left Brazil”: Lina Soualem, “JR: The Power of Paper and Glue,”
Argentina Independent, March 5, 2013.
178 “For once, the media”: Ibid.
179 With his project: JR’s goal with Women Are Heroes was to highlight the
role of women and show how they are pillars of support in a violent
community. For more information, visit his website at www.jr-
art.net/projects/women-are-heroes-brazil.
180 The mayor of: Ibid.
181 Perspective: Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th ed., s.v.
“perspective.”
182 Dr. Wayne W.: Thomas Boswell, “To Bryce Harper and Davey Johnson,
‘Play Me or Trade Me’ Is Just a Healthy Joke,” Washington Post, July 7,
2013; and Wayne W. Dyer, “Success Secrets,” DrWayneDyer.com, Hay
House, www.drwaynedyer.com.
183 Instead of a: While the picture might look like something clever you’ve
seen on the Internet, it’s actually by a sixteenth-century Italian painter,
Giuseppe Arcimboldo. Arcimboldo was famous for his visual double
entendres, creating portraits of people out of fruit, vegetables, books, and even
other people.
184 “Nor has there ever”: Giorgio Vasari, Lives of the Most Eminent Painters,
Sculptors and Architects (London: Macmillan, 1912): 352-53.
185 Art critics have: “Michelangelo’s David,” Accademia Gallery, Florence,
Italy, http://www.accademia.org/explore-museum/artworks/michelangelos-
david; and Fiachra Gibbons, “The Perfect Man’s Chiseled Squint,” Guardian,
June 7, 2000, accessed August 11, 2015.
186 “transmits exceptional”: “Michelangelo’s David,” accessed August 11,
2015. http://www.accademia.org/explore-museum/artworks/michelangelos-
david/.

187 “the perfect man”: Gibbons, “Perfect Man’s Chiseled Squint.”
188 “the standard by which”: Ibid.
189 “is consistent with”: John Hooper, “How David Shrank as He Faced
Goliath,” Guardian, January 22, 2005.
190 Close scrutiny also: Gibbons, “Perfect Man’s Chiseled Squint.”
191 His head seems: Rossella Lorenzi, “Michelangelo’s David is Missing a
Muscle,” ABC Science, Australian Broadcasting Corporation, October 18,
2004.
192 “malevolent stare”: Saul Levine, “The Location of Michelangelo’s David:
The Meeting of January 25, 1504,” Art Bulletin vol. 56, no. 1 (March 1974):
31–49.
193 Stanford University’s Digital: Digital Michelangelo Project, directed by
Marc Levoy, can be viewed online at
http://graphics.stanford.edu/projects/mich/.
194 While David’s eyes: Graham Lawton, “Michelangelo Cheated,” New
Scientist, June 10, 2000.
195 It’s the key: Tim Hindle, The Economist Guide to Management Ideas and
Gurus (London: Profile Books, 2008): 89–90.
196 In gemba walks: Bill Wilder, “Gemba Walk,” IndustryWeek, January 9,
2014.
197 “Unless you go”: Bob Herman, “9 Ingenious Ways to Cut Costs at Your
Hospital,” Becker’s Hospital CFO, February 26, 2013.
198 Just as the: Professor Yianis A. Pikoulas, “Cart-wheel Road
Communication,” Kathimerini, January 4, 1998; Martijn P. van den Heuvel et
al., “Efficiency of Functional Brain Networks and Intellectual Performance,”
Journal of Neuroscience vol. 29, issue 23 (June 10, 2009): 7619–24.
199 “I limit myself”: Jess McCann, interview with author, March 18, 2015. Jess
McCann is the author of Was It Something I Said? and You Lost Him at Hello.
For more information, visit www.jessmccann.com.
200 “The very act”: Roderick Gilkey and Clint Kilts, “Cognitive Fitness,”
Harvard Business Review, November 2007.
201 “Experience gained through”: Ibid.
202 “functional fixedness”: Drew Boyd, “Fixedness: A Barrier to Creative
Output,” Psychology Today, June 26, 2013.
203 “Our appreciation”: Corey S. Powell, “Unlocking the Other Senses of
Space,” Discover, October 23, 2014.
204 “You never really”: Harper Lee, To Kill a Mockingbird (New York: Grand
Central, 1960): 33.

205 “the force that moves”: Jayson M. Boyers, “Why Empathy Is the Force
That Moves Business Forward,” Forbes, May 30, 2013.
206 “The reality is”: Ibid.
207 “the key to having”: Leana Greene, “Empathy: The Key to Unlocking
Successful Relationships,” Kids in the House, March 4, 2015.
208 “The circumstances”: Dan Fastenberg, “‘Undercover Boss’ CEOs Tell
What Really Happened After the Show,” AOL Jobs, June 10, 2013.
209 “Dickensian struggles”: Dan Fastenberg, “Fast Food CEO Shuts Down
Struggling Branch During ‘Undercover Boss’ Episode,” AOL Jobs, February
20, 2012.
210 “They wouldn’t be”: Ibid.
211 “I call [my]”: Fastenberg, “‘Undercover Boss’ CEOs.”
212 ”I learned how”: Jennifer Miller, “The Halloween Trading Places
Challenge,” Confident Parents Confident Kids, October 29, 2014,
www.confidentparentsconfidentkids.org.
213 Putting ourselves in: “Hall of Fame: Shakespeare in Your Kitchen,” Five
Whys, February 10, 2012,
https://fivewhys.wordpress.com/2012/02/10/shakespeare-in-your-kitchen/.
214 When Marlene Mollan’s: Marlene Mollan, interview with author, November
3, 2014.
215 And in July: “Providência Gondola Finally Opens in Rio,” Rio Times, July
8, 2014.
216 Matisse spent countless: Hilary Spurling, Matisse the Master: A Life of
Henri Matisse, the Conquest of Colour, 1909–1954. (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf, 2005): 161–63.
217 In fact, according: “Great Figures of Modern Art: Henri Matisse,” Centre
Pompidou, Paris, http://mediation.centrepompidou.fr.
218 Elizabeth A. Phelps: Tali Sharot, Mauricio R. Delgado, and Elizabeth A.
Phelps, “How Emotion Enhances the Feeling of Remembering,” Nature
Neuroscience, December 7, 2004.
219 However, while emotional: Ulrike Rimmele et al., “Emotion Enhances the
Subjective Feeling of Remembering, Despite Lower Accuracy for Contextual
Details,” Emotion vol. 11, no. 3 (June 2011): 553–62; Elizabeth A. Kensinger,
“Remembering the Details: Effects of Emotion,” Emotion Review vol. 1, no. 2
(April 2009): 99–113; Elizabeth A. Kensinger and Daniel L. Schacter,
“Retrieving Accurate and Distorted Memories: Neuroimaging Evidence for
Effects of Emotion,” NeuroImage vol. 27, no. 1 (August 1, 2005): 166–77.
220 The final definition: Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th ed., s.v.
“perspective.”

7. Seeing What’s Missing
222 “We started hearing”: “Doctor Cleared in Katrina Deaths Recounts Scene,”
Associated Press, July 20, 2008.
223 “help [them] through”: Sheri Fink, “The Deadly Choices at Memorial,”
New York Times, August 25, 2009.
224 The case was: Julie Scelfo, “Vindicated Katrina Doc Tells Her Story,”
Newsweek, August 24, 2007.
225 Following deadly accidents: Janelle Burrell, “Riders Upset After Panel
Finds Metro-North Didn’t Prioritize Safety,” CBS New York, August 28, 2014.
226 Also in 2013: Associated Press, “Report Blames Arizona Forestry Division
for Firefighter Deaths,” Fox News, December 5, 2013.
227 “one crucial, overarching”: Julianne Pepitone, “Where BlackBerry’s
Ousted CEO Went Wrong,” CNN, November 5, 2013.
228 While $10 million: Manny Fernandez, “In Texas, Another Skirmish Brews
at the Alamo,” New York Times, November 30, 2012.
229 The furor resulted: Scott Huddleston, “Land Office Cancels DRT Contract
to Run Alamo,” San Antonio Express-News, March 12, 2015.
230 “Interviewing the Victim”: “Interviewing the Victim,” Baltimore Police
Department, viewable at National Center for Victims of Crime website,
https://www.victimsofcrime.org/docs/dna-protocol/baltimore-interviewing-
the-victim.pdf?sfvrsn=0.
231 And it is: “Improving Police Response to Sexual Assault,” Human Rights
Watch, January 2013.
232 The one I’ve: Richard J. Heuer, The Psychology of Intelligence Analysis
(Washington, DC: Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence
Agency, 1999).
233 Let’s practice with: Time Transfixed by René Magritte gives us yet another
reason not to go straight for the label: the artist doesn’t always agree with it, in
this case for reasons of perspective and perception. Magritte, a Belgian artist,
had originally titled the piece La Durée Poignardé, which translates into
English as Ongoing Time Stabbed by a Dagger. At first glance, this doesn’t
make much sense—there is no dagger—but Magritte, who was commissioned
to create it for the London home of a wealthy art collector, intended that the
painting would be installed at the bottom of the patron’s staircase so the train
would look as if it were “stabbing” guests as they walked up past it. This
perspective was lost entirely when the collector instead hung it in the most
ironic position: over his fireplace. When the painting was later exhibited in

galleries and museums—it’s currently in the collection of the Art Institute of
Chicago nowhere near a stairwell—officials unofficially renamed it Time
Transfixed, and much to the displeasure of the artist, it stuck. See James N.
Wood, The Art Institute of Chicago: The Essential Guide (Chicago: Art
Institute of Chicago, 2013): 267.
234 “into space”: Information from an interview with a former Disney web
development specialist, June 14, 2014.
235 “pertinent negative”: “Pertinent Negative,” Medical Terminology, Emory
University Emergency Medical Services, http://www.emory.edu/EEMS/Medi
calTerms.html.
236 “That was the”: Arthur Conan Doyle, “Silver Blaze,” The Memoirs of
Sherlock Holmes (London: Oxford University Press, 2009): 22.
237 “missing perspective”: Terry Prince, “The Importance of What’s Missing,”
Terry’s Thinking!, May 22, 2009,
https://terrysthinking.wordpress.com/author/terrysthinking/page/22/.
238 Her charity, Warm Detroit: For more information on Warm Detroit, to
donate, or start a collection in your area, go to www.warmdetroit.org.
239 “Perhaps most troubling”: Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of
the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction, Report to the
President of the United States, March 31, 2005.
240 “Urgent tasks”: Brett McKay and Kate McKay, “The Eisenhower Decision
Matrix: How to Distinguish Between Urgent and Important Tasks and Make
Real Progress in Your Life,” The Art of Manliness website, October 23, 2013,
http://www.artofmanliness.com/2013/10/23/eisenhower-decision-matrix/.
241 The title of: Jonathon Keats, “Do Not Trust This Joel Sternfeld Photograph,”
Forbes, September 6, 2012.
242 Sternfeld confirmed only: Alex Selwyn-Holmes, “Joel Sternfeld; McLean,
Virginia; December 1978,” Iconic Photos, October 25, 2012,
https://iconicphotos.wordpress.com/2012/10/.
243 Aviation enthusiasts who: Civil Aviation Forum, “Only NW for Smooth
Flights?” Airliners.net, www.airliners.net; and Forums, “Fly Northwest
Operated Flights for Smooth Rides,” Turbulence Forecast,
www.turbulenceforecast.com.
8. Making Your Unknown Known
245 In the absence: Daniel Kurtzman, “Gary Condit & Chandra Levy Scandal:
Quips, Quotes & Late-Night Jokes,” Political Humor, About.com,
http://politicalhumor.about.com/library/blconditlevy.htm; “How can one

Chandra be so Levy?” (a play on the pronunciation of Levy’s last name
sounding like “leave-y”) was a lyric featured on the song “Business” on The
Eminem Show album by Eminem, released by Aftermath in 2002, six days
after Levy’s body was discovered.
246 Her body wasn’t: Sari Horwitz, Scott Higham, and Sylvia Moreno, “Who
Killed Chandra Levy?” Washington Post, July 13, 2008.
247 In 2008, the global: IDC, “$37 Billion—US and UK Businesses Count the
Cost of Employee Misunderstanding,” Cognisco, June 18, 2008,
http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/37-billion-us-and-uk-businesses-
count-the-cost-of-employee-misunderstanding-870000.htm.
248 Whole Foods CEO: Brad Stone and Matt Richtel, “The Hand That Controls
the Sock Puppet Could Get Slapped,” New York Times, July 16, 2007.
249 “Among [Mackey’s] many: Peter Sagal, “Not My Job: Richard Price (AKA
Harry Brandt) Gets Quizzed on Pseudonyms,” Wait Wait . . . Don’t Tell Me!
NPR, March 21, 2015.
250 People fired for: Stacy Conradt, “16 People Who Tweeted Themselves into
Unemployment,” Mental Floss, December 21, 2013.
251 Firefighters, actors, teachers: Kim Bhasin, “13 Epic Twitter Fails by Big
Brands,” Business Insider, February 6, 2012.
252 In March 2015: Mike Foss, “Yankees Fire Employee Over Vulgar Tweet
About Curt Schilling’s Daughter,” USA Today, March 3, 2015.
253 YANKEES FIRE: Craig Bennett, “Sean MacDonald & Adam Nagel: 5 Fast
Facts You Need to Know,” Heavy.com, March 3, 2015,
http://heavy.com/sports/2015/03/sean-macdonald-adam-nagel-curt-schilling-
daughter-twitter-trolls-college-yankees-bio-gabby/.
254 Throughout their lives: Carlo Angerer, “Adolf Hitler Watercolor Set to Be
Auctioned in Germany,” NBC News, November 19, 2014; and Ron Cynewulf
Robbins, “Churchill as Artist—Half Passion, Half Philosophy,” Finest Hour,
Churchill Center (Autumn 1998): 32.
255 “making your unknown”: Roxana Robinson, Georgia O’Keeffe: A Life
(Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 1989): 256.
256 “Being an artist”: Maria Popova, “What It Really Takes to Be an Artist:
MacArthur Genius Teresita Fernández’s Magnificent Commencement
Address,” BrainPickings.org, December 29, 2014.
http://www.brainpickings.org/2014/12/29/teresita-fernandez-commencement-
address/.
257 “I can control”: “Jackson Pollock: Autumn Rhythm (Number 30)” (57.92),
Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art,
2000–. http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/57.92 (June 2007).

258 One of my: Anne Charlevoix, interview with author, January 21, 2014.
259 A lack of: Janette Williams, “Miscommunication May Have Led to Painting
Over $2,500 Mural at Pasadena Business,” Pasadena Star-News, November
29, 2009.
260 “spectacular”: Ibid.
261 “She pointed to”: Karin Price Mueller, “Bamboozled: What Happens When
a ‘Thirty-Seven-Fifty’ Bottle of Wine Really Costs $3,750,” NJ.com,
November 3, 2014,
http://www.nj.com/business/index.ssf/2014/11/bamboozled_what_happens_wh
262 “Joe had asked”: Ibid.
263 “Borgata is confident”: Lee Moran, “Borgata Casino Diner Hit with $3,750
Bill After Server Recommended Wine for ‘Thirty-Seven Fifty,’” Daily News
(New York), November 6, 2014.
264 “We weren’t at the table”: Ibid.
265 “Instead of telling”: Neal Hirschfeld, “Teaching Cops to See,” Smithsonian
Magazine, October 2009.
266 “Publishers need to know”: Susan Ginsburg, interview with author.
267 In 2001, when: Sara Blakely, interview with author.
268 “We have gotten”: Elise Reuter, “Colorado Distributes Cold Case Cards to
Raise Clues to Unsolved Crimes,” Summit Daily (Summit County, CO), April
1, 2015.
269 “Think of a ballet”: Dani Shapiro, Still Writing: The Perils and Pleasures of
a Creative Life (New York: Atlantic Monthly Press, 2014).
270 “I’ve seen supremely”: Bill Connor, “Fear Not, Introverts,” Oratorio,
March 5, 2013.
271 “Practice it”: Susan Cain, “10 Public Speaking Tips for Introverts,”
Psychology Today, July 25, 2011,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/quiet-the-power-
introverts/201107/10-public-speaking-tips-introverts.
272 She warned me: Margaret Snowling, D. V. M. Bishop, and Susan E.
Stothard, “Is Preschool Language Impairment a Risk Factor for Dyslexia in
Adolescence?” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry vol. 41, no. 5
(July 2000): 587–600; Bruce A. Bracken, ed., The Psychoeducational
Assessment of Preschool Children (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2004):
181–84; and M. Perkins, “Preschool Children with Inadequate
Communication: Developmental Language Disorder, Autism, Mental
Deficiency,” Archives of Disease in Childhood vol. 75, no. 5 (May 1997):
480.

273 “everyday objects shriek”: “Magritte: The Mystery of the Ordinary, 1926–
1938,” Art Institute of Chicago, http://www.artic.edu/exhibition/magritte-
mystery-ordinary-1926-1938.
274 “an ennobling moral”: Popova, “What It Really Takes.”
275 “as little to the surface”: Nicholas Forrest, “The Next Cy Twombly? First,
Jan Frank Paints for Australia and Tim Olsen Gallery,” Blouin Artinfo,
October 3, 2012.
276 The work, Ralph Steiner’s: Ralph Steiner, American Rural Baroque,
Collection, Museum of Modern Art, New York City.
277 “verbal vomit”: McCann quotes from interview with author, April 29, 2015;
Jess McCann, Was It Something I Said?: The Answer to All Your Dating
Dilemmas (Guilford, CT: Skirt!, 2013): 19.
278 “On Nov. 4, 2008”: Learning Network, “Nov. 4, 2008: Obama Is Elected
President,” New York Times, November 4, 2011.
279 a hat is: In 2014, a conservator for the Fitzwilliam Museum discovered that
a beached whale had been carefully painted over on artist Hendrick van
Anthonissen’s original seventeenth-century View of Scheveningen Sands. The
retouching is believed to have been done to suit new owners who possibly
wanted to display the piece in their house but found the whale carcass
“unsavory.” See “Whale Tale: A Dutch Seascape and Its Lost Leviathan,”
University of Cambridge, June 4, 2014,
http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/whale-tale-a-dutch-seascape-and-its-
lost-leviathan; and Emma del Valle, “Undercover Art: 6 Paintings That Were
Hiding Something,” Mental Floss, August 21, 2014.
280 “unpaintable beauty”: Carter Ratcliff, “The Scandalous Madame X,”
Chicago Tribune, February 1, 1987.
281 “My daughter is lost!”: Ibid.
282 He fled to: Jason Farago, “Who Was the Mysterious Madame X in Sargent’s
Portrait?” BBC, January 2, 2015; and Trevor Fairbrother, “The Shock of John
Singer Sargent’s ‘Madame Gautreau,’” Arts Magazine (January 1981): 90–97.
283 “We were told”: Tamara Jones and Ann Scott Tyson, “After 44 Hours,
Hope Showed Its Cruel Side,” Washington Post, January 5, 2006.
284 “We waited and waited”: James Dao, “False Report of 12 Survivors Was
Result of Miscommunications,” New York Times, January 4, 2006.
285 “In the process”: Ibid.
286 “crisis upon a crisis”: Scott Baradell, “Crisis Upon a Crisis: International
Coal Group’s ‘Miscommunication’ Is a Disaster in Itself,” Idea Grove,
January 4, 2006, http://www.ideagrove.com/blog/2006/01/crisis-upon-a-crisis-
international-coal-groups-miscommunication-is-a-disaster-in-itself.html/.

287 The company’s stock: Mario Parker and Aaron Clark, “Arch to Acquire
International Coal for Steelmaking Assets,” Bloomberg Business, May 2,
2011.
288 “Hatfield should have”: Ibid.
289 He designed special: Collections, “Georges Seurat: A Sunday on La Grande
Jatte,” Art Institute of Chicago,
http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/27992.
290 Van Gogh, too: Phil Daoust, “Edge Trimming,” Guardian, January 2, 2013.
291 “the most important”: Ibid.
292 “the total impact”: Barbara Pease and Alan Pease, The Definitive Book of
Body Language (New York: Bantam, 2006): 9–10.
293 Joe Navarro, body: Joe Navarro, “The Art of Handshaking,” Psychology
Today, July 13, 2013.
294 “Do not ask”: Dr. David G. Javitch, “Preventing Miscommunication in
Your Business,” Entrepreneur, March 1, 2004.
295 “Ask the receiver”: Ibid.
296 As the work: John Richardson, A Life of Picasso: The Cubist Rebel, 1907–
1916 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1991): 325.
297 The work itself: Ibid.
298 “Sometimes you can”: Harvey Mackay, Pushing the Envelope All the Way
to the Top (New York: Ballantine Books, 2000): 107.
299 “A rose by any”: William Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet (1597, repr. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2004).
300 The frame was: “From Wood to Canvas: Attached Frames and Artists’
Choices,” National Gallery of Art,
http://www.nga.gov/feature/frames/canvas.shtm.
9. Big (Naked, Obese) Sue and the High School Principal
302 “avoid uncomfortable truths”: Wayne Waxman and David Hume, Hume’s
Theory of Consciousness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994):
278.
303 “There have been many”: Brent Gleeson, “These 7 Motivational Navy
SEAL Sayings Will Kick Your Butt into Gear,” Inc., April 2015.
304 “raising questions”: Raffi Khatchadourian, “In the Picture,” New Yorker,
November 28, 2011.
305 The 1850 painting: Dante Alighieri, Inferno (1317; repr. New York:
Random House, 1996).

306 “willful blindness”: Margaret Heffernan, “The Wilful Blindness of Rupert
Murdoch,” Huffington Post, July 14, 2011,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/margaret-heffernan-/wilful-blindness-rupert-
murdoch_b_898157.html.
307 In March 2012: Martin Robinson, “Everyone to Blame but No One
Punished: Teachers, Doctors, the Police and Social Workers Escape Justice
After Missing 27 Chances to Save Tragic Daniel Pelka,” Daily Mail,
September 17, 2013.
308 “four dot-shaped”: Ibid.
309 His stepfather claimed: Ibid.
310 an “obsession”: Ibid.
311 “The practitioners involved”: Ibid.
312 “Over time”: Ron L. Deal, “Parenting Troubling Emotions,” Smart
Stepfamilies, http://www.smartstepfamilies.com/view/troubling-emotions.
313 “They have to”: Paul Ekman, “Outsmart Evolution and Master Your
Emotions,” video, Big Think, August 1, 2013, http://bigthink.com/bigthink-
tv/paul-ekman-outsmart-evolution-and-master-your-emotions.
314 “You might not even”: Ibid.
315 Trying to suppress them: Tori Rodriguez, “Negative Emotions Are Key to
Well-Being,” Scientific American, April 11, 2013.
316 A 2012 experiment: Ibid.
317 “you should attempt”: Daniel C. Dennett, Intuition Pumps and Other Tools
for Thinking (New York: W. W. Norton, 2013): 33–34.
10. Nothing Is Black-and-White
319 Even though she: Lucy Agate, interview with author, July 15, 2014.
320 “The elderly residents”: Selim Algar, “Nursing Home Hired Strippers for
Patients: Suit,” New York Post, April 8, 2014.
321 “The outrage!”: Agate interview.
322 “a traditional Baptist”: Ibid.
323 “nursing home employees”: Ibid.
324 “In any case”: Associated Press, “Lawsuit: Male Stripper Did Show at NY
Nursing Home,” Daily Mail, April 8, 2014.
325 “A committee of residents”: Agate interview.
326 “They have the right”: Ibid.
327 “They all said”: Ibid.
328 “Everyone was so”: Ibid.

329 Our brains readily: Saundra Hybels and Richard L. Weaver II, “Self,
Perception, and Communication,” Communicating Effectively, 7th ed. (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2004): 25–47.
330 “other-race effect”: David J. Kelly et al., “The Other-Race Effect Develops
During Infancy,” Psychological Science, December 2007.
331 “Sometimes I don’t”: Quoted in Cate Matthews, “He Dropped One Letter in
His Name While Applying for Jobs, and the Responses Rolled In,” Huffington
Post, September 2, 2014. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/09/02/jose-
joe-job-discrimination_n_5753880.html.
332 “Another example”: John Silvester, “Sambo Unchained in Life’s Skin
Game,” The Age, Victoria, Australia, March 2, 2013.
333 Even drug-and: M. K., “Clever Hounds,” Economist, February 15, 2011.
334 Eighteen of them: Claude Monet, “Bridge Over a Pond of Water Lilies,”
Collection Online, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
335 Retired FBI special: Interview with author; Jean Harrison is a pseudonym.
336 “These attitudes can”: Siri Carpenter, “Buried Prejudice: The Bigot in Your
Brain,” Scientific American, April/May 2008.
337 “Just as one can”: Jennifer Raymond, “Most of Us Are Biased,” Nature,
March 7, 2013.
338 Researchers at the: Michelle Heron-Delaney et al., “Perceptual Training
Prevents the Emergence of the Other Race Effect During Infancy,” PLoS One,
May 18, 2011.
11. What to Do When You Run Out of Gurneys
340 During the midnight: Clayton Sandell, Kevin Dolak, and Colleen Curry,
“Colorado Movie Theater Shooting: 70 Victims the Largest Mass Shooting,”
Good Morning America, July 20, 2012, ABC.
341 When the police: Ryan Sullivan, “Family Says Race a Factor in Charlotte
Girl’s Shooting Death,” Fox 8 WGHP, April 19, 2012.
342 Perceptions and prejudices: Ibid.
343 When the FBI reported: “Columbus Co. District Attorney Statement on
Jasmine Thar’s Death,” WSOCTV, April 22, 2013.
344 “I don’t think they”: Rick Atkinson, “The Tylenol Nightmare: How a
Corporate Giant Fought Back,” Kansas City Times, November 12, 1982.
345 Chairman James Burke: Department of Defense, “Case Study: The Johnson
& Johnson Tylenol Crisis,” Crisis Communications Strategies, Department of
Defense and University of Oklahoma Joint Course in Communication.

346 The company also: Lawrence G. Foster, “The Johnson & Johnson Credo and
the Tylenol Crisis,” New Jersey Bell Journal vol. 6, no. 1 (1983): 57–64.
347 A class action: Lynne Duke, “Secret Service Agents Allege Racial Bias at
Denny’s: Six Blacks to File Lawsuit Saying They Were Denied Service at
Annapolis Restaurant,” Washington Post, May 24, 1993.
348 Denny’s took responsibility: Department of Defense, “Case Study: Denny’s
Class Action Lawsuit,” Crisis Communications Strategies.
349 The layers of: Holland Cotter, “A Million Pieces of Home,” New York
Times, February 8, 2013.
350 The Metropolitan Museum: Roberta Smith, “The Fascination of the
Unfinished,” New York Times, January 9, 2014.
351 The unfinished occupies: Noah Schiffman and Suzanne Greist-Bousquet,
“The Effect of Task Interruption and Closure on Perceived Duration,” Bulletin
of the Psychonomic Society vol. 30, no. 1 (January 1992): 9–11; Colleen M.
Seifert and Andrea L. Patalano, “Memory for Incomplete Tasks: A Re-
examination of the Zeigarnik Effect,” Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, January 1991; and A. D.
Baddeley, “A Zeigarnik-like Effect in the Recall of Anagram Solutions,”
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology vol. 15, no. 1 (1963): 63–64.
352 It’s named for: Roy F. Baumeister and Brad Bushman, “Choices and
Actions: The Self in Control,” Social Psychology and Human Nature
(Belmont, CA: Cengage Learning, 2007): 131–35.
353 “You might not care”: Tom Stafford, “The Psychology of the To-Do List,”
BBC, January 29, 2013.
354 “it takes advantage”: Tom Stafford, “The Psychology of Tetris,” BBC,
October 23, 2012; and Tom Stafford and Matt Webb, Mind Hacks
(Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2005): 144.
355 “everything from really”: David Allen, Getting Things Done (New York:
Penguin, 2002): 12.
356 The ability to: “2013 Turnover Trends: Part 1—National Statistics and Top
Separation Reasons,” Unemployment Services Trust (UST),
www.chooseust.org/2014/blog/2013-turnover-trends-part-1-national-statistics-
and-top-separation-reasons/.
357 In 2006 an: E. Randol Schoenberg, “London’s National Gallery Hosts Klimt
Portrait Seized by Nazis,” Aljazeera America, October 20, 2013; and Anne-
Marie O’Connor, “Fighting for Her Past,” Los Angeles Times, March 20,
2001.
358 “Thanks, I got”: Kevin Daum, “Want to Be Truly Productive? End Each
Day Like This,” Inc., January 27, 2014.

359 In a series: E. J. Masicampo and Roy F. Baumeister, “Consider It Done!
Plan Making Can Eliminate the Cognitive Effects of Unfulfilled Goals,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, June 20, 2011.
360 “[Our] mind loves”: Stafford, “Psychology of the To-Do List.”

Illustration Credits
page xvii: JR (b. 1983). Women Are Heroes, Kenya. Self-Portrait in a Woman’s
Eye, Kenya, 2009. L’Agence VU, Paris, France.
page xix: Anna Schuleit Haber, Bloom: A Site-specific Installation, 2003. ©
Anna Schuleit Haber (b. 1974). Commissioned by the Massachusetts Mental
Health Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 2003.
page 8: Retinal neuron. Photograph courtesy of James Tyrwhitt-
Drake/EyeWire/NIH 3D Print Exchange.
page 10, top: Jan Steen (1626–1679). As the Old Sing, So Pipe the Young (1668–
1670). Mauritshuis, The Hague.
page 10, bottom: Carel Fabritius (1622–1654). The Goldfinch, 1654.
Mauritshuis, The Hague.
page 13: Gerrit van Honthorst, Dutch (1592–1656). Smiling Girl, a Courtesan,
Holding an Obscene Image, 1625. Oil on canvas, 32 × 251/4 inches. Saint
Louis Art Museum, Friends Fund, 63:1954.
page 20: Johannes Vermeer (1632–1675). Mistress and Maid, c.
1665./Copyright The Frick Collection.
page 23: René Magritte (1898–1967). © ARS, NY. The Portrait. Brussels, 1935.
Oil on canvas, 287/8 × 197/8 inches; (73.3 × 50.2 cm). Museum of Modern
Art, Gift of Kay Sage Tanguy; Digital Image © The Museum of Modern
Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY/ © 2015 C. Herscovici/Artists
Rights Society (ARS), New York.
page 27: Large Letter C in Inwood. Redux Pictures/The New York Times/photo
by Suzanne DeChillo.
page 28: Dr. Michael Graziano. Courtesy of Anil Ananthaswamy.
pages 34, 109, 151, 248: Eye icon. Chrissy Kurpeski.
page 37: Renshaw’s Cow. Optometric Extension Program Foundation.
page 38: Renshaw’s Cow with face outlined. Optometric Extension Program
Foundation.
pages 39–40: Artwork by Eve and Ruth Oosterman. A huge thank you to Ruth
Oosterman for sharing her and Eve’s delightful artwork with me. You can
read more about Ruth at her website, www.ruthoosterman.com, and her blog,
The Mischevious Mommy, http://themischeviousmommy.blogspot.ca, and
purchase prints from her Etsy shop, Eve’s Imagination,
https://www.etsy.com/ca/shop/EvesImagination.

page 44: Jane Alexander (b. 1959). Installation Infantry with beast (2008–2010)
at the Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine. Redux Pictures/The New
York Times/photo by Agaton Strom./Art © Jane Alexander, DALRO,
Johannesburg. /  Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY.
page 46: Tony Matelli (b. 1971). Sleepwalker, 2014. Photo by John Kennard.
Courtesy of the Davis Museum at Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA.
page 57: That Tree, March 14, 2012. Courtesy of Mark Hirsch.
page 58, top: That Tree, Day 320: February 6. Courtesy of Mark Hirsch.
page 58, bottom: That Tree, Day 51: May 13. Courtesy of Mark Hirsch.
page 60: Edward Hopper, American (1862–1967). Automat, 1927. Oil on
canvas, 36 × 281/8 inches (91.4 × 71.4 cm). Des Moines Art Center
Permanent Collections; Purchased with funds from the Edmundson Art
Foundation, Inc., 1958.2.
page 63, top left: Edward Hopper, American (1862–1967). Automat, 1927. Oil
on canvas, 36 × 281/8 inches (91.4 × 71.4 cm). Des Moines Art Center
Permanent Collections; Purchased with funds from the Edmundson Art
Foundation, Inc., 1958.2.
page 63, top right: Edward Hopper, American (1862–1967). Hotel Room, 1931.
Oil on canvas, 152.4 × 165.7 cm. Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza, Madrid, 2015./
© Photo SCALA, Florence.
page 63, bottom left: Fernand Léger, French (1881–1955), Maud Dale, 1935. Oil
on canvas, overall: 100.4 × 79.7 cm (391/2 × 313/8 inches), framed: 136.8 ×
112.1 cm (537/8 × 441/8 inches). National Gallery of Art, Chester Dale
Collection, 1963.10.36./© 2015 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New
York/ADAGP, Paris.
page 63, bottom right: George Bellows (1882–1925). Maud Dale, 1919.
National Gallery of Art, Chester Dale Collection, 1944.15.1./Bellows Trust.
page 69: Jan Steen (1626–1679). As the Old Sing, So Pipe the Young (1668–
1670). Mauritshuis, The Hague.
page 83: John Singleton Copley (1738–1815). Mrs. John Winthrop, 1773. Oil on
canvas, 351/2 × 283/4 inches (90.2 × 73 cm). Image copyright: © The
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Morris K. Jesup Fund, 1931 (31.109)./Image
source: Art Resource, NY.
page 108, left: Gilbert Stuart (1755–1828). George Washington (Lansdowne
Portrait), 1796. Oil on canvas. Place of execution: Germantown. Stretcher:
247.6 × 158.7 cm (971/2 × 621/2 inches); Frame: 283.5 × 194.3 × 17.8 cm
(1115/8 × 761/2 × 7 inches); Acquisition date: 2001-07-16. National Portrait
Gallery, Smithsonian Institution. Acquired as a gift to the nation through the

generosity of the Donald W. Reynolds Foundation, NPG.2001.13./Art
Resource, NY.
page 108, right: Alexander Gardner (1821–1882). Abraham Lincoln, 1865.
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division, Washington, DC, no.
LC-B812–9773-X.
page 116: JR (b. 1983). Women Are Heroes, Brazil. Action in the slums Morro
da Providência, tree, moon, horizontal, Rio de Janeiro, 2008. L’Agence VU,
Paris, France.
page 119: Giuseppe Arcimboldo (c. 1526–1593). L’Ortolano (The Vegetable
Gardener), c. 1590. Sistema Museale della Città di Cremona.
page 120: Giuseppe Arcimboldo (c. 1526–1593). L’Ortolano (The Vegetable
Gardener), c. 1590. Sistema Museale della Città di Cremona.
page 121: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David, 1501–1504. Photograph by Jörg
Bittner Unna (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Michelangelo-
David_JB01.JPG).
page 123: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David (detail), 1501–1504. Rachel
Sanderoff/Shutterstock.
page 124: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David, 1501–1504. Digital Michelangelo
Project, Stanford University.
page 125, top: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David (detail), 1501–1504.
Photograph by Jörg Bittner Unna
(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%27David%27_by_Michelangelo_J
page 125, bottom: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David (detail), 1501–1504.
Photograph by Jörg Bittner Unna
(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%27David%27_by_Michelangelo_J
page 126: Michelangelo (1475–1564). David (detail), 1501–1504. Photograph
by Jörg Bittner Unna
(https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Michelangelo-David_JB01.JPG).
page 131: Édouard Manet (1832–1883), A Bar at the Folies-Bergère, 1882. Oil
on canvas, 96 × 130 cm. P.1934.SC.234. The Samuel Courtauld Trust, The
Courtauld Gallery, London.
page 140, top: Henri Matisse, French (1869–1954), Open Window, Collioure,
1905. Oil on canvas, overall: 55.3 × 46 cm (213/4 × 181/8 inches), framed:
71.1 × 62.2 × 5.1 cm (28 × 241/2 × 2 inches). National Gallery of Art,
Collection of Mr. and Mrs. John Hay Whitney 1998.74.7./© 2015 Succession
H. Matisse/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York.
page 140, bottom: Henri Matisse, French (1869–1954), French Window at
Collioure, 1914. Oil on canvas, 116.5 × 89 cm. Photo by Philippe Migeat;

CNAC/MNAM/Dist. RMN: Grand Palais, Art Resource, NY./© 2015
Succession H. Matisse/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York.
page 151: Joel Sternfeld (b. 1944). McLean, Virginia, December 1978; n:1978
p:2003; Digital C-print; Edition of 10 and 2 artist’s proofs; image size: 42 ×
521/2 inches; paper size: 48 × 581/2 inches. © Joel Sternfeld. Courtesy of the
artist and Luhring Augustine, New York.
page 154: René Magritte, Belgian (1898–1967). Time Transfixed, 1938. Oil on
canvas, 577/8 × 387/8 inches (147 × 98.7 cm). Joseph Winterbotham
Collection, 1970.426. Photography © The Art Institute of Chicago./© 2015 C.
Herscovici/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York.
page 158: Sarah Grant, The Furniture City Sets the Table for the World of Art,
2009. Installation © Sticks/photo by Adam Bird.
page 165: Fundamentalist Church members. AP Photo/Tony Gutierrez.
page 170: Philip Evergood (1901–1973), © Copyright. Dowager in a
Wheelchair, 1952. Oil on fiberboard, 477/8 × 36 inches (121.5 × 91.4 cm).
Courtesy ACA Galleries, New York. Photo credit: Smithsonian American Art
Museum, Washington, DC, Gift of the Sara Roby Foundation, 1986.6.90/Art
Resource, NY.
page 192: René Magritte (1898–1967). The Key to Dreams, 1927. Oil on canvas,
38 × 53 cm. Inv. L 1953. bpk, Berlin/Art Resource, NY./© 2015 Artists
Rights Society (ARS), New York.
page 193: Ralph Steiner (1899–1986). American Rural Baroque, 1930. Gelatin-
silver print, 79/16 × 91/2 inches. Ralph Steiner photograph, courtesy
estate./Digital image © The Museum of Modern Art, Gift of the photographer
(892.1965)./Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY.
page 195: First Corinthian Baptist Church. Redux Pictures/The New York
Times/photo by David Goldman.
page 198: Teens on a stoop. Redux Pictures/The New York Times/photo by
Hiroko Masuike.
page 201, top: John Singer Sargent (1856–1925). Scrapbook of photographic
reproductions of paintings by Sargent. Published/Created [S.I.: s.n., 1893?]
p. 49, Madame X, 1884, albumen print (shows an earlier state of the painting:
John Singer Sargent, Madame × (Madame Pierre Gautreau), (16.53) in the
collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art). The Thomas J. Watson
Library, Gift of Mrs. Francis Ormond, 1950 (192Sa7 Sa78 Q). Image
copyright © The Metropolitan Museum of Art./Image source: Art Resource,
NY.
page 201, bottom: John Singer Sargent (1856–1925). Madame X (Madame
Pierre Gautreau), 1883–1884. Oil on canvas, 821/8 × 431/4 inches (208.6 ×

109.9 cm). Arthur Hoppock Hearn Fund, 1916 (16.53). Image copyright ©
The Metropolitan Museum of Art./Image source: Art Resource, NY.
page 209, top: Pieter Brueghel the Elder (c. 1525–1569). The Painter and the
Buyer, c. 1565. Heritage Images/Getty Images.
page 209, bottom: Richard Diebenkorn, Studio Wall, 1963. Oil on canvas, 453/8
× 421/2 inches (115.3 × 108 cm). Estate #1395. © The Richard Diebenkorn
Foundation.
page 212: Francisco de Goya y Lucientes (1746–1828). The Naked Maja, circa
1795–1800. © Madrid, Museo Nacional del Prado.
page 213: Lucian Freud, Benefits Supervisor Sleeping, 1995. Oil on canvas.
Lucian Freud (1922–2011). © The Lucian Freud Archive/Private
Collection/The Bridgeman Art Library.
page 217, top: Hieronymus Bosch (c. 1450–1516). The Garden of Earthly
Delights, c. 1500–1505. Universal History Archive/Getty Images.
page 217, bottom: Hieronymus Bosch (c. 1450–1516). The Garden of Earthly
Delights (detail), c. 1500–1505. Universal History Archive/Getty Images.
page 218: William-Adolphe Bouguereau (1825–1905). Dante and Virgil in Hell,
1850. Universal History Archive/Getty Images.
page 221: Hieronymus Bosch (c. 1450–1516). The Garden of Earthly Delights
(detail), c. 1500–1505. Universal History Archive/Getty Images.
page 226: Jacques-Louis David (1748–1825). Comtesse Daru, 1810. Copyright
The Frick Collection.
page 244: Photograph of two running police officers, 1993. Don
McCullin/Contact Press Images.
page 246: Nanny and child. Courtesy of the author.
page 249: Claude Monet (1840–1926). Bridge Over a Pond of Water Lilies,
1899. ACME Imagery/Superstock.
page 250, top: Claude Monet (1840–1926). The Japanese Footbridge, 1899. The
National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC, Marco Brivio, age
fotostock/Superstock.
page 250, middle: Claude Monet (1840–1926). Bridge Over a Pond of Water
Lilies, 1899. ACME Imagery/Superstock.
page 250, bottom: Claude Monet (1840–1926). The Japanese Footbridge and
the Water Lily Pool, Giverny, 1899. Philadelphia Museum of Art,
Philadelphia, PA, Mr. and Mrs. Carroll S. Tyson, Jr., Collection,
1963./Bridgeman Images.
page 252: Caravaggio (1571–1610). The Calling of Saint Matthew, 1599–1600.
Pii Stabilimenti della Francia a Roma e Loreto, San Luigi dei Francesi, photo
by Mauro Coen.

page 253: The Situation Room. White House Press Office, photo by Pete Souza,
2011.
page 264: El Anatsui (b. 1944). Skylines, 2008. Aluminium and copper wire,
118.1 × 324.8 inches (300 × 825 cm). Courtesy of October Gallery Trust,
photo Scope Basel 2013 and © Georgios Kefalas/epa/Corbis.
page 265: El Anatsui (b. 1944). Oasis (detail), 2008. Aluminium and copper
wire, 106 × 90 inches (269.24 × 228.6 cm). Private collection. Courtesy of
October Gallery Trust and Bill Greene, The Boston Globe/Getty Images.
page 268: Gustav Klimt (1862–1918). Amalie Zuckerkandl, 1917–1918, Canvas,
128 × 128 cm, unfinished. Oesterreichische Galerie im Belvedere. Erich
Lessing/Art Resource, NY.

Index
A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X
| Y | Z
Page references in italics refer to illustrations.
A
Abraham Lincoln (Gardner), 108, 108–10
accountability, 136, 248
action, objective assessment of, 69–71
Action in the Slums Morro da Providência, tree, moon, horizontal, Rio de
Janeiro (JR), 116, 116–18
adaptation, 14, 87–89
biases and, 239–57
uncertainty and, 258–72
affinity bias, 243
Afghanistan war, 176
Agate, Lucy, 239–42
aircraft recognition, 31, 56
air traffic controllers, 206
Alamo (Texas), 150
Alderete, Christian, 184–85
Alexander, Jane, 44–45
Allen, David, 267
al-Shabaab, 62
American Rural Baroque (Steiner), 193, 193–94
analyzing, 14, 115–43
Android, 150
appearances, deceptive, 65
Apple, 6, 150
Arcimboldo, Giuseppe, 119–20
Arizona Division of Occupational Safety and Health, 149–50

art. See also individual artworks
in attention development, 31–36
as communication, 179–81
discomfort caused by, 215–19
framing of, 203, 207
in observation skill development, xiv–xv, 10–14
physical perspective and, 119–27
taking time to observe, 19–22
unfinished, 266–72
articulation, 14. See also communication Art of Manliness (McKay and McKay),
167
The Art of Perception program, xv–xvii, 14
The Art of Scientific Investigation (Beveridge), 33
assessment
art for practicing, 11–14, 19–22
autopilot vs. focus in, 14–16
distraction and, 16–18
exercising the brain in, 9–10
in prioritization, 153–59
seeing what matters and, 3–22
trusting your senses for, 18–22
assumptions vs. facts, 62–65, 79–82, 187
As the Old Sing, So Pipe the Young (Steen), 10, 69, 69–70
attention
blind spots and, 29–31, 88–89
to detail, 90–97
developing/training, 31–36
emotions and, 224
as finite resource, 15–16, 29–31
multitasking and, 16–17
one thing at a time and, 99–100
schema theory, 29
attentional blindness, 87
audience, in communication, 187–90, 205
Audio-Animatronics, 91
The Austere Academy (Snicket), 79–80
Automat (Hopper), 60, 63, 63, 66–69, 71–72, 73, 74, 77, 78, 80, 163–64
autopilot, 14–16, 58–59
awareness, 35. See also attention

of bias, 242–43, 246–47, 254–55
of details, 91–97
of emotions, 225
of perspective, 137
of prioritization systems, 150–52
B
Bach, Oscar, 80
Baltimore Police Department, 153
Baradell, Scott, 202
A Bar at the Folies-Bergère (Manet), 131, 131–33
Barnes, Latrice, 195, 195–98
Beaumont Health System, 127–28
behavior, 11, 66–68
Bell, Alexander Graham, 14–15
Bell, Joseph, 24–25, 35, 159
Bellows, George, 63–64
Benefits Supervisor Sleeping (Freud), 213, 213–14, 215
Beveridge, William Ian Beardmore, 33
bias, 239–57
awareness of, 242–43, 246–47, 254–55
definition of, 242
experience, 248–54
perceptual filters and, 41–47, 52–59
prejudice and, 244–47
rules for working with, 254–57
seeing what we want to see, 52–54
transferring, 246
unconscious, 243–47
big picture, seeing, 104–5
Big Sue. See Benefits Supervisor Sleeping (Freud)
bin Laden, Osama, 254
BlackBerry, Ltd., 150
Blakely, Sara, 188–89
blanks, automatically filling in, 89–90
blindness
inattentional, 29–31

neuroscience of, 87–89
strategies for overcoming, 97–104
unawareness of, 94–95
to what’s in plain sight, 83–111
willful, 219–23
blind spots, 22, 95
neuroscience of, 28–31, 87–89
self-assessment of, 26–28
what’s in plain sight and, 83–111
Bliss, Dave, 102–3
Bloch-Bauer, Ferdinand, 268–70
Bloom: A Site-specific Installation (Haber), xviii–xx, xix
Bobby Flay Steak, 185–87, 206
body language, 65, 68, 96–97, 107, 203–5, 225
Borgata Hotel Casino, 185–87
Bosch, Hieronymus, 216–18, 221
Bouguereau, William-Adolphe, 218–19
Boyers, Jayson, 134
brain
attention delegation by, 15–16, 29–31
blind spots and, 28–31, 87–89
effects of movement on, 128–29
effects of practice on, 33
exercising, 9–10
filling in the blanks by, 89–90
illusion confusion and, 37–39
malleability of, 9–10, 47, 257
memory and, 142
multitasking and, 99
novelty and, 12
observation training for, 31–36
perception skills and, xiv–xv
perceptual filters and, 47–52
in sight, 6–9
Brain Games television show, 57
Brainwave program, 37–39
Braverman, Irwin, 31
breaks, taking, 100–101, 128–29
Bright, Josh, 188

Brueghel, Pieter the Elder, 208–9
bruises, 75
Burke, James, 261
C
Cain, Susan, 191
camouflaged things, noticing, 98–99
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 84
Caravaggio, 252–53
Carrasco, Marisa, 37–39
CARVER matrix, 152
Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine, 44–45
Chabris, Christopher, 29–31
change, 56–59, 87, 273–77
change blindness, 56–59, 87
Charlevoix, Anne, 182
charting by exception, 54–55
child abuse/neglect, 75, 106–8, 220
Chin, Don, 185
Churchill, Winston, 179–80
CIA, 153
Cleveland Clinic, 47
clothing, objective assessment of, 66–68
COBRA strategy, 97–104, 110
cognitive bias, 52–54
cold-case investigations, 189–90
collaboration, 134
Collioure, France, 139–41
Colorado Bureau of Investigation, 189–90
Columbia University photo, 26–27
communication, xiv
art as, 179–81
audience in, 187–90
avoiding breakdowns in, 175–210
believing what you see and, 219–23
with children, 222–23
correcting poor, 199–202

cost of poor, 177–78
editing, 193–99
emotions and, 223–31
expectations set by, 179
of facts vs. opinions, 214–19
framing, 203
of hard truths, 210–36
heated, moving on from, 227–31
as invitation, 208–10
nonverbal, 96–97
painting a picture in, 105–10
perception differences and, 47
practicing, 190–93
receiving, 232–36
renaming, 229–31
under stress, 210–36
subjective vs. objective, 77–79
three Rs in, 205–8
word choice in, 77–78, 181–87
completion, desire for, 266–72
complexity, 11–12, 277
Comtesse Daru (David), 226, 226–27
Conan Doyle, Arthur. See Doyle, Arthur Conan
Condit, Gary, 175
confirmation bias, 52–54
conflict management, 134
Conley, Kenneth, 30–31
Connor, Bill, 191
Consciousness and the Social Brain (Graziano), 28
Copley, John Singleton, 83–84, 95–96
cow photo, 37–39, 55, 56
C photograph, 26–27, 27
creativity, 134, 263–65
crises, 60–62, 148–53
cultural differences, 16–17, 162–63, 188–89, 203–5, 255–56
customer service, 91
D

Dang, Elaine, 72–73
danger
of assumptions, 64–65, 79–81
from being on autopilot, 14–15
of filters, 59
location assessment and, 72–73
from miscommunication, 177–78
objective observation and, 60–62, 74–75
perspective and, 136–37
prioritization plans and, 150–53
Dante and Virgil in Hell (Bouguereau), 218, 218–19
Darby, John, 153
Dasgupta, Nilanjana, 257
Daughters of the Republic of Texas, 150
Daum, Kevin, 272
David (Michelangelo), 121, 121–26, 123, 124, 125, 126
David, Jacques-Louis, 226–27
da Vinci, Leonardo, 6, 22
Deal, Ron L., 223
deception, body language and, 96–97
Della Femina, Jerry, 261
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (Picasso), 206
Dennett, Daniel C., 228
Denny’s restaurant, 263
Department of Defense, xvi
Department of the Army, 11
desires, in perceptual filters, 53–54
details
big picture and, 104–5
communicating, 105–10
importance of, 90–94, 110–11
in nonverbal communication, 96–97
orientation to, developing, 94–96
strategies for seeing, 97–104
Diebenkorn, Richard, 209–10
Digital Michelangelo Project, 124–25
discomfort, 12
Discover magazine, 129

Disney, Walt, 91, 204
distractions, 16–19, 99–100
Dolan, Eamon, 232, 275–76
Dowager in a Wheelchair (Evergood), 170, 170–71
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 24–25, 35, 159
Dyer, Wayne W., 119
E
Eastern Air Lines crash, 104–5
East Neck Nursing Center, 239–42
Ebola, 273
editing, 193–99
Eggies, 6
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 167
Eisenhower Decision Matrix, 167
Ekman, Paul, 224, 225
El Anatsui, 264–65
email, 158–59, 272
Eminem, 175
emotions
discomfort, 215–19
memory and, 142
moving on from in communication, 227–36
outsmarting, 223–27
from the unfinished, 266–72
empathy, 134–36
engagement, 35, 93–94
errors, 17, 199–202. See also filters, perceptual Evergood, Philip, 170–71
everyday situations, 11–12, 35
exclusive language, 184
exercise, 47, 100
expectations, 52–56, 101–2, 179
experience, 12, 41–47, 129, 248–54
eye contact, 96–97, 203, 204
EyeWire, 6–9
F

Fabritius, Carel, 10
facts, 65, 277
about location, 72–73
assumptions vs., 62–65
biases vs., 255
in emotional communication, 233–36
omitting because of uncertainty, 158–59
opinions vs., 51–52, 77–78, 214–19
perceptual filters and, 51–52
seeing what we want to see and, 52–54
system for gathering, 65–73
verification of, 64
willful blindness toward, 219–23
familiarity blindness, 87
family protective services, 106–8
FBI, xvi, 126–27, 130
Fernández, Teresita, 180, 193
filling in the blanks, 89–90
filters, perceptual, 41–47. See also perspective
bias, 239–57
blind spots and, 87–89
in children, 56
common, 52–59
developing awareness of, 47–52, 48–52
expectations and, 101–2
facts vs. opinions and, 51–52, 62–65
filling in the blanks with, 89–90
not seeing change, 56–59
in prioritization, 153
seeing through our subconscious, 47–52
seeing what we’re told to see, 54–56
seeing what we want to see, 52–54
firearm training simulator (FATS), 144–48, 164–65
Fischman, Lisa, 79
flight attendants, 76–77, 205
Florida State University, 226, 272
focus, 16–17, 29–31, 99–100, 100–101
Folk, Charles, 99

Forbes, 100, 134
found objects, 264–65
framing, 203, 207–8, 231
Frank, Jan, 193
Freaky Friday challenges, 135–36
French Window at Collioure (Matisse), 139–41, 140
frequency illusion, 53
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, 62
Freud, Lucian, 208, 213–14, 215
The Frick Collection, xiv–xv, 226–27
Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, 165, 165–67
fund-raisers, 134
The Furniture City Sets the Table for the World of Art (Grant), 158, 158
G
Galvan, Judy, 142–43
The Garden of Earthly Delights (Bosch), 216–18, 217, 221, 221
Gardner, Alexander, 108–10
Gautreau, Virginie Amélie Avegno, 200, 201
gemba walks, 127
genchi genbutsu, 127
George Washington (Lansdowne Portrait) (Stuart), 108, 108–10
Getting Things Done (Allen), 267
Gilkey, Roderick, 128–29
Ginsburg, Susan, 188
Gleeson, Brent, 212
Global Soap Project, 3–6, 22, 273–74
“go and see,” 127–29
The Goldfinch (Fabritius), 10
Goldman, David, 195–98
González, Wellington, 118
Goya, Francisco de, 212–14, 215
Grant, Sarah, 158
Graziano, Michael, 28, 28–29
Green, Marc, 94–95
H

Haber, Anna Schuleit, xviii–xx
Harrigian, Jeffrey, 176
Harrison, Jean, 255–56
Hatfield, Bennett K., 202
healthcare
art in enhancing observation skills in, 31–33
charting by exception in, 54–55
communication in, 188
diagnostic skills in, xv
hospice care, 142–43
managed, quality vs. quantity in, 17
mental, xviii–xx
perspective changes in, 127–28
power of observation in, 24–25
prioritization in, 148–49, 150, 152
seeing what’s in plain sight in, 84–85
uncertainty and, 258–60
what is not known in, 159–63
Heins, Thorstein, 150
help, asking for, 102
Heuer, Richard J., 153
Hirsch, Mark, 57–58
Hitler, Adolf, 179–80
Holmes, Sherlock, 24–25, 159
Holt, Tom, 187
Homer, Winslow, 207
Honthorst, Gerrit van, 13–14
Hopper, Edward, 60, 63, 66–69, 71–72, 73, 74, 77, 78, 80, 163–64
Horn & Hardart, 73
hospice care, 142–43
hotels, 3–6, 16–17, 22, 72, 273–74
Hound and Hunter (Homer), 207
Hume, David, 211
Hurricane Katrina, 148–49, 150, 152
I

IDC, 177
illusion confusion, 37–39
illusions, 59
impatience, 17
important vs. urgent, 167–69
inattentional blindness, 29–31, 87–89, 94–95
inclusive language, 184
Industrial Cottage (Rosenquist), 176–77
IndustryWeek, 127
Infantry with beast (Alexander), 44, 44–45
information-gathering model, 65–73
innovation, 5–6, 100–101, 127–29, 263–65
Institute of Customer Service, 91
Integrity and Accuracy Conference, 144–48
International Civil Aviation Organization, 76–77
International Coal Group, 200, 202
In the Studio exhibition, 208–10
intuition, 12
IQ, effect of distraction on, 16
Iraq Intelligence Commission, 81, 163
J
The Japanese Footbridge (Monet), 248–52, 249, 250
Javitch, David G., 206
Jeffs, Warren, 165–67
Jobs, Steve, 6, 22
Johnson & Johnson, 261–62
Joselit, David, 11
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 16
Journal of Vision, 31
JR (artist), xvii–xviii, 116–18, 139, 215
K
kaizen, 127–28
Kaufman, Betsy Ravreby, 6, 22
Kayongo, Derreck, 3–6, 22, 273–74

Kentridge, William, 216
The Key to Dreams (Magritte), 192, 192–93
Kilts, Clint, 128–29
KISS principle, 194–95
Klimt, Gustav, 268–70
Krznaric, Roman, 134
L
labels, 55–56
law enforcement, xv–xvi
body language of, 96
communication in, 175–76, 187, 189–90
cultural differences and, 255–56
focus and perspective of, 101
inattentional blindness and, 30–31
painting a picture and, 106–10
perspective changes in, 126–27
pertinent negative in, 160–61
prioritization in, 144–48, 150–52, 153, 164–65
sexual assault and, 138–39, 141
Stein homicide, 85–87
use of all senses in, 129–30
Le, Annie, 130, 137
Léger, Fernand, 63–64
Lehman Brothers, 220–21
Lentini, Joe, 185–87
Leonardo da Vinci, 6, 22
Levy, Chandra, 175–76
Lintgen, Arthur, 35–36
London Metropolitan Police, 244, 244–46
London University, 16
Longley, Joanna, 107–8
Lowery, Natavia, 86–87, 98, 101
Lupo, Joseph, 186
M

MacDonald, Sean, 178–79
Mackay, Harvey, 207
Mackey, John, 178
Maclean, Hunter, 162
Madame X (Madame Pierre Gautreau) (Sargent), 200, 201
Magritte, René, 23, 33–35, 154–57, 192–93, 277
MakerBot, 8
Manet, Édouard, 131–33
Marshall, Kerry James, 43
Martin, Trayvon, 260
mass shootings, 258–60
Matelli, Tony, 46–47, 48–52, 78–79
Matisse, Henri, 139–41, 203
Maud Dale (Bellows), 63, 63–64
Maud Dale (Léger), 63, 63–64
McCann, Jess, 128, 194–95
McDonald, Glenn, 19
McKay, Brett, 167
McKay, Kay, 167
McLean, Virginia (Sternfeld), 151, 151–52, 168–69
Mehrabian, Albert, 203
memory, rewriting of, 141–42
mental blocks, breaking, 128–29
mental health care, xviii–xx
Merkin, Daphne, 18
Mestral, George de, 5–6, 22
Metro-North Railroad, 149–50
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 266
Michelangelo, 121–26
Miller, Jennifer, 135–36
Mind Hacks (Stafford), 267
Mistress and Maid (Vermeer), 20, 20–22
Monet, Claude, 248–52
mono-tasking, 99–100
Morro da Providência, Brazil, 115–18, 139
motivation, 138–39
Mrs. John Winthrop (Copley), 83, 83–84, 95–96
Mueller, Karin Price, 187
multitasking, 16–17, 99–100

Murrell, Jerry, 200, 202
myside bias, 52–54
N
Nagel, Adam, 178–79
Nairobi mall terrorist attack, 60–62, 64, 70–71, 72–73, 74, 80
Naish, Benjamin, xvi
The Naked Maja (Goya), 212, 212–14
Nass, Clifford, 99
National Gallery of Art, 207
National Institutes of Health 3D Print Exchange, 8
National Transportation Safety Board, 105
Navarro, Joe, 203–4
neurons, 6–9, 8, 9–10, 19. See also brain Newton, Isaac, 22, 100–101
Newton, Kelly, 87
New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority, 149–50
New York Post, 239
New York State Regents Exam, 91–94
New York Times, 150, 158, 198–99
9/11 attacks, 42
nonverbal communication. See body language
Northwest Airlines, 169
note taking, 17
novelty, 12
nursing home stripper, 239–42
O
Oasis (El Anatsui), 264, 264–65
Obama, Barack, election of, 195–98
objective language, 77–78, 181–87
objective surveillance, 60–62, 277
assumptions vs., 79–82
avoiding subjectivity in, 77–79
cost of failure in, 60–62
fact gathering in, 65–73
facts vs. fiction in, 62–65

in personal and professional life, 75–77
senses in, 129–33
uncertainty and, 262–63
“what?” in, 69–71
“when?” in, 71
“where?” in, 72–73
“who?” in, 65–68
objet trouvé, 264–65
observation
accurate description and, 13–14
autopilot vs., 14–16
benefits of accurate, 5–6
big picture in, 104–5
danger of assumptions in, 81
definition of, 41
facts as basis of, 51–52
importance of, xiv, xx
multisensory, 129–33
neuroscience on, xiv–xv
objective surveillance in, 60–62
retention and, 34–35
seeing vs., 24–26
seeing what matters and, 3–22
senses vs. technology for, 18–19
skill development in, xiv–xv, 23–36
strategies for, 97–104
taking time for, 19–22
transformative change from, 273–77
value of art in developing, 10–14
of what’s in plain sight, 83–111
O’Keeffe, Georgia, 180
one thing at a time, 99–100
Oosterman, Eve and Ruth, 39, 39–41
Open Window, Collioure (Matisse), 139–41, 140
Operation Neptune’s Spear, 253–54
opinions, facts vs., 51–52, 77–78, 214–19
organization, 89–90. See also prioritization L’Ortolano (The Vegetable
Gardener) (Arcimboldo), 119, 119–20, 120
other-race effect, 243, 257

P
The Painter and the Buyer (Brueghel), 208–9, 209
painting a picture in communication, 105–10
Pasadena mural, 184–85
Paulo da Silva, Marcos, 118
Peace Corps, 138–39, 141
Pelka, Daniel, 220
pentimento, 199–200
perception. See also observation
attention in, 29–31
awareness of others’, 44–47
blind spots and, 28–31
definition of, 41
differences between individuals’, 37–59
errors in, neurology of, xiv
filters in, 41–59
importance of others’, 43–47, 55–56
labels and, 55–56
not seeing change, 56–59
perceptual blindness, 87
perspective, 12. See also perception
analyzing from multiple, 115–43
asking someone else for, 102
changeability of, 139–42
changing to observe more, 98–99
in communication, 233–35
definition of, 118, 143
mental, 134–37
motivation and, 138–39
movement and, 127–29
physical, 119–27
in prioritization, 153
seeing from others’, 133–42
service-oriented, 142–43
sharing your, 137
using all senses for, 129–33
pertinent negative, 159–63

Phelps, Elizabeth A., 142
Philadelphia Police Department, xvi, 153
phonographic records, reading, 35–36
Picasso, 206
planning, benefits of, 272
Poincaré, Henri, 101
pointing, 204–5
points of view. See perspective
police. See law enforcement
Pollard, Jon, 185
Pollock, Jackson, 181
Popova, Maria, 193
The Portrait (Magritte), 23, 33–35, 277
Portrait of Amalie Zuckerkandl (Klimt), 268, 268–70
Pou, Anna, 148–49, 150, 152
Powell, Corey S., 129
practice, 33–36, 47–52, 131–33, 190–93
prejudice, 55–56, 244–47
Prince, Terry, 162
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, 6–7
Princeton University, 17
prioritization, 144–71, 277
awareness of personal systems for, 150–52
blind spots and, 88–89
importance of, 150
influence of circumstances on, 156
practicing, 164–67
systems for, 152
three-prong approach to, 153–67
uncertainty and, 158–59, 261–62
unconscious bias in, 243–47
urgent vs. important in, 167–69
“what do I know?” and, 153–59
“what do I need to know?” and, 163–64
“what don’t I know?” and, 159–63
problem solving, 91–94, 136
project planning, 162
The Psychology of Intelligence Analysis (Heuer), 153
public speaking, 191

puerperal sepsis, 273
Q
quality vs. quantity, 17
quantification, in observation, 77–79
quantity vs. quality, 17
Queensland University of Technology, 225–26
questions, 231, 255, 277
Quiet (Cain), 191
R
Raymond, Jennifer, 257
reactive mode, 167
The Red Boat (Oosterman and Oosterman), 40, 40
Redd, Jasmine, 194–98
reframing, 207–8, 231
refrigerator blindness, 83–111
The Refusal of Time (Kentridge), 216
renaming, 206–7, 229–31
Renshaw, Samuel, 31, 37–39, 55, 56
Renshaw’s Cow, 37–39, 37, 38, 55, 56
repetition, 205–6, 227–29
resident advisors (RAs), 161
resource allocation, 15–17, 29–31, 167–68, 263–65
responsive mode, 167
retention, 34–35
retina mapping, 6–9, 19
Richards, Caroline, 228–29
Richards, Charles, 228–29
Right and Left (Homer), 207
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 115–18, 139
Robbins, Apollo, 37–39, 57, 59
Roberts, Jennifer L., 19
Rosenquist, James, 176–77
Rubin Museum of Art, 37–39

S
Sagal, Peter, 178
Sago, West Virginia, miners, 200, 202
Sarah Lawrence College, 17
Sargent, John Singer, 200, 201
SATs, 91
Savage, Adam, 17
“A Scandal in Bohemia” (Doyle), 24–25
schema theory, attention, 29
Schilling, Curt, 178–79
Schultz, Bonnie, 97
seeing what matters, 3–22
seeing what we’re told to see, 54–56
seeing what we want to see, 52–54
Self-Portrait in a Woman’s Eye (JR), xvii, xvii–xviii
senses, 10–14, 18–19, 129–33. See also sight sensory overload, 100
Seung, Sebastian, 6–9, 19
Seurat, Georges, 203
sex trafficking, 5
sexual assault response teams, 138–39, 141, 153
Shapiro, Dani, 190
Sidwell Friends School, 14–15
sight, 6–9, 37–59, 129–33
Silva, Rick, 135
“Silver Blaze” (Doyle), 159
Simkins, Audrey, 190
Simons, Daniel, 29–31, 57
single-tasking, 99–100
Six Sigma, 152
skimming, 33
Skylines (El Anatsui), 264, 264–65
Sleepwalker (Matelli), 46, 46–47, 48–52, 78–79
Sloan, Marcus, 91–94
Smiling Girl, a Courtesan, Holding an Obscene Image (Honthorst), 13, 13–14
Smithsonian American Art Museum, 43, 55, 170–71
Snicket, Lemony, 79–80
soap bars, recycling, 3–6, 22, 273–74

SOB, SOB (Marshall), 43
social media, 136–37, 178–79
Souza, Pete, 253–54
Spanx, 188–89
specificity, in language, 184–87, 213–14
Stafford, Tom, 266–67, 272
standardized tests, 91–94
Stanford University, 124–25
Starbucks, 75
State Farm insurance, 95
Steen, Jan, 10, 69–70
Stein, Linda, 85–87, 98, 101
Steiner, Ralph, 193–94
Sternfeld, Joel, 151–52, 168–69
stress, 12, 100, 210–36, 267
Stuart, Gilbert, 108–10
Studio Wall (Diebenkorn), 209, 209–10
subjectivity, 44–45
avoiding, 77–79
communication and, 233–36
emotions and, 223–27
of memory, 141–42
spotting, 81
uncertainty and, 262–63
word choice and, 77–78, 181–87
A Sunday on La Grande Jatte (Seurat), 203
Surveys (from the Cape of Good Hope) (Alexander), 44–45
T
technology, 16–17, 18–19, 178–79
“Teenage Summer, the Fasting Version,” 198, 198–99
terrorist attacks, 42, 60–62, 64, 70–74, 80
Tetris, 267
Texas General Land Office, 150
Thar, Jasmine, 260
That Tree (Hirsch), 57, 57–58, 58
Thephakaysone, Nikhom, 74–75

Tilley, Sue, 215
Time Transfixed (Magritte), 154, 154–57
Titanic, 220
To Kill a Mockingbird (Lee), 134
Tomasevic, Goran, 80
Toyota, 127
trading places, 135–36
transformative change, 273–77
Transportation Security Administration, 65
tunnel vision, 52–54
Tversky, Barbara, 88, 89
Two Japanese Wrestlers by a Sink (Freud), 208
Tylenol poisonings, 261–62
U
uncertainty, 12, 158–59, 258–72
Undercover Boss television show, 135
unfinished, anxiety of the, 266–72
Unicore, 233–35
University of California, Los Angeles, 17
University of Colorado Hospital, 258–60
University of Oslo, 47
University of Queensland, 257
University of Virginia School of Nursing, 54–55
unknown, in prioritization, 159–63
urgent vs. important, 167–69
US Army Asymmetric Warfare Group, 253–54
V
Valdez, Justin, 74–75
Vasari, Giorgio, 122
Velcro, 5–6
Velcro parents, 161
Vermeer, Jan, 20–22
Villanova University, 99
Vincot, Bruce, 233–35

Virgin Atlantic, 91
vision, biology of, 6–9
visual intelligence, 6
visual learners, 105
visual-spatial intelligence, 105
W
Wall Street Journal, xvi
Warhol, Andy, 205–6
Warm Detroit, 162
Was It Something I Said? (McCann), 194
water lily paintings (Monet), 248–252, 249, 250
Wellesley College, 46–47
West, Allison, 31–33
Westgate Mall, Nairobi, Kenya, terrorist attack, 60–62, 64, 70–71, 72–73, 74, 80
What Every Body Is Saying (Navarro), 203–4
White House Situation Room, 253, 253–54
“who, what, when, where” in fact gathering, 65–73
Whole Foods, 178
“why?,” understanding, 138–39, 260
Wilder, Bill, 127
willful blindness, 219–23
Wilson, David, 228
Winokur, Kay, 128
wish fulfillment, 53
wishful seeing, 52–54
Women Are Heroes (JR), xvii, xvii–xviii, 116, 116–18
word choice, 77–78, 181–87
work and workers
anxiety of the unfinished and, 265–72
attention to detail and, 90–94
bias in, 246
communication and emotions, 223–27
cost of poor communication in, 177–78
distractions and, 16–17, 99–100
email policies and, 158–59
perspective changes and, 127–29

prioritization in, 149–50
service perspective in, 142–43
what they don’t know, 162–63
World Trade Center attacks, 42
World War II, 31, 56
Wright, Gerald, 160–61
Y
Yarnell Hill, Arizona, fire, 149–50
Yearning for Zion Ranch, 165–67
“You Do Not Talk About Fight Club If You Do Not Notice Fight Club” (Simons
and Chabris), 31
Youngblood, Franklin, 240–41
Z
Zamora, José, 244
Zeigarnik, Bluma, 266
Zeigarnik effect, 266–67
zoning out, 14–15
Zuckerkandl, Amalie, 268, 268–70

About the Author
AMY E. HERMAN is a lawyer and art historian who developed the Art of
Perception course to help a wide array of professionals improve their
observation and communication skills. She teaches for a range of institutions,
including the New York City Police Department, the FBI, and the Department of
Defense. She holds an AB, a JD, and an MA in art history. She lives in New
York City.

