ETHICAL PERSPECTIVES 29, no. 2 (2022): 263-295.
© 2022 by Centre for Ethics, KU Leuven. All rights reserved.
doi: 10.2143/EP.29.2.3290921
Vlastimil Vohánka 
Palacký University Olomouc, Czech Republic
Abstract.  I argue for three principles of minimal beneficence, which constrain 
when and what at least we are obligated to do on behalf of someone. All three 
may be accepted by both the consequentialist Peter Singer and by his staunch 
opponents in material value-ethics, who are typically anti-consequentialists. 
Either side would philosophically benefit from accepting the principles. At the 
same time, the first principle is rarely applicable, the second only when the avail-
able relevant evidence is not too complex, and the third only as a prompt to 
keep thinking seriously about how to practice beneficence. Even so, I derive 
some widely applicable, practical implications.
Keywords.  Practical ethics, effective altruism, expected value, cluelessness, 
food ethics
I.  Material Value-Ethics
A
t the very start, let me remind the reader what material (or non-­formal) 
value-ethics is. It is ethics, says Eugene Kelly, that “[…] involves a 
profound criticism of Kantian ethical formalism” and is “[…] founded in 
a phenomenology of the values themselves, that is, the content, available 
in intuition, of such values as trust, utility, friendship, or even the ­Aristotelian 
virtues” (2008, 1). In this ethics, unlike the ethics commonly ascribed to 
Kant, actions, decisions, and persons are morally positive or negative in 
virtue of the agent’s attitude to specific (contentful or ‘material’ as opposed 
to contentless or ‘formal’) objects or phenomena. If John wants to cure 
Peter, his decision to do so is not morally good solely in virtue of being a 
decision to do whatever is, in the abstract, morally right, but in virtue of 
being a decision to restore Peter’s health and the wellbeing enabled by it. 
Likewise, John’s more basic attitude toward ill people is not morally good 
Minimal Beneficence through the Lens of 
Material Value-Ethics

— 264 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
solely in virtue of being a sincere attitude towards doing whatever is, in the 
abstract, morally right, but in virtue of being a sincere attitude towards 
restoration of health and wellbeing. Similar analysis holds for other bearers 
of moral goodness: John’s morally good actions on Peter’s behalf that issue 
from John’s decision, John’s morally good emotions towards Peter, and 
John’s being a morally good agent overall. These too are morally good in 
relation to something more specific than abstract moral rightness. The rest 
of the above quotation from Kelly expresses what I call value-responsivism 
about moral evaluations. Decisions, actions, attitudes, emotions, and agents 
are morally positive in virtue of involving an adequate (in a sui generis sense) 
response, on the agent’s side, to specific values or disvalues – typically those 
intuitively discerned by the agent, however vaguely and by whatever means. 
They are morally negative in virtue of a similar but inadequate response. 
So, John’s decision to cure Peter is morally positive in virtue of being an 
adequate response to the value of Peter’s health and wellbeing, and John’s 
decision not to cure Peter is morally negative in virtue of being an inade-
quate response.
As I observed in an earlier article (2017), material value-ethicists so 
defined include, among others, Franz Brentano, Alexius Meinong, 
Edmund Husserl, Adolf Reinach, Max Scheler, Nicolai Hartmann, 
­Dietrich von Hildebrand, Aurel Kolnai, Hans Reiner, Manfred Frings, 
Peter Spader, Josef Seifert, John F. Crosby, Fritz Wenisch, Philip Blosser, 
Eugene Kelly, and Graham McAleer. I argued that material value-ethics 
is remarkable in that it tracks moral evaluations down to values and dis-
values while at the same time avoiding the tangled question of whether 
(some version of) consequentialism is correct.
I noted that material value-ethicists accept value-responsivism, as 
stated above. For instance, they agree that a morally good decision to do 
something is morally good in virtue of its being a free and adequate 
response to the morally relevant values of attainable outcomes, discerned 
by the agents both in value and attainable. This is the case if John decides 
freely to restore Peter’s health and further wellbeing, which John discerns 

— 265 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
as satisfying or objectively good for Peter or as valuable in itself; John 
discerns he can cure Peter without doing anything comparably dissatisfy-
ing or objectively bad for someone else or disvaluable in itself; and John’s 
decision is adequate to his discernment. That is why his decision to cure 
Peter is morally good. John’s more basic attitude to help ill people is 
morally good for similar reasons: he has the attitude freely; he discerns 
the morally relevant values and disvalues involving in his helping, as well 
as his ability to help; and the attitude is an adequate response to his dis-
cernment. Interdependence in adequacy (or inadequacy) across various 
levels is possible. For example, a morally adequate (or inadequate) deci-
sion may require a corresponding and adequate (or inadequate) basic atti-
tude, and vice versa. As said, the concept of adequacy (and inadequacy) of 
a response to values and disvalues is sui generis. But it is intelligible from 
examples and usage. Brentano (1889/2009, 10-11), for example, applied 
the concept to emotions. His examples: in normal circumstances, love 
towards one’s own child, fear of dangerous dogs, and joyful expectation 
of someone’s recovery are adequate; hate towards one’s own child, 
fear of harmless dogs, and joyful expectation of someone’s death are 
inadequate. A greater delight from chocolate than from ice cream is nei-
ther adequate nor inadequate. Later the concept of adequacy was gener-
alized by von Hildebrand (1916/1969, 39-40; 1953, 239-240; 244-256; 
1980, 407-408). He applied it also to actions, omissions, and decisions. 
He took it as indefinable via other concepts, or at least not conveyable 
to anybody who has never discerned it as such. “To anything valuable an 
adequate response is due.” That, he wrote, “[…] is an archphenomenon 
[ein Urphänomen]” (1980, 407). This is less than ideal if we require rigorous 
definitions at all levels of philosophical analysis, but it is more acceptable 
if we acknowledge some concepts as bedrock and philosophically useful 
even though not altogether precise.
Useful in what way? The value-responsivist analysis of moral evalua-
tions is explicitly focused on values and disvalues. As Kelly notes, to omit 
them from moral analysis is not true “[…] to the common experience of 

— 266 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
values” (2008, 2), because values and disvalues are “[…] the ultimate stuff 
of our moral consciousness”, “[…] the material to which moral conscious-
ness is directed” (2011, 7-8). In the example of John deciding to cure 
Peter, it is the value of Peter’s health and wellbeing, and the disvalue of 
any costs of curing Peter. Value-responsivism also prompts some material 
value-ethicists to scan and describe in rather unusual detail the landscape 
and possible hierarchy of values (such as pleasure, health, vitality, depth, 
acuteness, brilliance, gloriousness, beauty, courage, generosity, honesty, 
humility, wisdom, charity, or holiness) and disvalues (the opposites), pur-
sued or affirmed in decisions, actions and dispositions, and realized in 
persons, groups, and states of affairs (see Gooch 1993). It also prompts 
such ethicists to discuss rough and ready guidelines for adequacy and inad-
equacy, both consequentialist and other. These guidelines may be such as 
that, all else equal and barring reasons to the contrary, the more the actu-
alization of a value would be noble, or basic, or urgent, or probable, or 
large in quantity, or required by special obligations, the more it should be 
preferred (see Scheler 1913-1916/1973, 26; von Hildebrand 1953, 237-239; 
Hartmann 1926/2002, 51-53; 155-156; Reiner 1951/1983, 176-177).
Another useful feature of value-responsivism is that it, as such, does 
not commit us to take a stance on the disputed issue of whether conse-
quentialism, another view focused on values and disvalues, is correct. 
Value-responsivism is silent on whether, in general, adequacy consists just 
in pursuing – on the level of decisions, actions, dispositions, or elsewhere 
– valuable and probable enough overall outcomes, as well as on whether 
inadequacy consists just in pursuing disvaluable and probable enough 
overall outcomes. It neither sanctions nor rules out other possibly rele-
vant factors: virtues, obligations, promises, contracts, rights, justice, com-
passion, and the like. (For example, the above stated guidelines mention 
special obligations as a relevant factor and seem consistent with value-­
responsivism.) Value-responsivism also neither affirms nor denies that, at 
least sometimes, the value of non-consequentialist factors is, morally 
speaking, more decisive than the value and the probability of outcomes. 

— 267 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
This neutrality is useful if you think the issue of consequentialism is 
tough, or want to avoid it for expository reasons, yet still would like to 
provide a basic philosophical analysis of moral evaluations that is explic-
itly focused on values and disvalues. I granted in my earlier article that 
most material value-ethicists reject consequentialism. However, my point 
has been that this rejection is not inbuilt into their value-responsivism. It 
goes beyond it. Indeed, if it did not, then Brentano, a value-responsivist 
himself, would hardly be a consequentialist – which he is, since for him 
a decision is adequate if it is regarded by the agent to probably maximize 
the value of the present and future of the world as a whole (1952/2009, 
57; 84; 139; 199).
II.  Material Value-Ethics of Minimal Beneficence
Yet elsewhere (2018), I have noted that however useful material value-
ethics and its value-responsivism can be in abstruse moral theory, they 
have been much less instructive for doing applied ethics.1 Here my aim 
is to explore how such ethics might be done. What I propose is just a 
sketch, a sketch of issues less dramatic but more ubiquitous than those 
debated, for example, in bioethics.
In part, the sketch is old news, both in its moral principles and in 
their commonality, but it still has morally grave implications. It is old 
news at least for readers well acquainted with the ethics of effective altru-
ism (see Greaves and Pummer 2019). Perhaps surprisingly for some mate-
rial value-ethicists, the principles originate in the works of the current 
arch-consequentialist and a co-founder of effective altruism Peter Singer, 
the favourite whipping boy of contemporary material value-ethicists (see 
Colosi 2003; Crosby 2004; Seifert 2004; McAleer 2010). In correspond-
ence, some of them have even told me it is beyond them how his works 
could be brought into useful contact with theirs. He is a chief antipode 
of conclusions of material value bioethics in so far as they are, among 
other things and unlike him, against all abortion, euthanasia, and genetic 

— 268 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
human enhancement. He also defends consequentialism, while most, 
though not all, material value-ethicists refuse it.
Still, at least outside bioethics, there is a common ground. The moral 
principles inspired by Singer may be adapted and incorporated into mate-
rial value-ethics and into its value-responsivism. They concern duties of 
minimal beneficence, i.e. when and what at least we are obligated to do on 
behalf of someone, be that us or somebody else. I formulate and assess 
the principles because they serve as premises in chief arguments for help-
ing those in need, which arguments in turn are morally salient in this world 
of grave needs and apparently easy opportunities to help. These principles 
seem plausible both for consequentialists and anti-­consequentialists, both 
for material value-ethicists and their opponents such as Singer. I try to 
state the principles succinctly and explicate their meaning clearly so that 
I can weigh their pros and cons, progressively refine them, and see which 
if any practical implications they really have. I find the principles surpris-
ingly hard to state, and even harder to derive their implications, though 
eventually I deliver some results. Throughout, I note what material val-
ue-ethicists can learn from their opponents like Singer, and what the latter 
can learn from the former.
III.  The Naive Principle
I begin with the naive principle of minimal beneficence (NMB). It admon-
ishes us to take relatively easy steps to prevent things of grave disvalue 
on behalf of others or even ourselves. I word the principle as follows:
NMB. If we can prevent something gravely disvaluable, and if the 
aggregate value we would sacrifice thereby and by other beneficent 
actions is small, it is wrong not to do so.
In other words, we should prevent any gravely disvaluable thing or event 
that we can prevent at aggregate costs which are both small and incom-
parable with that thing or event. Let me clarify. A material value-ethicist 

— 269 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
might say that by not preventing the disvaluable thing or event, we would 
be responding inadequately and so wrongly to the involved values and 
disvalues; and by preventing it, we would be responding adequately and 
so rightly. And that if we discerned the involved values and disvalues and 
our capacity for the prevention, then the non-prevention would be inad-
equate and bad, and the prevention would be adequate and good; not just 
objectively but also subjectively, on the level of our moral awareness. 
Anything disvaluable may be read or understood disjunctively, as is com-
mon in material value-ethics: i.e. as something unpleasant or dissatisfying 
for someone, or as something objectively bad for someone, or something 
bad in itself or impersonally (i.e. as something that ought not to be 
although it harms no one). Mutatis mutandis for anything valuable (see 
Vohánka 2017, 238-239). In the context of NMB, gravely disvaluable 
things or events mean especially the top disvaluable things or events that 
are preventable by normal people: things like premature death, intensive 
suffering, or prolonged misery of someone who does not deserve it and 
perhaps even cannot make sense of it. By normal people are meant mainly 
people in households that do not struggle to satisfy modest needs and 
can save enough money to deal with, say, six months of likely emergen-
cies, even if they cannot donate, say, a tithe of their monthly income 
without a noticeable reduction in their standard of living (for a similar 
definition, see Synowiec 2019, 27-28). We can prevent things or events in 
the sense of being in a position to make a counterfactual difference: i.e. 
we are able to do (instantly or over a course of time) actions upon which 
the things or events would not obtain yet without which they would 
obtain.
The idea of small costs and incomparable costs is more complicated. It is 
vague, yet still allows for clear-cut cases. Let me adapt the famous example 
from Singer (1972, 231-234; 240-241), the one about the lone strider pass-
ing by a child who is drowning in a shallow, though perhaps muddy, pond. 
Many people find the following claim acceptable, including material val-
ue-ethicists, who even posit similar examples (see von Hildebrand 1953, 

— 270 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
388; Reiner 1951/1983, 197-198; Blosser 1995, 143; Spader 2002, 277-278; 
Wenisch 2002, 92; 108; 182-183; 198). It would be wrong for John to let 
Peter drown in a nearby shallow pond if, at that moment, John alone could 
rescue Peter without comparable costs – i.e. without sacrificing something 
of comparable value. Singer would explain that this means John could res-
cue Peter without causing anything more or about as disvaluable as Peter’s 
death; without preventing anything more or about as valuable as Peter’s 
death is disvaluable; without doing anything wrong regardless of conse-
quences (though as a consequentialist Singer believes there is no such 
thing); and without doing anything else that would be a significant and 
morally relevant reason against John’s rescuing Peter.2 We can also assume, 
as Singer would in that example, that John could rescue Peter at small costs. 
This means John could do so conveniently, at least without, say, a notice-
able reduction in his or anyone else’s standard of living.
To convey the idea of small and incomparable aggregate costs, I will 
stretch the previous example as it is usual in recent literature. Suppose 
John walks daily by hordes of people drowning in shallow ponds. He is 
obligated to rescue many. At least dozens on a given day and at least hun-
dreds during a longer period. (This is not to say that anything valuable or 
disvaluable can be quantified, or at least ranked. It is just to say that at least 
sometimes quantities count, morally.)3 How many at most? That is a vexed 
issue. According to authors such as Singer, John may stop only when fur-
ther rescue would cause to him, or someone else, something at least as 
disvaluable as what he would prevent. (A moment would come, at least, 
when he would be too tired to feed himself or his own children, or to earn 
money he could donate to rescue teams.) Authors such as Garrett Cullity 
(2004, 82-89) think otherwise (cf. Hare 2013, 212; Timmerman 2015). 
If further rescue added up to a great enough aggregate value John has 
already sacrificed, he could stop although by continuing he would not 
cause anything more or about as disvaluable as a premature death. Here, 
the aggregate value would be one of all the valuables John has given up 
– taken together – by rescuing or by other beneficent actions. It might be 

— 271 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
great enough in absolute terms, or as a proportion of John’s original hold-
ings. No simple algorithm appears. Would it be enough for John to give 
up his boat and fine car? To keep a half of his wealth? Whatever the 
answer should be, Cullity insists John would not be bound to go as far as 
Singer would demand. The main point, however, is that Singer, Cullity, 
and almost everybody else agree that John would be bound to save at least 
those he could save at aggregate costs incomparable with their death and 
small to him and for anyone else.
NMB is not limited to life rescues. John would be likewise obligated 
to write a short email that would help Peter greatly – perhaps not to 
escape a murderous regime but rather to reunite with his family, or to 
pursue a sorely dreamed-of career (see Cullity 2004, 136). If given such 
opportunity on behalf of innocent people repeatedly, John would be obli-
gated to write at least hundreds of such emails if writing them would be 
convenient to him and for others (causing no noticeable reduction in their 
standard of living), and also permissible in itself, regardless of conse-
quences (no lying or deception needed). Here it is important to note that 
such examples help to make NMB intuitive and widely acceptable. They 
are also explained by it: it is true that John must save or help Peter 
because NMB is true. NMB may also be inherently intuitive to many 
people as a general or abstract principle, regardless of examples.
Now compare NMB to some more loose principles considered in 
material value-ethics. When recent authors in that tradition clash with 
authors like Singer, never or almost never is the comparison made. 
According to Scheler (1916/1973, 26), it is right to prefer the realization 
of higher – i.e. nobler – values over the realization of lower values. This 
implies that John acts rightly when saving Peter’s life or career (if these 
are of nobler value than the things John must sacrifice, such as his 
momentary comfort). But it does not say why John acts wrongly in case 
he fails to help Peter. Strengthening to the effect that it is wrong not to 
prefer higher things has controversial consequences that NMB, since 
explicitly aggregative, does not seem to have: John acts wrongly in case 

— 272 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
he fails to spend almost all his resources on people like Peter (if doing so 
would be nobler). The same follows also from the non-aggregative prin-
ciple discussed by Reiner (1951/1983, 197), von Hildebrand (1953, 237-
239; 379-392), and Wenisch (2002, 108; 181-183; 203), that it is wrong 
not to prevent something disvaluable if there is no one else who should 
do it and it can be done easily and without sacrificing something compa-
rable. (Assume there are many people like Peter, each single one of whom 
can be easily helped only by John.) Also note that both the stronger and 
the weaker versions of Scheler’s principle have incorrect consequences: 
John acts rightly by educating Peter, who is starving, instead of feeding 
him, if education is nobler than satiation. Von Hildebrand suggests how 
to avoid some of these pitfalls. He says it is wrong not to prefer nobler 
things if everything else is (almost) equal. Still, I would say that although 
it explains why John acts wrongly if he fails to help Peter, if endorsed as 
universal moral truth, it has other controversial consequences that NMB, 
since it demands disvalue prevention, rather than value promotion, does 
not seem to have: John acts wrongly in case he fails to help the already 
virtuous Peter to become even more virtuous, provided John could do 
so all else being equal. Finally, Hartmann (1926/2002, 51-53; 155-156) 
considers, though likewise ultimately does not approve wholesale, the 
principle that all else being equal it is wrong not to prefer satisfaction of 
more basic or elementary needs. Which implies, falsely, that John always 
acts wrongly in pursuing ascetic virtue instead of a lunch.
NMB fits with material value-ethics, because violating it seems like 
inadequate responding to values and disvalues. In other words, if we 
violate NMB, thus not preventing gravely disvaluable things that we could 
prevent easily and permissibly, we respond wrongly to the mix of values 
and disvalues involved in the sort of situations that NMB describes. NMB 
does not mean that prevention of more basic disvalues should always take 
precedence, or that prevention of harms for persons should always be 
preferred. NMB requires the prevention of some gravely disvaluable X 
only if the prevention of X does not lead to anything more or about as 

— 273 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
disvaluable as X, does not prevent anything more or about as valuable as 
X is disvaluable, and is not wrong for some other reason. Surely NMB is 
not supposed to be a simple rule for all situations and all of ethics. It also 
allows that sometimes those clauses are not satisfied, as higher values and 
disvalues, or values and disvalues important in themselves, are at play. 
Still, NMB is more acceptable than similar principles discussed in that 
ethics so far, yet also than those in the works of Peter Singer.
IV.  Objections against the Naive Principle
That said, several objections might be raised against NMB. Like Singer 
and some others, I find three of them unpersuasive. Unlike Singer and 
yet others, I find the last one persuasive and demanding a modification 
of NMB.
First, anti-consequentialists might say NMB is consequentialist: it 
demands any action that would easily prevent something gravely disvalua-
ble. Hence, the objection continues, NMB demands from John to spread 
a slander about Peter’s competitor if that’s how Peter gets his sorely 
dreamed-of job and, let’s suppose, the competitor does not care. But this 
objection gets NMB wrong. As explained, it is implicit in NMB that it is 
only applicable on the condition of doing nothing that would be wrong on 
non-consequentialist grounds (if there is anything like that). If spreading the 
slander is wrong on such grounds, NMB does not demand it from John.
Second, somebody might say NMB is overdemanding: it demands 
many actions that easily prevent something gravely disvaluable. It requires 
from John to do lots of individually easy preventions that in aggregate are 
not easy but hard for him or his family, until a further prevention causes 
to him or his family a strain (say, suffering) or stint (say, obstacle) at least 
as disvaluable as what he would prevent. Again, this gets NMB wrong. It 
is explicit in NMB that is only applicable if overall the prevention is not 
hard not just individually but also in aggregate, i.e. when added to John’s 
previous beneficent conduct. I cannot say where does the presumably 

— 274 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
vague line of small aggregate costs for oneself and one’s family lead in 
general; neither whether one has a duty to go beyond that line. I doubt 
anyone can say anything mightily instructive about that. But generally 
speaking, other things being equal, the more resources one has, and the 
less one has used them beneficently, the more one’s costs can be expected 
to be below the line. And in case of some people some costs quite clearly 
are below it. As Mike W. Martin notes: “We should not be overeager to 
criticize ourselves and others harshly, yet not just anything goes. […] 
While we cannot precisely gauge what is required of a given individual at 
a particular moment, nevertheless we can discern blatant patterns of self-
ishness and callousness (in ourselves and others)” (1994, 92). More below, 
in the section on practical implications.
Third, one might say that NMB, though aggregative, is still too strong 
and only holds if weakened by one or more qualifications, such as these: 
there is no one else than us who can prevent the very bad thing. There is 
no one who could prevent it at even smaller aggregate costs, or with greater 
chance of success. There is no one who is physically or socially closer to 
those who are to be harmed by the very bad thing. There is no one who 
has a special responsibility for its occurrence, or for helping those who are 
to be harmed by it. We can point to them with our finger, locate them in 
space and time, or describe their appearance. There is a fact of the matter 
about precisely who of them is to be helped if we prevent the thing. They 
or their close ones can reciprocate to us. The bad thing is something we 
are vividly confronted with. It is something rare, not common. It is urgent, 
not far off in time. It is to be caused by factors we can prevent from recur-
ring or for which we are culpable. (Budolfson [2019] gives a similar list of 
additional clauses.) Here I stop. All the qualifying clauses strike me as 
superfluous. What matters is not them but just whether the antecedents of 
NMB obtain. Suppose all the clauses are met in the original scenario, in 
which John alone walks by Peter drowning in a shallow pond. But then 
imagine as few as possible unmet. For instance, people or rescue organiza-
tions stand by the pond idly. Or, John is only able to rescue by switching 

— 275 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
on a rescue machine which will select randomly who precisely, out of many 
drowning people, is to be rescued. Or, John is getting a call from a lunatic 
who wants a small fee for not drowning someone somewhere. It still seems 
John must help. Then start to compound further deviations from the orig-
inal. As far as I know, nobody has found a combination under which John 
would – suddenly – become allowed not to help. On the other hand, there 
are combinations under which John must help. Plus, NMB seems intuitive 
on its own. So NMB still seems to stand after all (cf. Unger 1995, 33-54; 
62-75; Hare 2013, 191-202).
A note here on how material value-ethicists comment on this issue. 
Reiner indicates (1951/1983, 197-198) that the first three clauses about 
alternative agents are irrelevant: one must help even if these agents will not. 
Von Hildebrand (1953, 388), as far as I know, is silent about their moral 
relevance. Wenisch (2002, 181-187) says he just does not know. On the 
other hand, he considers our just being physically close to those in need 
irrelevant – unlike McAleer (2010, 179) – but he takes our ability to locate 
or describe them to be relevant. Once more, NMB seems closer to truth.
Fourth, the most serious objection: NMB hardly has any recognizable 
implications since we hardly if ever know how valuable the overall aggre-
gate outcomes of our actions are or will be, as these outcomes include all 
the unintended or remote consequences from now to eternity. The objec-
tion does not say that NMB is false or incorrect. Rather, it says that we 
hardly if ever know that the aggregate cost of our prevention is going to be 
small. So, we hardly if ever know that we can apply NMB – that we can 
put NMB into action. It is not a simple rule even for the limited sort of 
situations it talks about, since hardly if ever we know how to identify them. 
Brentano (1889/2009, §36, note 44), himself a consequentialist material 
value-ethicist, tries to reply to this. He says most times things like rescues 
of drowning people are net positive in their proximate outcomes. As for 
unintended or remote outcomes, they mostly cancel out, like the dying away 
ripples in the pond. So mostly we may have probable knowledge even of 
overall consequences (cf. Moore 1903/1993, §93; Finnis 1983, 98-99).

— 276 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
Unfortunately for that reply, mostly the ripples do not cancel out. 
Suppose John helps Peter by dragging him out of the pond, or by writ-
ing an important email so that Peter may meet his family again. Either 
action will affect, in a chain-like manner, with whom, how exactly, and 
at which exact times John, Peter, and many other people will interact on 
that day and later. Because of the shift in exact times, many people will 
conceive, on that day and later, other children than they otherwise would 
have. These children will become ancestors of other people than those 
that would have come into existence otherwise – for example, if John 
did not help Peter. And some of what these future people will do will 
be so consequential that at least in total it will deprive some future peo-
ple or other future beings of things comparable or at least incommen-
surable with Peter’s life or with Peter’s reunion with his family.4 Granted, 
John can know the balance of proximate outcomes. But he does not 
know the balance of overall outcomes. It is because unintended or 
remote outcomes may be substantial and may go either way, good or 
bad. Just consider this. The overall outcome, from now to eternity, of 
John’s helping Peter, as well as of John’s not helping Peter, would 
include many probabilistically independent components, i.e., compo-
nents whose chance of occurring would be independent from each other. 
Suppose positive numbers or signs would be somehow assigned to val-
uable outcomes and negative numbers or signs to disvaluable outcomes. 
As Hilary Greaves (2016, 314-316) notes, according to the mathematical 
theory of random walks, the overall outcome of probabilistically inde-
pendent components tends to grow indefinitely with their number, either 
in the positive or in the negative direction. This tendency is even more 
pronounced in probabilistically dependent components. In brief and 
roughly put, even if many outcomes – dependent or independent – 
within the big overall outcome cancel out, it is very likely that many do 
not and that overall they compound in either a very positive or a very 
negative direction. So, at least considering just the mathematics, the 
overall outcome of John’s helping Peter would very probably be either 

— 277 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
vastly valuable or vastly disvaluable. Same for the overall outcome of 
John’s not helping Peter. These overall outcomes might be even infinitely 
good or bad, if future is infinite. Even then they still might be better or 
worse, perhaps based on some distribution of their finite segments. But 
that is not the issue here. The issue is that we, like John, do not know 
how to tell in which direction – vastly good or vastly bad – the overall 
outcomes would probably go. I am not saying that when so ignorant, 
John should not help Peter. Rather, like Greaves, herself a consequen-
tialist and a proponent of effective altruism, and unlike her fellow ethi-
cist Peter Singer, I doubt we can know that on the basis of NMB. 
Although I agree that in the abstract, NMB is correct.
V.  The Naive Principle Modified
Still, Brentano, Singer, and Greaves might say that although actual unin-
tended or remote outcomes mostly do not cancel out, the probabilities 
of these outcomes do. When they do so straightforwardly, it is a situation 
that Greaves calls simple cluelessness. Suppose John is offered a bet. A 
coin is to be flipped. John wins $1,000,000 if the coin lands heads up, but 
he loses $1,000 if it lands tails up. This is all the relevant information 
available to John at the moment. So, in all other respects, taking the bet 
and not taking the bet are symmetric: all other outcomes, including those 
unintended or remote, are equiprobable on both options. So, they cancel 
out. The expected payoff of the bet – the sum of John’s gain and loss, 
each weighted by its 50% probability – is positive. Still, John does not 
know whether the actual payoff will be positive. (Greaves provided this 
example in email correspondence.) Or more closely to prevention of bad 
things, suppose again Peter is drowning in a pond. For some reason, John 
can only save him using a rescue machine. Basically, all John knows now 
is that, though faulty, the machine gives him a greater chance of saving 
Peter than not using it. Clearly, John must use it. Likewise, John must use 
the more reliable machine if there are two of them; or write an email if 

— 278 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
that gives Peter a greater chance of reuniting with his family. In a sen-
tence, John must choose the option which is a better bet.
These examples might lead us to propose the stochastic principle of 
minimal beneficence (SMB).5
SMB. If we can significantly reduce the chance of something gravely 
disvaluable occurring, and if the expected aggregate value we would 
sacrifice thereby and by other beneficent actions is small, it is wrong 
not to do so.
SMB is less known than NMB, even outside material value-ethics, but it 
helps to push our moral thinking further. Significant reduction is, once again, 
vague yet allowing for clear-cut cases. The chance to be reduced should be 
non-negligible. Of course, a zero chance is not even negligible. Negligible 
might be, for example, the 1 in a quintillion (1 in 1018) chance of Peter 
drowning or staying separated from his family. Not so, however, a 1 in a 
hundred chance. Also, the purported chance decrease should be non-negli-
gible. Zero decrease? Too small again; plausibly also a quintillionth reduction 
of the chance of 1 in a hundred of Peter drowning or staying separated from 
his family. Not so plausibly, however, the decrease from a 1 in a hundred 
chance to 1 in a million. The chance of the gravely disvaluable thing or the 
decrease of that chance need not be precise (point-like), precisely known by 
John, or even measured in numbers. Both might be intervals, or approxi-
mated, or compared by John even more roughly (cf. Greaves 2016, note 12). 
But they need to be clear enough – not too inscrutable, too hazy. Analo-
gously, vague phenomena like heaps of sand lack precise boundaries. Yet, if 
not blinded by deep haze, John could still guesstimate the margins of their 
volume, or at least whether one heap is much bigger than some other.
Now, SMB may be intuitive on its own. It seems less so than NMB. 
SMB operates with the concepts of chance and expected value, and most 
people have a hard time thinking about these concepts clearly, myself 
included. On the other hand, examples help to appreciate SMB, and are 
explained by it.

— 279 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
Still, there is a serious objection against SMB. As with NMB, the 
objection does not say SMB is incorrect. Unlike with NMB, the objection 
does not say SMB is hardly if ever applicable. Rather, it says SMB often 
is not applicable, because the relevant chances and decreases thereof are 
often too inscrutable, too hazy. This happens when the evidence available 
to the agent is too messy or complex for her. This is not to deny that 
sometimes the agent can penetrate it. In hypothetical examples like those 
above in this section, we can just stipulate that. Many a time, though, such 
stipulation would be unrealistic. Greaves (2016, 323-325) says these are 
situations of complex cluelessness. She gives a telling example: the messy, 
complex evidence about the expected overall outcome of distributing bed 
nets in malarial regions. In expectation, the distribution reduces the num-
ber and severity of cases of malaria. Suppose that by supporting the dis-
tribution via his money or volunteer time, John can reduce the chance of 
some such cases, significantly and easily. However, in, say, the next fifty 
years the distribution might also increase populations in currently over-
populated areas, and it might diminish the tendency of governments in 
the malarial regions to solve the problem themselves and much better. 
Which might be very bad and also hard to avoid as it requires coordinated 
policies of various sorts across many organizations and institutions. The 
point here is not some sheer speculative possibility. If it were, John could 
reasonably say the chance of such bad outcomes is the same no matter 
what he does, and so evened out for the options he has. Rather, there is 
a messiness in the conflicted available evidence. In this case it is the 
messiness of conflicted data, theories, and models about the dynamics of 
population and development aid in various time frames. Given this evi-
dence, there is a chance of disastrous population increments, and a chance 
of disastrous governmental neglect. If John is like me or even Greaves, 
he does not know how to approximate what these chances are – given 
the data, models, and theories – if the distribution of bed nets continues, 
nor how the chances compare to the chance of increments in the number 
and severity of cases of malaria if the distribution does not continue. 

— 280 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
He just does not know which, if any, conduct the data, models, and the-
ories recommend, on the whole. He also does not know anybody who 
knows that. Hence the small costliness of his supporting bed nets distri-
bution remains murky to him. To quote Greaves: “[…] callous as it may 
sound, the hypothesis that […] the knock-on effects of averting […] 
deaths [via the distribution of bed nets] are negative and larger in magni-
tude than the direct (positive) effects cannot be entirely discounted. Nor 
(on the other hand) can we be confident that this hypothesis is true. And 
[…] this is not for the bare reason that it is possible both that the hypoth-
esis in question is true and that it is false; rather, it is because there are 
complex and reasonable arguments on both sides, and it is radically unclear 
how these arguments should in the end be weighed against one another” 
(2016, 325; italics mine). In other words, “[…] there are good conse-
quence-based reasons and arguments for favouring each of two alterna-
tive actions, and also […] there is no obviously canonical way of weighing 
up those reasons or arguments against one another” (2016, 334-335). This 
is not to say that when so ignorant, John should not support the distri-
bution of bed nets. Maybe he should after all: maybe due to actual or 
expected consequences, maybe due to other (perhaps deontological or 
virtue-based) reasons. Rather, like Greaves (2016) and again unlike Singer 
(2015, 3; 6; 15; 45; 118), I doubt that given the available evidence, John 
can know that on the basis of SMB. I agree that SMB is correct in the 
abstract. I even agree we can employ it quite confidently in some situa-
tions, examples of which I will mention in the next section. However, in 
situations with too messy available relevant evidence, we cannot.
Distributing bed nets is just one example. Another could be stated 
for one’s private life: which degree to study and where, which career or 
job to pursue, whether to stay single, which romantic partner to look for, 
whether to marry or divorce, whether to have children or how many of 
them. The available evidence around these questions is messy for many 
people who try to make their own life or even the broader world better 
(cf. Schwartz et al. 2010; Dougherty et al. 2015; Todd et al. 2019/2020). 

— 281 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
Likewise, it is often messy which intervention or project to support within 
public problem areas that span from artificial intelligence to global health, 
from national justice reform to traffic safety, from domestic violence to 
unemployment, and from factory farming to animal population control. 
(See problem lists such as those by Jenkins et al. 2013; Anderson 2014; 
and Todd et al. n.d.)
Moreover, it is also unclear whether in such public problem areas, a 
normal individual like John really can make a significant expected differ-
ence easily. Take again the distribution of bed nets. John may not know 
which projects are significantly sensitive, in expectation, to his modest 
donations. Typically, the projects buy the needed stuff, and they hire the 
needed staff, in bulk; not in small amounts comparable with his dona-
tions. John may know, like I do, that some of the projects even are, or at 
least were, backed up by large philanthropic donors. So, if small donors 
stopped donating the large donors would take up the slack. Indeed, 
authors who try to address these worries in detail admit a careful research 
is needed, not only about bed nets distribution but also elsewhere (cf. Cul-
lity 2004, 58-60; Gabriel 2017, 467-468; Halstead et al. 2017, section 5).
On top of it, John, like all of us, can only act by choosing specific 
problem areas and interventions. And maybe he is missing some even 
more important problem areas or even better interventions than those he 
can list or think of: maybe because his notion of what occurs or could 
occur in the world is incomplete, or because his notion of what is, in what 
way, and how much, valuable is incomplete.6 In Principia Ethica, 
G. E. Moore writes: “[…] we cannot hope to discover which, in a given 
situation, is the best of all possible alternative actions”, though “[…] there 
may be some possibility of shewing which among the alternatives, likely 
occur to any one, will produce the greatest sum of good.” This at least 
because “[…] no one has ever attempted to exhaust the possible alterna-
tive actions in any particular case” (1903/1993, §91). So even if John’s 
support of some intervention was best or equal best in expectation among 
all interventions known to him, quite likely there would be other and in 

— 282 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
expectation still better courses of action that he could take. But then, 
relative to all possible interventions and not just those known to John, 
the support would have great expected opportunity cost. Hence, the sup-
port would not have small expected cost. Like NMB, SMB is not a simple 
rule to apply. Although its application does not require John to know the 
overall balance of actual outcomes of his prevention. It does require from 
him to know the expected balance, his ability to make a significant 
expected difference, and the absence of great opportunity costs. In the 
next section, I will suggest some situations when John could know all 
those preconditions obtain.
But what if John does not know all or some of those preconditions? 
He can still try – seriously and persistently though without overstraining 
himself and his family – to figure out what to do with what is available 
to him so that the chance of his doing an overall positive difference is 
decent and the expected opportunity cost is not great. Even when clueless 
due to the complexity, he need not be indolent, desperate, passive, or 
defeated. He can consider something like the resilient stochastic principle 
of beneficence (RSMB).
RSMB. If we can (seriously) try to figure out how to significantly 
reduce the chance of something gravely disvaluable occurring while 
keeping the expected aggregate value we would sacrifice thereby and 
by other beneficent actions small, it is wrong not to try; and if we 
figure that out, it is wrong not to act accordingly.
So, somewhat less specifically, Larry Temkin, a sympathetic interlocutor 
of Singer, would insist that John tries and does not give up even when 
facing messy opportunities to help, messier than Singer himself admits. 
Temkin writes: “[G]ood people should respond in a world of need. […] 
those who are well off are open to serious moral criticism if they ignore 
the plight of the needy. Unfortunately, however, for a host of both empir-
ical and philosophical reasons, what one should do in light of that truth 
is much more complex, and murky, than most people have realized” 

— 283 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
(2019, 3). Still, he says, “we need to try” (2019, 21). Similarly, Bob Fischer 
finds it plausible that “[…e]ach of us, individually, has an obligation to 
respond in some way to the realities of intensive animal agriculture.” At 
the same time, though he is vegan, he attempts to undermine against 
Singer and others the main arguments for the claim that “[…e]ach of us, 
individually, has an obligation not to consume animal products”; even 
when in both cases, ‘us’ includes just most, not strictly all, healthy adults 
for whom the abstention would be quite easy (2020, 17-18; cf. 165).
That much is reasonable. A crucial step in John’s response is figuring 
out what to do. RSMB highlights for him what to consider when com-
plexly clueless. Now RSMB sounds reasonable as well. But if John wants 
to go deeper and more theoretical, RSMB itself may be explained to him 
by the value-responsivism of material value-ethics: to follow RSMB is an 
adequate response to the values and disvalues that John discerns, however 
vaguely, in the opportunities available to him; e.g., the values of human 
or animal health and happiness, and the disvalues of human or animal 
illness and misery. To violate RSMB is an inadequate response. 
On the one hand, this explanation of RSMB in terms of value-­
responsivism has the disadvantage of employing the sui generis concept of 
adequacy (of a response to values or disvalues). On the other hand, the 
explanation of RSMB inherits not just the disadvantage from value-­
responsivism, but also some of its advantages. First, the explanation is 
explicitly value-based. It refers to – and helps to make dominant in our 
moral consciousness and consideration – values of things or events John 
wants to achieve or protect and disvalues of things or events he wants to 
avoid or reduce. To direct his primary attention elsewhere – say, to 
­Kantian consistency rules, social contracts, virtues, his special obligations, 
or his personal proclivities without explicit thinking about their values 
and about the disvalues of their opposites – seems to put the moral cart 
before the horse. First things first. And the primary, though not the only 
thing, for John to consider are values and disvalues and his options by 
which he might realize them. Typically, the primary values are those of 

— 284 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
well-being or flourishing, and the primary disvalues are those of their lack. 
This does not mean John should exclude from his consideration the 
instrumental or intrinsic values and disvalues around consistency, virtue, 
and the like. Second, the explanation of RSMB is humane. It does not 
demand from John inhumanely challenging assessments, be they of actual 
or expected outcomes and their chances, or of all the relevant values and 
disvalues. The employed concept of an adequate response to value or 
disvalue is so broad and basic that it is neither consequentialist (adequacy 
is always determined by actual, possible, or intended outcomes and the 
possible or thinkable options for those outcomes), nor anti-consequen-
tialist (sometimes adequacy is not so determined). Similarly, the proposed 
explanation of RSMB does not assume that by following RSMB, John will 
produce the best actual or expected outcome. Nor that by following 
RSMB, he will fulfil NMB or SMB. Because also this may well be a messy, 
complex question. For example, John may have messy evidence on how 
thinking about doing good may lead to his decision paralysis, counterpro-
ductive perfectionism, or counterproductive activism (see Huemer 2012). 
Likewise, the explanation does not assume that John can make the tar-
geted significant expected difference easily, or that he is not missing some 
major value or option.
I know that both RSMB and its explanation in terms of value-­
responsivism are not much more than a hint: a hint on how to amend 
SMB in face of the above objections against it. But one must start some-
where, sometimes even start small. Material value-ethics has a potential 
worth exploring: a potential to explain RSMB by appeal to values and 
disvalues even under deep uncertainty about their rank and about ways 
of their realization.
VI.  Practical Implications
To my best guess, the practical implications below are among the safest, 
though by no means exhaustive. I think they should be pondered by most 

— 285 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
adults in today’s affluent countries – by normal people, as I defined them 
above –, putting aside people who honestly believe they have already tried 
or sacrificed enough by their previous beneficent actions.
To begin with, SMB implies that not just normal people but people 
in general should do at least some easy and empirically attested and prom-
ising acts conducive to their kindness. For such acts quite likely make them 
and their fellow men saliently less miserable (see Terkel and Terkel 2004, 
81-128; Lyubomirsky 2007, 125-149). This is trivial yet not often suffi-
ciently recalled in applied ethics. (I put aside abusive fellow men to whom 
we should not be so kind.) To yell, scowl, or curse much less, we can 
count to ten, focus on breath, go for a run, play the guitar, practice mind-
fulness or loving-kindness meditation every other day, or meet a cogni-
tive-behavioural therapist ten times, face to face or online. We can also 
remind ourselves daily to cut by half or more the amount of criticism and 
unsolicited advice, or when we quarrel, the number of dangerous words 
like ‘never’ and ‘always.’ If necessary, we can try to get prescribed pills 
with small side effects. We can remind ourselves to forgive people small 
spats – or, when we have wronged them, to say sorry, explain ourselves, 
and say how to make amends – after just a few hours or days, rather than 
after weeks, months, or even years, so that wrongdoings or misunder-
standings do not fester. Last but not least, we can phone or Skype our 
remote elderly parents every other day, and our remote siblings on Sun-
days, so that the passage of mute time does not allow alienation or 
remorse to grow. These are just a few tips, all easy and plausibly without 
comparable opportunity costs. Certainly, people can think of others, even 
better suited for them.
Next, SMB may well imply that normal people should cut, by at least 
a small portion, their purchase of food whose production or supply gen-
erates needless and severe misery. (This is granted even by those who 
vigorously defend more compassionate production or supply of similar 
food; see Zangvill 2021. Also leave aside people who have exceptional 
nutritional needs or gustatory addictions and so perhaps cannot change 

— 286 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
their purchase easily.) Notably, authors who agree with that implication 
include Andrew Tardiff (1996; 1998), a philosopher well versed in mate-
rial value-ethics and a former student of Josef Seifert. Tardiff, like Singer, 
argues from principles like NMB for vegetarianism; Singer sometimes 
even for something like veganism (though he accepts eating bivalves). 
The case I want to propose is only reducetarian, but not restricted to 
animal-based products. It also appeals to SMB, rather than NMB. Sup-
pose that every other day John eats strawberries or bananas. At least in 
the US these often come from supply chains which the farm workers, 
many of them immigrant, mostly regret to enter, since backbreaking work, 
constant exposure to pesticides and harassment, and little access to bath-
rooms and medical and psychological treatment are common there 
(Budolfson 2016, 164-172). Or suppose that every other day John eats 
eggs from layer hens, or meat from broiler chickens, non-pastured pigs, 
or farm-raised fish. These, except for the fish, are relatively costly in 
terms of greenhouse gases, land use, or water use (Budolfson 2016, 164-
172; cf. Wilson 2013). Also, in most of the production chains these ani-
mals live especially miserably, and in great numbers per the pound of 
served food (Norwood and Lusk 2011, 222-257). John does not intend, 
and may be inculpably ignorant of, these harms. And if he could easily 
obtain compassionately produced bananas or strawberries, he would be 
allowed to purchase them; likewise, perhaps, if he could get compassion-
ately produced animal-based food. But suppose he cannot. Then SMB 
may well bind him to change. Perhaps he can easily waste less and buy less 
of the damaging food. How? He can be more careful about the portions 
he cooks. He can store leftovers, eat perishable things on time. Instead 
of some portion of the listed foods, he can buy lentils, beans, carrots, 
peanuts, cabbage, or mussels; and more frequent meals containing more 
of these. He can get a grasp of such meals just by googling ‘healthy rec-
ipes by ingredients’. If needed, he can easily suit them to his nutritional 
needs, without impairing his health (cf. Rossi and Garner 2014; Lynch 
2018). Admittedly, at least before mastering how to choose or cook such 

— 287 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
meals, and before getting used to them, his gustatory pleasures will be 
somewhat diminished. However, even material value-ethicists agree that 
minor inconvenience does not suffice as an excuse (see Gooch 1993; 
cf. Tardiff 1996, 305-309; Tardiff 1998, 216-217). Estimates by econo-
mists suggest that John would really be making an expected difference. 
On occasions of his giving up one egg, the total production would on 
average fall by about 0.9 eggs. So, his giving up one egg would have the 
expected value of that drop. For one pound of chicken, the drop would 
be about 0.8 pound, and for one pound of non-pastured pork, about 
0.7 pound (Norwood and Lusk 2011, 222-257; MacAskill n.d.). I do not 
know any estimates for fish, but they may be in the same ballpark.
Two caveats, however. Less factory farming may mean more land 
turned back into wilderness, hence more animals suffering in the wild, 
possibly even worse in total than animals in factory farms (see John and 
Sebo 2020, 579-582). Also, John’s expected impact on the market may be 
lower than the average impact; like the chance of one droplet moving a 
boulder may be negligible, though the chance of a whole wave moving 
the boulder, averaged over the droplets in the wave, may be dispropor-
tionately higher (Fischer 2020, 50-74). Insofar as these caveats are spec-
ulative, or perhaps backed up by evidence that is symmetric, they put 
John into a situation of simple cluelessness. Then he can still argue from 
SMB for the change in his food choices. But insofar as they are backed 
up by evidence that is messy, they put him into a situation of complex 
cluelessness and he cannot thus argue from SMB. Frankly, I am still not 
sufficiently acquainted with the state of the available evidence. That is 
why I only say above that SMB may well demand from John and other 
normal people a change in food choices. In the meantime, due to RSMB, 
John and others should at least keep an eye on the whole issue, regularly 
updating the information they have.
As said in the previous section, there are other grave issues to keep 
an eye on. This brings us to another possible implication. SMB may well 
imply that normal people should donate at least a small aggregate of their 

— 288 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
money to underfunded charities doing interventions that significantly 
reduce chances of grave evils without expected comparable costs. Even 
material value-ethicists such as Fritz Wenisch (2002, 184-187) and Peter 
Colosi (2003, 9) seem to admit this, though they think rather in terms of 
NMB. In any case, RSMB implies normal people should seriously look 
for such charities, even if without straining or overwhelming themselves. 
As for SMB, suppose John lives in the US with his housewife and two 
dependent children and earns annually about $60,000 post-tax. Not rich by 
present-day US standards, he is still in the richest 10% of the world’s pop-
ulation (GivingWhatWeCan.org). Quite likely not impairing but rather 
meaningfully improving the level of happiness in his family (cf. Mogensen 
et al. 2018), maybe he can donate at least 2% of that money to an under-
funded charity like or at least as efficient as, say, GiveDirectly, which pro-
vides one-off cash transfers via mobile phones to the poorest people in 
East Africa. Thus, he can double the annual income of a family of six 
people in extreme poverty. In a typical case, the family can build a new 
house, a pit latrine, and a water borehole, as well as pay school fees for two 
children. This palpably reduces their hunger, diseases and stress for years 
after the transfer is made (Todd et al. 2016, 39-40; cf. Karnofsky 2015/2016). 
Of course, this is too simple, for reasons already stated. So, insert 
RSMB. If John is worried about indirect outcomes similar to those of 
distributing bed nets, he can search for the available evidence or for other 
suitable charities. OPIS, for example, improves access to pain relief in 
West Africa, and to treatment of severe cluster headaches worldwide. 
NAUH helps people leaving North Korea, with $2,000 per person. There 
are many others. John can also search further if worried whether a char-
ity is efficient, sensitive to his contribution, or missing some major values 
or options. By email or otherwise he can, even regularly, elicit advice from 
people versed in monitoring organizations (Effective Altruism Funds, 
80,000 Hours, GiveWell, Giving What We Can, or The Life You Can 
Save, Animal Charity Evaluators) and see where they converge (see Pum-
mer 2016a). If John is wary of purely secular organizations, he can ­consult, 

— 289 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
for example, Bless Big, Pay It Forward Foundation, Effective ­Altruism 
for Christians, or Buddhists in Effective Altruism. At times when there 
is no convergence, he can discuss his dilemma on websites such as Effec-
tive Altruism Forum. The point of RSMB is that John does not give up.
Finally, SMB implies that unless they think it might well be counter-
productive, John and other normal people should ask others, at least 
occasionally, to consider principles like NMB, SMB, and RSMB, the rea-
sons for them, and their practical implications. When doing so, people 
should keep in mind some shrewd but licit guidelines (see Cialdini 2009). 
They should proceed kindly (no rumble!) and with epistemic humility (no 
overconfidence!). They should use examples and avoid verbosity. They 
should highlight traits and interests they share with their audience or 
interlocutors (such as interest in philosophy or helping those in need). 
They should mention the value of one’s acting in line with one’s own 
previous actions or words (like previous volunteer work or already 
expressed interest in it). They should convey that sensitivity to those 
principles is normal enough in some relevant peer or reference groups 
(y’know, thousands of thoughtful people like you support this approach), 
yet not a boring commonplace (sadly, there are still not that many who 
realize how important that approach is). Again, all this is often easy and 
has no comparable opportunity costs.
How could this sketch of SMB’s and RSMB’s practical implications 
be developed by material value-ethicists? Certainly, by improving argu-
ments like those of material value-ethicists Josef Seifert and John Crosby 
for the existence of the basic capacity for rational and conscious life in 
humans, and for its implications in applied ethics. I call for such improve-
ment elsewhere (Vohánka 2018). The arguments have been ignored by 
Singer (2011, 16-19; 2015, 139-144) and other proponents of NMB and 
SMB (such as Plant 2019, chaptee 1). Even if the capacity does not justifie 
the uncompromising bioethical claims of Seifert and Crosby (against, say, 
all abortion, euthanasia, and genetic human enhancement), it may be a 
viable theoretical explanation for other things: for example, why, all else 

— 290 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
equal, a human being (e.g. a little girl in Africa) should be given precedence 
over a great multitude of animals (those eaten by her in her lifetime, or 
those saved instead of her). Also, now moving into moral psychology, 
material value-ethicists such as Max Scheler (1915/2010, 64; 85-89), Peter 
Colosi (2001, chapter 7), and Graham McAleer (2010, 28-29; 165-174) 
provide some prudent warnings one should keep in mind. They would say 
that even if well-argued, psychologically the will to follow principles such 
as NMB, SMB and RSMB sometimes arises out of hatred: elitist hatred 
towards others one wants to differ from; rebel hatred towards conservative 
or religious values which one enjoys to ignore or belittle; or hatred towards 
oneself, with whom one cannot stay alone, thus continually busying one-
self with problems in the world (cf. Friedman 1991, 831-835). But unique 
to material value-ethics are rather its foundational analyses of moral 
­evaluations, of values and disvalues in general, and of specific kinds of 
values and disvalues in particular. These analyses come in handy when 
somebody starts to question even RSMB, or the whole moral or value talk 
as such. All in all, there is room for exchange of important ideas.
VII.  Conclusion
NMB, SMB, and RSMB are all reasonable principles. All may be accepted 
both by the consequentialist Peter Singer and by his typically anti-­
consequentialist opponents in material value-ethics. Either side may use 
all the three principles to improve its ethical thinking about minimally 
acceptable beneficence, though, so far, the principles have been more 
commonly or readily associated with Singer. In material value-ethics, the 
principles are value-based yet not consequentialist. That said, NMB is 
hardly if ever applicable, SMB only when the available relevant evidence 
is not messy, and RSMB only as a prompt to keep thinking seriously 
about how to practice beneficence. Practically speaking, SMB implies that 
people who can do so at small expected cost should perform acts 
­conducive to kindness and sometimes ask others to ponder principles of 

— 291 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
minimal ­beneficence and their implications. Maybe they should also 
donate to reportedly effective charities and cut the purchase of food that 
greatly and it seems needlessly harms other sentient beings. Pace Singer, that 
still remains moot. RSMB implies that in the meantime, they should keep 
thinking seriously about that. The practical aspect is not new but worth 
recalling. Even more needed, for those of philosophical predilection, may 
be grounding that aspect in widely acceptable moral principles, and ­framing 
these principles in a plausible moral theory. Hence the present article.7
Works Cited
Anderson, Ronald E. 2014. Human Suffering and Quality of Life: Conceptualizing Stories and 
Statistics. Dordrecht: Springer.
Blosser, Philip. 1995. Scheler’s Critique of Kant’s Ethics. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press.
Brentano, Franz. 1889/2009. The Origin of Our Knowledge of Right and Wrong. Translated 
by Roderick Chisholm and Elizabeth Schneewind. London: Routledge.
Brentano, Franz. 1952/2009. The Foundation and Construction of Ethics. Translated by Eliz-
abeth Schneewind. London: Routledge.
Budolfson, Mark B. 2016. “Consumer Ethics, Harm Footprints, and the Empirical 
Dimensions of Food Choices.” In Philosophy Comes to Dinner. Edited 
by Andrew Chignell, Terence Cuneo and Matthew Halteman, 163-181. New York: 
Routledge. 
Budolfson, Mark B. 2019. “Global Ethics and the Problem with Singer and Unger’s 
Argument for an Extreme Duty to Provide Aid.” Unpublished MS.
Cialdini, Robert B. 2009. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. Boston: Pearson.
Colosi, Peter J. 2003. “The Intrinsic Worth of Persons.” Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies 
15/1: 3-22. 
Colosi, Peter J. 2001. Radical Ethical Altruism in Analytic Moral Philosophy. Unpublished 
Dissertation: International Academy of Philosophy in Liechtenstein. 
Crisp, Roger and Theron Pummer. 2020. “Effective Justice.” Journal of Moral Philosophy 
17/4: 398-415.
Crosby, John F. 2004. Personalist Papers. Washington, DC: The Catholic University of 
America Press.
Cullity, Garrett. 2004. The Moral Demands of Affluence. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Dougherty, Tom, Sophie Horowitz and Paulina Sliwa. 2015. “Expecting the Unex-
pected.” Res Philosophica 92/2: 301-321.
Finnis, John. 1983. Fundamentals of Ethics. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University 
Press.

— 292 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
Fischer, Bob. 2020. The Ethics of Eating Animals: Usually Bad, Sometimes Wrong, Often Permis-
sible. New York: Routledge.
Friedman, Marilyn. 1991. “The Practice of Partiality.” Ethics 101/4: 818-835.
Gabriel, Iason. 2017. “Effective Altruism and its Critics.” Journal of Applied Philoso-
phy 34/4: 457-473.
GivingWhatWeCan.org, n.d. “How Rich Am I?” https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/
get-involved/how-rich-am-i [accessed June 14, 2022].
Gooch, Augusta. 1993. “Value Hierarchies in Scheler and von Hildebrand.” Southwest 
Philosophical Studies 15: 19-27.
Greaves, Hilary. 2016. “Cluelessness.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 116/3: 311-339.
Greaves, Hillary and Theron Pummer (eds.). 2019. Effective Altruism: Philosophical Issues. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Halstead, John et al. 2017. “Effective Altruism: An Elucidation and a Defence.” https://
www.effectivealtruism.org/articles/effective-altruism-an-elucidation-and-a-defence 
[accessed June 13, 2022].
Hare, Caspar. 2013. The Limits of Kindness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hartmann, Nicolai. 1926/2002. Ethics, Vol. 2: Moral Values. Translated by Stanton Coit. 
New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Huemer, Michael. 2012. “In Praise of Passivity.” Studia Humana 1/2: 12-28.
Jenkins, Jon et al. (eds.). 2013. Encyclopaedia of World Problems and Human Potential Online. 
https://uia.org/projects/encyclopedia [accessed June 13, 2022]. 
John, Tyler M. and Jeff Sebo. 2020. “Consequentialism and Nonhuman Animals.” In 
The Oxford Handbook of Consequentialism.” Edited by Douglas W. Portmore, 564-591. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Karnofsky, Holden. 2015/2016. “The Lack of Controversy Over Well-Targeted Aid.” 
https://blog.givewell.org/2015/11/06/the-lack-of-controversy-over-well-targeted-
aid/ [accessed June 14, 2022].
Kelly, Eugene. 2008. “Material Value-Ethics: Max Scheler and Nicolai Hartmann.” Phi-
losophy Compass 3/1: 1-16.
Kelly, Eugene. 2011. Material Ethics of Value: Max Scheler and Nicolai Hartmann. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Liao, S. Matthew. 2008. “Who Is Afraid of Numbers?” Utilitas 20/4: 447-461.
Lynch, Ben. 2018. Dirty Genes: A Breakthrough Program to Treat the Root Cause of Illness and 
Optimize Your Health. New York: HarperCollins. 
Lyubomirsky, Sonja. 2007. The How of Happiness: A New Approach to Getting the Life You 
Want. New York: Penguin.
MacAskill, William. n.d. “Errata to Doing Good Better.” http://www.williammacaskill.
com/errata [accessed June 14, 2022].
Martin, Mike W. 1994. Virtuous Giving: Philanthropy, Voluntary Service, and Caring. Bloom-
ington, IN: Indiana University Press.
McAleer, Graham J. 2010. To Kill Another: Homicide and Natural Law. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction.

— 293 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
Mogensen, Andreas, William MacAskill and Toby Ord. 2018. “Giving Isn’t Demand-
ing.” In The Ethics of Giving: Philosophers’ Perspectives on Philanthropy. Edited 
by Paul Woodruff, 178-203. New York: Oxford University Press.
Moore, George Edward. 1903/1993. Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Norwood, F. Bailey and Jason L. Lusk. 2011. Compassion, By the Pound: The Economics of 
Farm Animal Welfare. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Ord, Toby. 2020. Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of Humanity. New York: Hachette.
Plant, Michael D. 2019. Doing Good Badly? Philosophical Issues Related to Effective Altruism. 
Unpublished Dissertation, Oxford University.
Pummer, Theron. 2016a. “Risky Giving.” The Philosopher’s Magazine 73/2: 62-70.
Pummer, Theron. 2016b. “Whether and Where to Give.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 
44/1: 77-95.
Reiner, Hans. 1951/1983. Duty and Inclination. Translated by Mark Santos. The Hague: 
Kluwer.
Rossi, John and Samual Garner. 2014. “Plant-Based Diets and Scientific Value Judg-
ments.” In Encyclopedia of Food and Agricultural Ethics. Edited by Paul B. Thompson 
and David M. Kaplan, 1487-1495. New York: Springer. 
Scheler, Max. 1913-16/1973. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Value. Translated 
by Manfred Frings and Robert Funk. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Scheler, Max. 1915/2010. Ressentiment. Translated by Lewis  B.  Coser and Wil-
liam W. Holdheim. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press. 
Schwartz, Barry, Yakov Ben-Haim and Cliff Dacso. 2011. “What Makes a Good Deci-
sion? Robust Satisficing as a Normative Standard of Rational Decision Making.” 
Journal of the Theory of Social Behaviour 41/2: 209-227.
Seifert, Josef. 2004. The Philosophical Diseases of Medicine and Their Cure. New  York: 
Springer.
Singer, Peter. 1972. “Famine, Affluence, and Morality.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 1/3: 
229-243.
Singer, Peter. 1980. “Utilitarianism and Vegetarianism.” Philosophy & Public Affairs 9/4: 
325–337. 
Singer, Peter. 2011. Practical Ethics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Singer, Peter. 2015. The Most Good You Can Do: How Effective Altruism Is Changing Ideas 
About Living Ethically. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Spader, Peter. 2002. Scheler’s Ethical Personalism. New York: Fordham University Press.
Synowiec, Jakub. 2019. “Effective Altruism for the Poor.” Ethics and Bioethics (in Central 
Europe) 9/1-2: 27-35.
Tardiff, Andrew, 1998. “A Catholic Case for Vegetarianism.” Faith and Philosophy 15/2: 
210-222.
Tardiff, Andrew. 1996. “Simplifying the Case for Vegetarianism.” Social Theory and Prac-
tice 22/3: 299-314. 
Temkin, Larry. 2019. “Being Good in a World of Need: Some Empirical Worries 
and an Uncomfortable Philosophical Possibility.” Journal of Practical Ethics 7/1: 1-23.

— 294 —
	
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
ethical perspectives – june 2022
Terkel, Susan and Larry Terkel. 2004. Small Change: It’s the Little Things in Life That Make 
a Big Difference! New York: Tarcher/Penguin. 
Timmerman, Travis. 2015. “Sometimes There Is Nothing Wrong with Letting a Child 
Drown.” Analysis 75/2: 204-212.
Todd, Benjamin et al. 2016. Career Guide from 80,000 Hours. Oxford: Centre for Effective 
Altruism.
Todd, Benjamin et al. 2019/2020. “A Guide to Using Your Career to Help Solve the 
World’s Most Pressing Problems”. https://80000hours.org/key-ideas/ [accessed 
June 13, 2022].
Todd, Benjamin et al. n.d. “Our Current List of Especially Pressing World Problems”. 
https://80000hours.org/problem-profiles/ [accessed June 13, 2022].
Unger, Peter. 1996. Living High and Letting Die: Our Illusion of Innocence. New  York: 
Oxford University Press.
Vohánka, Vlastimil. 2017. “The Nature and Uniqueness of Material Value-Ethics Clari-
fied.” Ethical Perspectives 24/2: 225-258.
Vohánka, Vlastimil. 2018. “Material Value-Ethics: Evaluating the Thought of Josef Seif-
ert and John F. Crosby.” International Philosophical Quarterly 58/3: 275-293.
Von Hildebrand, Dietrich. 1916/1969. Die Idee der sittlichen Handlung. Darmstadt: Wis-
senschafltliche Buchgesselschaft.
Von Hildebrand, Dietrich. 1980. Moralia. Regensburg: Habbel.
Von Hildebrand, Dietrich. 1953. Ethics. Chicago: Franciscan Herald.
Wenisch, Fritz. 2002. “To Do or Not to Do: Basic Elements of an Ethics of Action.” 
Aletheia VII: 31-220.
Wilson, Lindsay. 2013. “Shrink  Your Footprint, pt.  7.” https://web.archive.org/
web/201312 25060041/http://shrinkthatfootprint.com/shrink-your-food-foot-
print [accessed June 14, 2022].
Zangwill, Nick. 2021. “Our Moral Duty to Eat Meat.” Journal of the American Philosophical 
Association 7/3: 295-311.
Notes
1  I focus there on Seifert and Crosby, the two main proponents of applied material value-
ethics. Both are opposed to all forms of suicide and abortion. Seifert rejects all forms of eutha-
nasia, torture, destructive stem-cell research, genetic enhancement, in vitro fertilization, and con-
traception. Crosby rejects all kinds of spousal in vitro fertilization and spousal contraception. 
I argue that their case for these conclusions is not convincing, though I do not argue against the 
conclusions themselves. Here I will not argue against those conclusions either. Nor will I argue 
for them. I am far from sure how the former or the latter should be done.
2  Some philosophers, including material value-ethicists Seifert (2004, 170; 339) and Crosby 
(2004, 23; 206; 216-220), admit that incommensurable values and disvalues exist; that knowledge, 
for example, is neither equally, nor more, nor less valuable than friendship, and lack of one is 

— 295 —
Ethical Perspectives 29 (2022) 2
vlastimil vohánka – minimal beneficence through the lens
neither equally, nor more, nor less disvaluable than lack of the other. Such philosophers might 
wish to add the clause that John can prevent Peter’s premature death without causing something 
of incommensurable disvalue (vis-à-vis Peter’s premature death), and without preventing some-
thing of incommensurable value (vis-à-vis Peter’s continued life).
3  Some insist that numbers do not count in ethics. For example, even all else equal, we 
would be allowed to save a few instead of the very many. This is a counterintuitive position I have 
never seen defended convincingly. Besides, whoever accepts it mostly accepts at least some rank-
ings. He or she mostly agrees that all else equal we must save someone’s life rather than someone 
else’s finger, or to give alms to an outcast rather than to a millionaire. Cf. Liao (2008), Pummer 
(2016b, 84), and Crisp and Pummer (2020). Also, as I observed, even some material value-ethicists 
explicitly embrace the ceteris paribus guideline to prefer the realization of a larger quantity of value 
over smaller one. Wenisch (2002, 193) admits that sometimes numbers even trump other morally 
relevant factors, such as special obligations. He says there may well be such high numbers of 
people believed by us to be in danger of life that it would be right for us to save these many 
people rather than one of those people to which we have special obligations (such as our child, 
spouse, parent, sibling, or friend).
4  The same sort of shift would happen if John just paused for a few seconds to tell Peter 
on the street what time it was. Which is a bit scary: many a time per day, we unintentionally start 
or affect possibly endless generations, and we stop others from coming into existence. I should 
add not everything we do has such momentous effects. Whistling or snapping our fingers prob-
ably does not. Apart from our effects on who comes into existence, which are not only certain 
but possibly also the most momentous effects we can ever have, perhaps we can have momentous 
effects independent of those. Perhaps, instead of writing the email, John could, on the given day, 
make a timely breakthrough with his idea of a business or technological start-up that would even-
tually do much more good. But that is too unlikely. And it is even less likely as a moral or at least 
net positive alternative to his helping Peter out of the pond.
5  For arguments appealing to principles similar to SMB, see Singer (1980) and (2015, 170-
174).
6  Then, again, John is not special in his ignorance. Toby Ord (2020, chapter 7) thinks that 
thousands of years of global interdisciplinary reflection might be needed to shed substantially 
greater light on the landscape of human options and relevant values.
7  My thanks for commentaries go to Martin Cajthaml, Travis Timmerman, Jan Votava, and 
anonymous reviewers of this journal. The research underlying this article was supported by The 
Czech Science Foundation GAČR, project Nr. 18-06856S (Value and Teleology: Toward a More 
Fruitful Intellectual Encounter between Material Value-Ethics and Traditional Ethics).

