CHAPTER
120
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Advancing Algebra
Sigrid Wagner and Sheila Parker
Since Algebra surpasses all human subtlety and the clarity of every mortal
mind, it must be accounted a truly celestial gift, which gives such an illuminat-
ing experience of the true power of the intellect that whoever attains to it will
believe there is nothing he cannot understand.
G. Cardano
What Is Algebra? 
Most people, when they think of "algebra," think of solving equa-
tions, factoring polynomials, graphing functions, and other things they did with x
and y in their high school algebra classes. Too many people, including some who
got good grades in mathematics, may recall that algebra was the point at which
mathematics stopped having much connection with the real world.
In the past, many students have gone through algebra memorizing "rituals" (12),
those formal procedures for manipulating symbols that have lost their connection to
the numbers they represent. Now, hand-held computers can relieve us of the graph-
plotting, symbol-manipulating drudgery of doing algebra. We are free to spend more
time thinking algebraically. As teachers, we can begin to illuminate the structure of
the algebraic forest without asking students to climb every tree.
Rituals often lose something in the translation:
"When you multiply, you add exponents; when you divide, you subtract."
Students who do not understand the meaning behind this ritual may write:
32 - 33 = 9s.
With this exciting opportunity comes a daunting challenge: We need to reconsti-
tute the algebra curriculum, to shift the emphasis from doing to thinking. Conse-
quently, we have to decide what it means to "think algebraically." We must identify
119
essential concepts and skills and determine, through research, how much conceptual
development and skill practice students need to be successful at solving algebraic
problems. The NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards (32) point some gen-
eral directions to be followed, but it will be the continuing task of textware authors
and classroom teachers to map details of the journey from the algorithmic algebra of
yesterday to the problem-solving algebra of tomorrow.
In algebra we need to increase our emphasis on:
• Real-world problems
• Conceptual understanding
• Computer-based methods
• Structure of number systems
• Matrices and their applications
NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards (32, p. 126)
Research can help us understand how students construct mature concepts and
learn complex procedures. Research can suggest activities for the classroom that foster
the connections that build understanding. Research can suggest ways of making al-
gebraic ideas accessible to all students (15), so that algebra becomes part of the math-
ematical pump that propels students on to higher achievement instead of the filter
that holds them back (34). Translating theoretical ideas from research into practical
ideas for the classroom can help teachers teach more effectively and students learn
more efficiently.
Historical Sketch. 
Formal research in the learning of algebra began early in the
twentieth century, about the time that psychologists were developing objective meth-
ods for measuring intelligence, aptitude, and achievement. Mathematics was a pop-
ular vehicle for studying constructs like learning and memory because of the ease of
scoring answers. Algebra was often used for studying advanced learning because so
few people had yet to understand the subject!
From 1900 to 1930, research on the learning of algebra dealt primarily with the
relative difficulty of solving various types of linear equations. In 1923, Thorndike
(47) published The Psychology of Algebra, in which he applied his "bond" theory to
the learning of algebra. Though most of his recommendations focus on such things
as the amount of practice students need to acquire certain skills and how the practice
should be distributed, Thorndike is credited with bringing a systematic approach to
research in the learning of algebra, including a careful analysis of the nature of al-
gebraic tasks.
~From 1930 to 1945, research in education declined, as the nation focused on
issues of survival surrounding the Great Depression and World War II. After the war,
research in algebra rebounded, as a new wave of behavioral psychologists refined
some of the earlier methods of investigating skill acquisition. It was in the 1960s that
mathematics educators, with academic backgrounds in higher mathematics and
teaching experience in secondary schools, began to shift the focus of research toward
conceptual understanding. Their work has been complemented by the efforts of cog-

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
121
122
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
nitive psychologists to analyze the thinking processes involved in problem solving
and the acquisition of complex algebraic skills.
"Algebra to most learners ... is in large measure forming more or less particular
bonds or connections, such as a x ab = azb, a(a + b) = a2 + ab, a means
1a, -a x -b = +ab, learning to operate several of these together as needed,
organizing them further into more inclusive habits and insights, summing up what
one has learned to do in rules, and thus gradually attaining a sense of what it is
right to do with literal numbers and why." Thorndike et al. (47, p. 246)
In this chapter we will discuss the recent research in algebra from three perspec-
tives—that of the learner, of the content, and of the teacher. As we identify major
findings, we will propose ideas for teaching certain topics. We will conclude with
some general implications for the algebra classroom.
include such human foibles as the tendency to overgeneralize or to judge on the basis
of superficial characteristics. The most common obstacle attributable to teaching is
the incomplete mental construct that may result from considering a too-narrow range
of simple, special cases of a given concept (46).
We will see examples throughout the next section of obstacles of various kinds.
We should keep in mind that cognitive conflict is not necessarily bad for students; in
fact, it is an important stimulus to learning. It is our responsibility as teachers to be
aware of possible sources of conflict and alert students to differences, as well as sim-
ilarities, among the various phenomena they study.
Learning of Algebra
Two theoretical perspectives underlie most of the research on the learning of algebra
of the past twenty-five years. Piagetian-style theories of cognitive development (see
Chapter 1) have provided a theoretical framework for much of the research on con-
ceptual understanding. Written instruments and semi-structured interviews, using
nonroutine tasks—that is, tasks that are different from typical textbook exercises—
are used to analyze students' concepts of function, equation, and variable. Some-
times tasks are administered using techniques inspired in part by Soviet research
methodology, such as asking individual students to think aloud while working on a
problem, having pairs of students work together on a problem, or conducting small-
group teaching experiments in which tasks are devised to capitalize on responses to
previous tasks. Researchers then analyze tapes and transcripts of working sessions to
formulate conjectures about students' thinking.
Information processing provides a theoretical framework for much of the current
research on skill learning in algebra. Here, researchers study data on such factors as
response time or common errors in an effort to identify patterns and infer mental
processes students use in carrying out certain algebraic procedures. Sometimes com-
puter models of students' thinking processes are formulated, or computer programs
called "intelligent tutors" are developed to remediate student errors (see Chapter 11).
Both cognitive-development and information-processing research can help us un-
derstand how students learn. Both kinds of research can alert us to obstacles that arise
along the way. Before we consider the mental constructs students need to develop in
algebra, let us consider some sources of difficulty they typically encounter.
Research suggests that impediments to learning tend to be of three types: (a) Some
are inherent to the subject itself, (b) some are intrinsic to the learner, and (c) some
are the unintended consequence of generally good teaching techniques. Most obsta-
cles inherent to algebra stem from notational conventions or the complexity of con-
cepts that arise with the use of letters as variables. Obstacles intrinsic to the learner
Content of Algebra
For convenience, we have divided the discussion of content research into the lan-
guage, concepts, geometry, and rules of algebra. Generally, research studies reflect a
range of ideas and do not fall neatly into a single category. Thus, we will analyze the
research by areas of implications, rather than study by study.
Language of Algebra
Algebra is a language for describing actions on, and relationships among, quantities.
As with any language, difficulties may arise from features of the language itself or in
translating from one language to another. Within the language of algebra, most lin-
guistic difficulties relate to variables and expressions; most translation difficulties arise
in translating word problems into equations.
Variables. Research shows that students can work with variables without fully un-
derstanding the power and flexibility of literal symbols (51). Because variables operate
much like the numbers of arithmetic, and because conceptually they resemble pro-
nouns in ordinary language, most students can acquire some facility in routine al-
gebraic manipulations. On the other hand, variables are different from numerals
(e.g., variables can represent many numbers simultaneously, they have no place
value, they can be selected arbitrarily), and they are different from words (e.g., vari-
ables can be defined in any way we wish and can be changed without affecting the
values they represent).
Changing x to y in the equation 2x + 3 = 15 does not have the same effect as
changing he to she in the sentence, He was President of the United States.

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
123
124
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Variables are versatile, too. We use them as names for numbers or other objects,
as discrete unknowns in equations, as continuous unknowns in inequalities, as in-
determinates in polynomials, as generalized numbers in identities, as independent
and dependent variables in functions, as parameters in formulas, and so on. Whether
we look at variables from the viewpoint of the roles they play in algebra (48) or the
ways that students operate with them (24), it is clear that the "concept of variable"
is, in fact, a multifaceted idea.
FIGURE 7.1 
N-gon diagram from CSMS
Can you add to this list of ways we refer to literal symbols?
Unknown
Variable
Constant
Parameter
Generalized number
Name
Placeholder
Argument
Indeterminate
However, there is evidence that students' early impressions about variables may
impede their construction of a sufficiently general concept. For example, students
who first encounter variables as names (as in person A, person B) may assume that
letters are like abbreviations. This assumption is reinforced when we use the mne-
monic device of choosing as variables the first letter of the name of the objects we
are talking about, as in using a to represent some number of apples. Interpreting
variables as abbreviations may cause difficulty in translating word problems, as we
will see shortly.
Students who first encounter variables as unknowns in equations may assume that
letters represent a specific value. When confronted with a letter of indeterminate
value, (see Fig. 7.1), they may respond by assigning a value to the variable and
computing the answer (24).
A common naive conception about variables is that different letters must have
different values. Even students who have been told and are quick to say that any
letter can be used as an unknown may, nonetheless, believe that changing the un-
known can change the solution to an equation (50). How many of us have unwit-
tingly reinforced this misconception by always picking different values for a, b, and
c to illustrate, say, the distributive law a(b + c) = ab + act If we occasionally pick
the same values for different variables, the reactions of our students could be
instructive.
Expressions. 
An algebraic expression is a description of some operation involving
variables, such as 3d, x + 1, or x — y. Because we use two distinct symbol systems
(letters and numerals) together in algebra, and because these systems follow different
rules, we gain some economy of notation, but at the expense of possible confusion.
For instance, many students assume that — x is a negative number (29), as though
Letter used as a specific unknown.
Part of this figure is not drawn.
There are n sides altogether, each of length 2.
The perimeter p = 
.
Adapted from (24, p. 23)
the variable were a numeral. In this particular case, we should alert students to the
three uses of the " — " sign (the subtraction operation "minus," the integer sign "neg-
ative," the additive inverse "opposite of) and refer to " — x" as "the opposite of x"
rather than "negative x."
The most common notational shortcut in algebra is the omission of the operation
sign for multiplication. Because variables have no place value, we can denote mul-
tiplication by concatenating (linking) literal symbols with numerals, other literal sym-
bols, or parentheses, as in 3d = 3 X a or 3(1/2) = 3 x 1/2. However, students are
used to interpreting concatenation in arithmetic as implying addition (29), as in
32 = 30 + 2 or 3 1/2 = 3 + 1/2. It takes them awhile to internalize these conflict-
ing conventions (10), and of course the fact that both arithmetic and algebraic con-
ventions operate simultaneously in algebra does nothing to alleviate the confusion.
What do we get if we replace the a in 3a by 2 in arithmetic? What do we get in
algebra? Adapted from (10), p. 41
One idea that should, but does not, transfer easily from arithmetic to algebra is
the notion of inverse operations. In the elementary grades, a great deal of emphasis
is placed on the inverse relation between addition and subtraction, multiplication
and division. Yet, these inverse relationships tend to get lost in algebra. For example,
most students can multiply (3x + 2)(5x — 4) to obtain 15x2 — 2x — 8 readily
enough, but if asked in the next breath to factor (the product) 15x2 — 2x — 8,
surprisingly few students immediately recognize that the factors are the expressions
they just multiplied (37). The complexity of algebraic operations can obscure impor-
tant relationships, and often it is not enough just to remind students that multiplying

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
125
1Z6
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
and factoring are inverse operations—we need to illustrate the implications of a re-
lationship with specific examples.
Just as young students who work with place-value ideas eventually begin to think
of ten single units, bundled together, as a single unit of ten, so we expect algebra
students who work with polynomial expressions to be able to "unitize" these expres-
sions and treat them as single variables, as in factoring by grouping: ax + bx +
ay + by = (a + b)x + (a + b)y = (a + b)(x + y). The tendency of most students
to think only of single letters as variables (2, 35, 52) may be partially the consequence
of an algebra curriculum that uses only single letters as unknowns. Perhaps occa-
sional use of unknowns like In or x + 5 might help students learn to unitize
expressions.
Parentheses and other bracketing symbols should provide a perceptual aid for
unitizing. However, there are three common behaviors that seem to neutralize the
suggestive effect of parentheses. Some students apparently ignore or overlook brack-
eting symbols, as in 4(n + 5) = 4n + 5 (6). Other students, perhaps in response to
the order-of-operations exhortation to "do what's in parentheses first," focus on paren-
theses to the exclusion of the overall structure of the expression (39). And finally, the
equation-solving advice to "clear the parentheses first" may prompt many students to
overlook the variable unit in their haste to eliminate grouping symbols. As with any
rules of thumb, we need to show students some situations in which the usual rules
are not the most efficient way to proceed.
Word Problems. 
In their search for well-defined procedures to follow, students may
transfer the "key word" approach to solving word problems in arithmetic to a "key
context" approach in algebra. That is, they tend to categorize and remember prob-
lems according to superficial characteristics—as "distance" problems, "age" prob-
lems, or "mixture" problems—rather than according to underlying relations—equal
quantities, two quantities added equal a third, and so on (20, 30). We may be able
to help students focus more on underlying structures if we do as the Standards suggest
and increase our use of real-world (not so easily categorized) problems and decrease
the number of traditional coin-digit-work type problems (32, pp. 126-127).
Word problems should be integrated throughout the chapter and not given as a
separate assignment at the end. (28, p. 423)
Though looking for key words can be a useful problem-solving heuristic, it may
encourage overreliance on a direct, rather than analytical, mode for translating word
problems into equations. The fact that so many textbook problems lend themselves
to direct translation is seductive, and when faced with as simple a real-world situation
as "There are six times as many students as professors," even college students translate
the statement as 6S = P about half the time (40). Though direct translation is not
always to blame, certainly the presence of the phrase "six times" and the interpreta-
tion of S as an abbreviation for students, rather than a representation for the number
of students, impels many, including some who can draw an accurate diagram for the
statement, to write an equation that resembles a literal translation but which is math-
ematically reversed. This reversal error seems highly resistant to remediation; how-
ever, the analysis required to write a computer program to provide the proper output
has been moderately successful with some students (43).
A question that needs to be researched for word problems in general is whether
using simple, non-mnemonic variables like x and y may wean students away from
direct translation toward an analysis of numerical relationships. Moreover, having
students write out in words what each variable represents ("x represents the number
of students, y represents the number of professors") not only provides a visual re-
minder that the variables represent numbers, but is also very much in keeping with
the increased emphasis on verbalization in the Standards (32, p. 140). The interested
reader should see (9) for further review of factors related to word problems.
Concepts of Algebra
The two algebraic concepts that have been investigated the most are equations and
functions. Conceptually, there is quite a jump from equations, in which a single
variable typically represents one or two unknown numbers, to functions, in which
two or more variables generally take on infinitely many values in relationship to each
other. Inequalities are a conceptual intermediary between these two, in that a single
variable represents a whole continuum of numbers, but relatively little research has
focused on inequalities.
Equations. 
Students typically begin solving simple equations long before they enter
a formal algebra course, but a clear vision of the structural differences between equa-
tions and expressions may be obstructed by their experience with the equal sign in
arithmetic. Students do so much computing of answers in arithmetic, they may come
to regard the equal sign as a kind of operation sign—a "write-the-answer" sign—
rather than a statement of equivalence (4, 22).
In algebra, the equal sign may still signal writing an answer, as in simplifying an
expression: 2x + 5 + 3x - 7 - 5x - 2. But in solving equations, the equal sign
is explicitly a relation sign, and students are asked to operate on the whole relation
to find a sequence of equivalent relations. Lingering confusion between simplifying
expressions and solving equations is betrayed when students refer to the (often nu-
merical) right-hand side of an equation as "the answer" or when they simplify an
expression, look at the "equation" they have thereby written, and begin solving it,
only to wonder what happened to x, when all the x terms subtract out.

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
127
128
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Have any of your students ever done this?
Perhaps textbook authors should distinguish between the two uses of the equal sign
in algebra by consistently using "=" to denote identically equivalent expressions (ax-
iomatic properties, simplified expressions, multiplication/factoring identities, equiv-
alent equations, etc.) and " = " to denote the limited equality of an equation or func-
tion. Then, for example, students who are wont to solve equations by chaining
successive, equivalent equations together with equal signs could quite properly write:
7x - 3 = 5x + 5 = 2x - 3 = 5 = 2x = 8 = x = 4
Few students fully appreciate the fact that solving an equation is finding the
value(s) of the variable for which the left- and right-hand sides are equal (52). Nu-
merical approaches, such as using arithmetic identities to develop the concept of
equation (19), or using calculator methods to find or approximate solutions (13), may
help students focus more on the relational aspect of an equation and less on the
algorithm for solution. Having students reason through a solution instead of always
using inverse operations may also help (1; see Fig. 7.2).
Try this with your class:
Find an expression whose value is 17 when x = 3.
Possible response: 5x + 2.
Find another expression whose value is 17 when x = 3.
Possible response: 7x - 4.
Now, what is the solution of this equation:
5x + 2 = 7x - 4? How can you tell?
Adapted from (52)
FIGURE 7.2 Solving an equation by reasoning (1, p. 205)
15
Solve: 14 -
= 9
7 - x
Reasoning: 14 minus what equals 9?
(5)
15 divided by what equals 5? (3)
7 minus what equals 3? 
(4)
Solution: x = 4
Checking numerical solutions in the original equation—for word problems, in the
problem statement—should be an integral part of the solution process for all types
of equations (8), not just for rational or radical equations, where extraneous roots
may be introduced. The significance of checking solutions to equations is not intu-
itively obvious to students (17). The purpose of checking is not just for accuracy, but
also for ascertaining the reasonableness of an answer and reinforcing the connection
between the original equation or problem situation and the final solution.
Functions. 
Some early research on concepts related to functions indicates that stu-
dents construct the formal concept of function in stages, beginning with the notion
of a function rule, and progressing through vocabulary and symbolism, graphical
representation, operations on functions, and internal properties of specific functions
(27). Much research has focused on intuitive ideas about functions and the transition
from intuition to formal symbolism (e.g., 14, 36, 49). Research on graphing will be
discussed in the next section.
Middle grades students can easily comprehend the basic idea of a function as "a
rule of correspondence" either in concrete situations or in two-column tables of num-
bers. For simple functions, they can identify patterns, fill in missing domain/range
elements, and verbally describe rules of association (7; see Fig. 7.3).
The formal f(x) notation, on the other hand, condenses a great deal of information
very efficiently but causes difficulty even for advanced students. In the Fourth Math-
ematics Assessment, for example, success rates of llth graders evaluating a + 7
when a = 5 declined 20-40 percentage points (depending on algebra background)
when the question was recast as evaluating f ( 5 ) when f(a) — a + 7 (26, p. 62).
The set-theoretic definition of function that appears in many algebra textbooks
does not convey the richness of the function concept in a very meaningful way. By
and large, students' intuition about what constitutes a function corresponds more to
the first functions they encounter than to the formal definition (49). That is, students
generally believe that functions should be linear, or at the very least, continuous,
smooth, and definable by a single formula. To help students construct a more com-
FlGURE 7.3 Item similar to one used in the Second Mathematics Assessment (7,
p. 68)

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
129
130
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
FIGURE 7.4 Items similar to those used by [(49), p. 359]
Does there exist a graph whose function is:
(a)
plete conceptualization, we need to augment the introduction of simple examples
with a variety of other kinds of functions, as well as nonexamples of functions (see
Fig. 7.4). For more discussion of specific types of functions, see Chapter 9.
Geometry of Algebra
Traditionally, algebra and geometry have been regarded as separate subjects in the
high school curriculum, with relatively few efforts to draw the connections between
them that the Standards recommend (32, p. 146ff). Most of the geometry that has
appeared in algebra classes has been as graphs of functions, and the treatment of this
topic was limited by the practical difficulties of graphing by hand. Computers and
graphing calculators enable us to take a much more visual approach to algebra.
Area Models. 
The Greeks developed algebraic ideas using geometry. Long before
Viete systematized the symbolization of polynomials in the late sixteenth century,
the Greeks proved polynomial identities using area models (16; see Fig. 7.5). General
learning theory (see Chapter 1) suggests that pictorial representations, together with
numerical concretizations,
29 = (20 + 5)
2 = 20
2 + 2(20X5) + 5
2 = 400 + 200 + 25 = 625,
should help students apprehend the equivalence of algebraic identities in symbolic
form. Research is needed to determine the most effective way of incorporating activ-
ities with area models into the algebra classroom.
Graphing. 
Prerequisites for graphing functions, such as notions of point and line,
as well as plotting and naming points on coordinate axes, are standard fare in the
elementary grades. Nevertheless, barely 50% of students who have studied algebra
can do much more with coordinate systems than simply plot points (26, pp. 62-3).
Even students who can graph a function like x — 2y — 5 may not be able to look
at a given graph and identify a solution of the corresponding equation from the graph
(52; see Fig. 7.6).
Some naive conceptions related to graphs seem to reflect naive conceptions in
geometry, such as the common notion that the only points on the graph of a function
are the points that were actually plotted (21). These kinds of errors can be at least
partially attributed to the fact that most representations of geometric concepts have
features contradictory to the concepts they represent. That is, representations of
points all have size, whereas points themselves do not. When we plot points on a
graph, they generally appear "bigger" than the points elsewhere along the line, and
this perceptual miscue is misleading to many students. Calculator and computer
graphing may alleviate some of these problems but may introduce new problems yet
to be identified (46; see also Chapter 11).
FIGURE 7.6 Graph interpretation item from (52)

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
FIGURE 7.7 
Graph of the speed of a vehicle with respect to time
131
132
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Some misconceptions are not so much geometric in nature as they are idiosyn-
cratic to graphing, as when students confuse the picture of the graph with the actual
event (5). For example, it is difficult for students to imagine that a vehicle whose
speed is graphed in Figure 7.7 could be going uphill when the graph of the speed is
going down, and vice versa. A number of researchers (see [25] for a complete review)
have asked students to construct stories whose actions could be depicted by a given
graph (see Fig. 7.8). This kind of open-ended, multiple-answer problem solving,
encouraged by the Standards (32, p. 137ff), is easily adaptable to the classroom and
could enhance students' graph interpretation skills.
Rules of Algebra
Research on the rules of algebra focuses on describing errors and trying to explain
thinking processes. The errors noted in the research literature are generally those
familiar to every algebra teacher.
FIGURE 7.8 
Graph with multiple interpretations. Students make up stories that
could be illustrated by the graph.
Manipulating Expressions. 
Many errors related to expressions seem to involve an
interaction between (a) overgeneralizing on the part of the student and (b) the highly
abstract nature of the field properties, especially the associative or distributive law.
For example, one of the most common errors is to simplify an expression like 4 +
3n to In. One explanation for this kind of error is that, in arithmetic, students learn
to operate on numbers until they obtain a single number as the answer. Then, in
algebra they may feel uncomfortable leaving an expression with a visible operation
sign as the final answer, so they perform whatever operations they can on the avail-
able numbers to reduce the expression to a single term (11). Of course, in the case
of 4 + 3n —» 7n, if the first operation were multiplication instead of addition, com-
bining the numbers would be correct, using the associative law:
As a third example, the expression (x + y)2 is often converted to x2 + y2, following
the pattern of (xy)2 
= 
x2y2 (29). 
Of course, 
writing (x 
+ 
y)2 
=
(x + y)(x + y) and using the distributive law (twice) helps clarify where the missing
middle term 2xy comes from, in contrast to (xy)2, which converts to x2y2 using only
the commutative and associative laws.
The frequency and persistence of these kinds of errors clearly show that there is no
easy answer to remediating them. Cautioning students to distinguish carefully be-
tween multiplication and addition (between factors and terms) undoubtedly helps but
is not sufficient. We need to emphasize the importance of structural ideas in algebra
by showing how the field properties apply, at the same time using the powerful tech-
nological tools at our disposal to clarify and reinforce the structural relationships with
numerical examples and visual models.
Standard 14: Mathematical Structure
In grades 9-12, the mathematics curriculum should include the study of mathe-
matical structure so that all students can ... understand the logic of algebraic
procedures. NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation Standards (32, p. 184)

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
133
134
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Interviews with students reveal that this error may not always be the result of care-
lessness or confusion with the transposition rule but may sometimes reflect a belief
system that attributes validity to some operations that are not mathematically valid.
In the above example, for instance, some students seem to believe in a fairness ("re-
distribution") principle: Whatever is taken away from one side of an equation should
be added to the other side (23).
Just as some students seem more adept at constructing graphs than interpreting
graphs already drawn, some students are more adept at solving equations than iden-
tifying given transformations that yield equivalent equations. In a recent study (44),
about a third of the students who were asked to identify equivalent pairs of equations
preferred to compute answers to determine the validity of transformations, even in
simple cases like:
X + 2 = 5
and
X + 2 - 2 = 5 - 2
Judging equivalence of equations was even more difficult when the transformation
did not involve a number in the equation, that is, was not a usual step in a standard
solution path:
X + 2 = 5
and
+ 2 - 99 = 5 - 99
Graphing calculators and recent software packages for algebra encourage students
to solve equations by graphing the left-hand side and the right-hand side as functions
and determining for what x-value the functions are equal (see Fig. 7.9). Students can
then perform transformations on the equation and see whether the transformed func-
tions still intersect at the same point or along the same vertical line (same x-value).
Explorations of this sort are fun and instructive, and we may find that they help
students better understand which transformations preserve the equivalence of equa-
tions and why.
FIGURE 7.9 
Solving x - 4 = - 2x + 5 by graphing each side of the equation as
a function and finding the value of x for which the two expressions
are equal
Teaching- of Algebra
As promised, we conclude with some general recommendations. Perhaps first and
foremost, we need to incorporate more writing in the algebra classroom. The Profes-
sional Teaching Standards urge more writing throughout the mathematics curricu-
lum (33, p. 52), but writing is especially important in a subject like algebra that is
generally viewed as being highly symbolic, almost nonverbal. Journal writing at the
beginning of class can provide a mental warm-up for students and improve their
attitude toward mathematics (31). Writing during or at the end of class can identify
questions, difficulties, or misunderstandings. As much as writing helps students, it
can help the teacher even more by providing informal and highly individual feedback
in a nonthreatening atmosphere. Students write the most in response to simple, but
specific, prompts and particularly when asked to direct their comments to a parent,
a friend, or a former teacher (31).
Writing need not be limited to journals, however. Essay test questions that ask
students to explain a solution procedure to, say, a younger student not only enhance
students' understanding through the process of articulating ideas, but provide the
teacher with detailed information about students' conceptualizations. Although sup-
plying students with worked examples of problems, from which to generalize a so-
lution procedure, has met with only mixed success (38, 45), writing might be used
in conjunction with incorrectly worked examples to provide students with a context
for diagnosing errors and explaining correct procedures.
See if your students can find the error and explain the correct procedure:
Solve: y2 - 6y = -9
Solution: y(y - 6) = -9
y = - 9 and
y - 6 = -9soy= -3
Research also shows the value of asking nonroutine questions to ascertain the depth
of students' understanding. One technique that has often been used is simply to
reverse the standard questions: Give students a graph and ask them to interpret it (5);
give students an equation and ask them to make up a word problem for it (39); give
students a solution and have them make up an equation or system of equations
having that solution (52). Creative questions not only help the teacher/researcher by
providing insight into students' thinking, but they also help students become less
unidirectional in their thinking and to make those connections between questions
and answers, concepts and processes that make learning more meaningful.
Special activities are good motivation for students. "Reversed" questions sug-
gest a game of Jeopardy (3). "What's My Rule" helps clarify the idea of function
(41). Bingo can be adapted for all sorts of algebraic activities.

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
135
136
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
Another theme that underlies much of the research is the importance of applica-
tions in algebra—from two perspectives. First, algebra gives us a way of modeling
real-world phenomena and predicting outcomes through manipulation of abstract
symbols. From this perspective, applied problems give meaning to abstract symbols.
But from another perspective, the algebras of polynomials, rational expressions, and
equations are themselves concrete examples of more abstract structures like rings,
fields, and vector spaces. As such, the algebra of secondary school gives meaning to
the abstract structures of higher mathematics. Stressing the importance of applied
problem solving in algebra addresses only half of the applications equation. Empha-
sizing the structural aspects of algebra addresses the other half and balances the
equation.
"When using computing devices in the algebra classroom, choose software or
tools that place mathematical decision making in the hands of the stu-
dents ... Tool software, such as function graphers, table generators, and sym-
bolic manipulators, can put students in control of problem-solving decisions." (18,
P- 197)
Of all the lessons we learn from research, perhaps the most important is that we
must never take for granted that students truly understand a subject just because they
are able to operate intelligently within it. We must be careful to explain the "obvious"
and ask the questions that are not so obvious. Most of all, we need to listen to our
students, to what they say and what they write. Learning, like teaching, is two-way
communication. Students will learn more from us, the more we learn from them.
Looking Ahead . . .
Research in the learning and teaching of algebra is maturing to the point that it has
important ideas to offer curriculum developers and teachers. New text materials,
software programs, and standardized tests (42) are beginning to reflect recent ideas
from research. Indeed, several of the writers of these new curriculum materials are
researchers eager to share insights with students and teachers. As teachers become
increasingly involved in research, communication is enhanced, and cooperation
becomes collaboration. We will achieve full partnership when teachers and re-
searchers are as equally involved in formulating the research questions as we are in
searching for answers.
Sigrid Wagner
I believe that research can help teachers by providing suggestions for the classroom
that help us teach so students will internalize ideas and avoid common misconcep-
tions. Research will be of no use, however, if we do not try some of the ideas. We
must heed the message of research into teacher effectiveness and adjust our plan-
ning, expectations, and behavior to create a classroom environment in which stu-
dent input is at the center of every learning experience. I would suggest that every
teacher keep a journal that includes general feelings and interesting things that
happen in the classroom. You may have questions that can only be answered in
your own classroom. If we aren't always looking ahead to how we can become bet-
ter teachers, then research will be of no value to us.
Sheila Parker
About the Authors
Sigrid Wagner is a professor in mathematics education at The Ohio State University in Co-
lumbus, where she works with preservice and inservice middle school and high school teach-
ers. She earned her PhD degree in mathematics education at New York University, and has
long been interested in issues and research related to the learning and teaching of algebra.
Sheila B. Parker teaches algebra and geometry at Clarke Central High School in Athens, GA.
She earned her Educational Specialist degree in mathematics education at The University
of Georgia and has taught high school mathematics for seven years. She is interested in class-
room research and speaks to teachers' groups on how to conduct teachers' own classroom
investigations.
References
1. ADI, H. (1978). Intellectual development and reversibility of thought in equation solv-
ing. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 9(3), 204-213.
2. ASSAD, S. I. (1978). Perspectives in mathematics learning. Unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, SUNY Buffalo.
3. BARKLEY, C. A. (1988). Math Jeopardy. Mathematics Teacher, 81(1), 45-50.
4. BEHR, M., ERLWANGER, S., & NICHOLS, E. (1976). How children view equality sentences
(PMDC Technical Report No. 3). Tallahassee: Florida State University. (ERIC Docu-
ment Reproduction Service No. ED 144802)
*5. BELL, A., & JANVIER, C. (1981). The interpretation of graphs representing situations.
For the Learning of Mathematics, 2(1), 34-42.
6. BOOTH, L. R. (1984). Algebra: Children's strategies and errors. Windsor, Berkshire:
NFER-Nelson.
7. CARPENTER, T. P., CORBITT, M. K., KEPNER, H. S., JR., LINDQUIST, M. M., & REYS,
R. E. (1981). Results from the Second Mathematics Assessment of the National Assess-
ment of Educational Progress. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
8. CARRY, L. R., LEWIS, C., & BERNARD, J. (1980). Psychology of equation solving: An
information processing study (Final Technical Report). Austin: University of Texas at
Austin, Department of Curriculum and Instruction.
*9. CHAIKLIN, S. (1989). Cognitive studies of algebra problem solving and learning. In S.
Wagner & C. Kieran (Eds.), Research issues in the learning and teaching of algebra (pp.
93-114). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
*10. CHALOUH, L, & HERSCOVICS, N. (1988). Teaching algebraic expressions in a meaning-
ful way. In A. F. Coxford (Ed.), The ideas of algebra, K-12 (1988 Yearbook, pp. 33-
42). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
137
138
PROCESSES AND CONTENT
11. COLLIS, K. F. (1975). The development of formal reasoning. Newcastle, Australia: Uni-
versity of Newcastle.
12. DAVIS, R. B. (1987, March). Remarks at the Research Agenda Conference on Algebra,
Athens, GA.
*13. DEMANA, F., & LEITZEL, J. R. (1988). Establishing fundamental concepts through nu-
merical problem solving. In A. Coxford (Ed.), The ideas of algebra, K-12 (1988 Year-
book, pp. 61-68). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
14. DREYFUS, T., & EISENBERG, T. (1982). Intuitive functional concepts: A baseline study
on intuitions. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 13(5), 360-380.
*15. EDWARDS, E. (Ed.). (1990). Algebra for everyone. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
16. EVES, H. (1953). An introduction to the history of mathematics. New York: Holt,
Rinehart.
17. GREENO, J. G. (1982, March). A cognitive learning analysis of algebra. Paper presented
at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA.
*18. HEID, M. K. (1990). Uses of technology in prealgebra and beginning algebra. Mathe-
matics Teacher, 84(3), 194-198.
*19. HERSCOVICS, N., & KIERAN, C. (1980). Constructing meaning for the concept of equa-
tion. Mathematics Teacher, 73(8), 572-580.
20. HINSLEY, D. A., HAYES, J. R., & SIMON, H. A. (1977). From words to equations: Mean-
ing and representation in algebra word problems. In M. A. Just & P. Carpenter (Eds.),
Comprehension and Cognition (pp. 89-106). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
21. KERSLAKE, D. (1981). Graphs. In K. M. Hart (Ed.), Children's understanding of math-
ematics: 11-16 (pp. 102-119). London: John Murray.
*22. KIERAN, C. (1981). Concepts associated with the equality symbol. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 12, 317-326.
23. KIERAN, C. (1984). A comparison between novice and more-expert algebra students on
tasks dealing with the equivalence of equations. In J. M. Moser (Ed.), Proceedings of
the Sixth Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group
for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (pp. 83-91). Madison: University of
Wisconsin.
24. KUCHEMANN, D. (1978). Children's understanding of numerical variables. Mathematics
in School, 7(4), 23-26.
*25. LEINHARDT, G., ZASLAVSKY, O., & STEIN, M. K. (1990). Functions, graphs, and graph-
ing: Tasks, learning, and teaching. Review of Educational Research, 60(1), 1-64.
26. LINDQUIST, M. M. (Ed.). (1989). Results from the Fourth Mathematics Assessment of
the National Assessment of Educational Progress. Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
27. LOVELL, K. (1971). Some aspects of the growth of the concept of a function. In M. F.
Rosskopf, L. P. Steffe, & S. Taback (Eds.), Piagetian cognitive-development research
and mathematical education. Washington, DC: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
*28. MARQUIS, J. (1989). What can we do about the high D and F rate in first-year algebra?
Mathematics Teacher, 82(6), 421-425.
29. MATZ, M. (1982). Towards a process model for high school algebra errors. In D. Slee-
man & J. S. Brown (Eds.), Intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 25-50). London: Academic
Press.
30. MAYER, R. E. (1982). Memory for algebra story problems. Journal of Educational Psy-
chology, 74(2), 199-216.
*31. MILLER, L. D., & ENGLAND, D. A. (1989). Writing to learn algebra. School Science and
Mathematics, 89(4), 299-312.
32. NATIONAL COUNCIL OF TEACHERS OF MATHEMATICS (1989). Curriculum and evaluation
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
33. NATIONAL COUNCIL OF TEACHERS OF MATHEMATICS (1991). Professional standards for
teaching mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
34. NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL (1989). Everybody counts. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
35. NORMAN, F. A. (1986). Students' unitizing of variable complexes in algebraic and graph-
ical contexts. In G. Lappan & R. Even (Eds.), Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Meeting
of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psychology of Math-
ematics Education (pp. 102-107). East Lansing: Michigan State University.
36. PIAGET, J., GRIZE, J. B., SZEMINSKA, A., & BANG, V. (1977). Epistemology and psy-
chology of functions (F. X/Castellanos & V. D. Anderson, Trans.). Boston: D. Reidel.
(Originally published, 1968)
37. RACHLIN, S. L. (1981). Processes used by college students in understanding basic algebra.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia.
38. REED, S. K., DEMPSTER, A., & ETTINGER, M. (1985). Usefulness of analogous solutions
for solving algebra word problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 11(1), 106-125.
39. RESNICK, L. B., CAUZINILLE-MARMECHE, E., & MATHIEU, J. (1987). Understanding
algebra. In J. A. Sloboda & D. Rogers (Eds.), Cognitive processes in mathematics. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
40. ROSNICK, P., & CLEMENT, J, (1980). Learning without understanding: The effect of
tutoring strategies on algebra misconceptions. Journal of Mathematical Behavior 3(1)
3-27.
41. SAWYER, W. W. (1970). The search for pattern. Baltimore: Penguin Books.
42. SCHOEN, H. L., & ANSLEY, T. N. (1992). Iowa Algebra Aptitude Test. Chicago: River-
side Publishing.
43. SOLOWAY, E., LOCHHEAD, J., & CLEMENT, J. (1982). Does computer programming en-
hance problem solving ability? Some positive evidence on algebra word problems. In
R. J. Seidel, R. E. Anderson, & B. Hunter (Eds.), Computer literacy. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
44. STEINBERG, R. M., SLEEMAN, D. H., & KTORZA, D. (1991). Algebra students' knowl-
edge of equivalence of equations. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 22(2)
112-121. 
' 
V ''
45. SWELLER, J., & COOPER, G. A. (1985). The use of worked examples as a substitute for
problem solving in learning algebra 1. Cognition and Instruction, 2(1), 59-89.
46. TALL, D. O. (1989). Different cognitive obstacles in a technologicafparadigm. In S.
Wagner & C. Kieran (Eds.), Research issues in the learning and teaching of algebra (pp.
87-92). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics.
47. THORNDIKE, E. L., COBB, M. V, ORLEANS, J. S., SYMONDS, P. M., WALD, E. 
&
WOODYARD, E. (1923). The psychology of algebra. New York: Macmillan.
*48. USISKIN, Z. (1988). Conceptions of school algebra and uses of variables. In A. F. Cox-
ford (Ed.), The ideas of algebra, K-12 (1988 Yearbook, pp. 8-19). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
49. VINNER, S., & DREYFUS, T. (1989). Images and definitions for the concept of function.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 20(4), 356-366.

ADVANCING ALGEBRA
139
50. WAGNER, S. (1981). Conservation of equation and function under transformations of
variable. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 12(2), 107-118.
*51. WAGNER, S. (1983). What are these things called variables? Mathematics Teacher, 76(7),
474-479.
52. WAGNER, S., RACHLIN, S. L., & JENSEN, R. J. (1984). Algebra Learning Project: Final
report. Athens: University of Georgia.

