
  WHAT GALILEO SAW 


n
 WHAT GALILEO SAW 
 IMAGINING THE 
SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION 
 Lawrence Lipking 
 CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS 
 Ithaca and London 

 Copyright © 2014 by Cornell University 
 All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, 
this book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced in any 
form without permission in writing from the publisher. 
For information, address Cornell University Press, Sage 
House, 512 East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850. 
 First published 2014 by Cornell University Press 
 Printed in the United States of America 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Lipking, Lawrence, author.
 What Galileo saw : imagining the scientiﬁ c revolution / 
Lawrence Lipking.
  pages cm
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-0-8014-5297-0 (cloth : alk. paper)
 1. Literature and science—History—17th century.   
 2. Europe—Intellectual life—17th century.  3. Science—
History—17th century.  4. Galilei, Galileo, 1564–1642—
Inﬂ uence.  I. Title.
 PR149.S4L56 2014
 001.09'032—dc23   2014017110 
 Cornell University Press strives to use environmentally 
responsible suppliers and materials to the fullest extent 
possible in the publishing of its books. Such materials 
include vegetable-based, low-VOC inks and acid-free 
papers that are recycled, totally chlorine-free, or partly 
composed of nonwood ﬁ bers. For further information, 
visit our website at www.cornellpress.cornell.edu. 
 Cloth printing   10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

 Contents
 List of Illustrations  vii
 Preface  ix
 Acknowledgments  xv
 1. Introducing a Revolution  
1
 2.  What Galileo Saw: Two Fables of 
Sound and Seeing  
20
 3.  Kepler’s Progress: Imagining 
the Future 
41 
 4.  The Poetry of the World: A Natural 
History of Poetics  
68
 5.        “Look There, Look There!” Imagining 
Life in  King Lear  
91
 6.  The Dream of Descartes: The Book 
of Nature and the Inﬁ nite I AM  
110
 7.  A History of Error: Robert Fludd, 
Thomas Browne, and the 
Harrow of Truth  
131
 8.  The Century of Genius (1): 
Measuring Up  
158
  9.  The Century of Genius (2): Hooke, 
Newton, and the System of the World  
177
 10.  Revolution and Its Discontents: 
The Skeptical Challenge 
201

vi    CONTENTS
 Appendix 1. Galileo: The Fable of Sound  221
 Appendix 2. Descartes’s Three Dreams  225
 Notes 231
 Bibliography  281
 Index 309

  Illustrations 
 1. Galileo’s wash drawings of the moon 
29 
 2. Galileo’s etchings of the moon,  Sidereus Nuncius 
35
 3. Frontispiece for Kepler’s  Tabulae Rudolphinae 
63
 4. Panel from the frontispiece for Kepler’s  Tabulae Rudolphinae  
65
 5.  Descartes’s diagram of planets and comets aﬂ oat on 
celestial matter,  The World  
118 
 6. Descartes’s diagram of magnetism,  Principles of Philosophy  
123
 7. Descartes’s diagram of the solar system,  Principles of Philosophy  
124
vii


 Preface  
 What Galileo saw, when he looked through his 
homemade spyglass at the sky, has been a source of fascination and hindsight 
for 400 years. It brings together an intimate, private act—one man’s effort to 
make sense of the ﬂ ickering images in his eyes—and an earthshaking histori-
cal event—perhaps the making of the modern world. Something important 
happened then, as everyone agrees. Yet every aspect of what occurred is 
subject to interpretation. No one can ever know exactly what Galileo saw, 
of course, and the evidence that he provided, in skillful wash drawings and 
etchings as well as verbal descriptions, could never record his ﬁ rst impres-
sions directly; instead he offers his later reﬂ ections on them.  1  Nor does the 
signiﬁ cance of what he saw speak for itself. If Galileo started a revolution, 
the meaning of that revolution has not yet been settled. 
 Even the phrase “what Galileo saw” can point in different directions. 
An emphasis on the “what” highlights the heavenly objects of his vision: 
the patchy, shining face of the moon, the countless stars that decompose the 
Milky Way into individual dots, the moons of Jupiter, and later the phases of 
Venus and spots on the sun. Scholars have taken pains to show how well these 
observations match the photographic evidence of later times. But Galileo’s 
discoveries extended much further. They opened a universe of boundless 
unknown possible worlds, explored by ever-improving instruments in a far-
sighted future. In 2003 an essay by Michael Benson told the story of the Gal-
ileo Orbiter, which after touring the solar system found several new moons 
of Jupiter and took close-ups of Europa before crashing into the planet.  2  The 
title of the essay, “What Galileo Saw,” suggests a continuity between the man 
and the spacecraft, as if the orbiter had reﬁ ned and completed his mission. 
This was what Galileo began long ago with his own explorations. 
 Yet an emphasis on what Galileo  saw might lead to different conclusions. 
Other observers, using their naked eyes, had already noticed some spots on 
the moon and the sun. When Dante is transported to the moon, in canto 2 of 
the  Paradiso , he can hardly wait to ask Beatrice, “What are the dark marks on 
this body?”  3  With the aid of his spyglass, Galileo perceives those spots much 
ix

x    PREFACE
more clearly, of course. But the crucial point for him is that, unlike Dante, 
he knows, or comes to know, that the moon is a body much like the earth, 
so that the dark marks are not anomalies of an unearthly, spotless sphere but 
topographical features, analogous to valleys in this world. Familiar with the 
art of perspective, Galileo sees things in three dimensions.  4  What he makes 
of those things, however, depends still more on a set of underlying assump-
tions, at once the product of a Copernican worldview and a conﬁ rmation 
of it; the eyes and the mind work together. In this respect the deﬁ nition of 
seeing seems very complex. The scare quotes in I. Bernard Cohen’s “What 
Galileo ‘Saw’ in the Heavens” acknowledge that what someone sees can-
not be taken for granted: “the raw data of sense experience,” those spots 
on the moon, came into focus only when they were transformed into “a 
new concept: a lunar surface with mountains and valleys.”  5  Observers who 
resisted that concept also denied that they saw anything resembling Galileo’s 
moonscapes. Some doubted that the spyglass worked; others suspected that 
Galileo’s imagination had led him astray.  6  
 Surely those doubters were wrong. But it was not wrong to link the new 
phenomena in the sky to the power of imagination. In retrospect the truth 
of what Galileo saw may seem so irresistible that only a fool or fanatic could 
disbelieve it. Yet to accept his vision at the time required a bold leap of faith. 
When Johannes Kepler quickly endorsed Galileo’s ﬁ ndings, even before 
he had looked through a spyglass himself, he admitted that such a rush to 
judgment might seem rash, but his eagerness to embrace new ideas drove 
him to imagine much more than Galileo had vouched for—for instance, he 
guessed there were inhabitants on Jupiter as well as on the moon.  7  Kepler’s 
own sparks of vision predisposed him to put his mind’s eye at the service 
of a magniﬁ ed Copernican cosmos; he did not need an instrument to see 
that. To be sure, he also insisted on precise and time-consuming calculations. 
Both Galileo and Kepler pictured a universe composed of mathematical 
ﬁ gures, presided over by its Creator, a master geometer and engineer. But 
that picture drew on conjectures and intuitions, not only on what could 
be measured. Both men often fell into error when they tried to impose 
their mental images on the world. Galileo, a maestro of motion, was sure 
that motions of the earth explained the tides, and Kepler, who found pat-
terns everywhere, arranged the solar system according to Platonic solids or 
Pythagorean harmonics. At times their visionary casts of mind led them 
too far. Without such leaps into the unknown, however, the truths and laws 
that they discovered would likely have been much harder to perceive. The 
observations that changed the world were shaped not only by what could 
be seen but also by insight and foresight. 

PREFACE    xi
 A similar double vision can provide a perspective on the Scientiﬁ c Revo-
lution itself. From one point of view, its history might seem a straightfor-
ward record of progress, as modern science dramatically replaced the myths 
and fallacies of earlier ages with objective facts and veriﬁ able theories. But 
that oversimpliﬁ ed story tends to brush over the to-and-fro of what actu-
ally happened, as well as its later reception. Each break with the past left a 
trail of lingering, unresolved issues. In some ﬁ elds, such as medicine, many 
seventeenth-century European assumptions and practices might even be 
viewed as regressive, compared with the expert knowledge of some medieval 
Arabian clinics.  8  Sometimes science leaps backward or sideways rather than 
forward. Selective memory distorts the character of previous achievements, 
and some apparent revolutions are merely renewals. Nor do breakthroughs 
in understanding arrive at a steady, predictable pace. The record of scientiﬁ c 
advances charts a line of zigzags and swerves, as observers suddenly grasp the 
implications of what they have seen. No history can afford to ignore what 
Keats called the “wild surmise,” the ﬂ ash of amazed recognition. 
 Those visions also mark the process of discovery. To see the moon anew, 
to see the world anew, hard facts and better instruments are not enough; one 
needs to know how to see. Galileo created a story about his perceptions. 
While he rejoiced at the sights that he alone had found, the message that he 
ﬁ rst conveyed insisted above all on the accuracy of his account. The naked 
eye was not dependable; its illusions required correction by his own cool 
head and well-adjusted lenses.  9  But the revolution in which Galileo took part 
depended on something else as well. “What is now proved was once, only 
imagin’d,” according to William Blake,  10  and someone who turned conjec-
tures and dreams into matters of fact had to master both ways of thinking. 
Galileo imagined a solar system long before he could hope to prove it. The 
process continues today. The Scientiﬁ c Revolution consists not only of a 
series of events but also of a series of stories, created at the time and revised 
ever since. Its signiﬁ cance changes whenever a new school of thought fastens 
on a different aspect of science. During the last ﬁ fty years, views of the Sci-
entiﬁ c Revolution have shifted with dazzling speed. What people saw then, 
what people see now, depends on the kind of story they might choose to tell. 
 This book takes those competing versions as its point of departure. 
By paying attention to stories as well as events, it opens a bridge to the 
past, when people tried to puzzle out what their work meant. The puzzles 
remain; in the twenty-ﬁ rst century, many have not yet been solved. Some of 
Kepler’s geometrical models, for instance, anticipate fractals and other as yet 
unresolved explorations of chaos. In this regard the last page of the story has 
never been written. The revolution in science goes on, connecting the past 

xii    PREFACE
with the present and future. It passes through many dimensions; it moves 
through time as well as space, and keeps shifting shape. This book tries to 
follow that back-and-forth, multidimensional medley of stories. Resisting 
two temptations—the historicism that treats early science as immured in its 
own time, and the teleology that treats it as the embryonic form of our own 
full-grown and consummate science—my analysis traces the living rela-
tions between what was thought then and what is thought now. Again and 
again it asks two interpenetrating questions: How did seventeenth-century 
natural philosophers and natural historians imagine the new world-pictures 
and books of nature that they constructed? And how has posterity imagined 
them, right up to the present day? 
 The answers to those questions are the heart of this book. Collectively 
they try to bring fresh life to a history that sometimes seems to have been 
theorized out of existence. No single answer or theory can possibly offer a 
key. The Scientiﬁ c Revolution has been imagined in any number of differ-
ent ways, and people who look through the telescope and the microscope 
visualize things that have very little in common. Hence each chapter of this 
book addresses a different set of problems, which vary according to what is 
observed and who has observed it. At the same time, however, each chapter 
consistently faces two ways: toward the formation of early scientiﬁ c ideas at a 
time when they still were forming, before they had been accepted and codi-
ﬁ ed and turned into “science”; and toward the later narratives that eventually 
shaped those ideas into precursors of modern thought. The advancement of 
learning that Francis Bacon deﬁ ned requires both perspectives. It takes in 
individual ventures and thoughts in the days when their implications had 
not yet been given a name, and it also survives as a twenty-ﬁ rst-century story 
whose reverberations might still have some power to make sense of the world. 
 That story brings heterogeneous issues together, and any book that wants 
to respond to its full scope cannot be content to ﬁ x on any one science or 
any one point of view. Many histories equate the Scientiﬁ c Revolution with 
striking changes in cosmology, as if the heavens superintended life on earth. 
That is a plausible thesis, but it ignores developments in other ﬁ elds that may 
have been just as important. Bacon, who fathered the revolution in England, 
never accepted Copernican theory.  11  Practical knowledge meant most to 
him, and in the long run, advances in engineering, natural history, and the 
life sciences might affect lives more deeply than astronomical speculations. 
A history that charts such pursuits will have to make room for people who 
paid little attention to the grand scheme that Galileo saw. This book tries to 
do justice to the plurality of views in an age when “science” did not imply 
any uniﬁ ed method or practice. While some of my chapters turn an eye with 

PREFACE    xiii
Galileo toward the heavens, others stay close to earth, keeping watch on the 
fall of a snowﬂ ake, a ﬂ ickering breath, or the embryo of a frog. 
 Nor does this book admit any rigid distinction between science and art. 
During the early modern period, scientiﬁ c theories were often spun out in 
verse or rendered in pictures. Lucretius’s great Latin poem  De rerum natura 
( On the Nature of Things , ca. 60 BC), rediscovered in 1417, served as a model 
for atomists and other natural philosophers well into the seventeenth century. 
A love of poetry runs through the nimble prose of Galileo, Kepler, Bacon, 
and Descartes, whose worldviews were expressed in stylish dialogues and 
speculative ﬁ ctions. Bonds to science were drawn still tighter by the visual 
arts. Fields such as natural history and anatomy could hardly have devel-
oped without illustrations; in  De Humani Corporis Fabrica  ( On the Fabric of 
the Human Body , 1543) Vesalius famously coordinated pictures and text. And 
the works that brought the new philosophy home to the public depended 
on art. Galileo taught viewers to see the new heavens in his own drawings, 
Descartes explained the clockwork of his universe by sketching its gears and 
springs, and Robert Hooke’s tiny world came alive in the spectacular designs 
of  Micrographia . From this point of view, the Scientiﬁ c Revolution succeeded 
largely as a training exercise in how and where to look. 
 The structure of this book responds to its dual perspective. Each chap-
ter moves from speciﬁ c events toward their historical repercussions—from 
seeing to believing—and each tells a story about the efforts of thoughtful 
people to make sense of what they saw. Those stories embody ideas about the 
natural order; about the authority of the ancients; progress; living creatures; 
life and death; standards of truth; the place of human beings in the cosmos; 
the outsize strokes of individual genius; and the possibility of understand-
ing how the world was made. The questions such stories raise have never 
been settled. Their twists and turns, their appeals to imagination, continue to 
drive the ways we think about science and art. In this respect the history and 
meaning of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution, evolving across four centuries, mirror 
the choices and conﬂ icts of modern times. 
 Many stories remain to be told. This book passes over some plausible 
views of seventeenth-century science and art. Through its focus on major 
ﬁ gures, for instance, it tends to neglect the host of coworkers, as well as the 
institutions, that made the Scientiﬁ c Revolution grow. The particular social, 
political, and religious contexts within which the new philosophy arose, and 
the networks of communication that spread the word, receive only scattered 
attention; nor does this book pretend to trace the internal logic of scientiﬁ c 
advances. Excellent scholarship has been devoted to all those perspectives. 
But this book attempts something else. In its style as well as its substance, it 

xiv    PREFACE
tries to imagine a world in which science and literature and art are not locked 
in separate compartments. The Scientiﬁ c Revolution brought about new 
kinds of discourse and new kinds of art, and often one person mastered both 
kinds. Such doers and thinkers straddle the lines that later eras have drawn; 
to see what Galileo and Bacon and Kepler and Descartes and Hooke saw 
requires some attention to what they imagined. That story has seldom been 
told. By carrying messages across the boundaries of disciplines, it serves to 
remind us that past times were different from ours. In seventeenth-century 
Europe, philosophers and historians of nature kept company with artists and 
poets, and their conversations helped to transform the world. To bring them 
together once more is the aim and the hope of this book. 

  Acknowledgments  
 This book has been slowly growing for a very 
long time. Its seeds were planted in my earliest years as a scholar, when con-
versations with Erwin Panofsky and Marjorie Nicolson—ﬁ gures already leg-
endary then—brought home to me the bonds between the arts and sciences. 
Perhaps a literary scholar could ﬁ nd fresh things to say about the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution. During two decades at Princeton, I often had the opportunity 
to talk with Charles Gillispie, Thomas Kuhn, and John Wheeler, whose 
wide-ranging interests all spanned the usual academic disciplines. Later, the 
Science and Human Culture program at Northwestern provided a forum 
where humanists and scientists exchanged ideas, and where my colleagues 
Claudia Swan and Ken Alder helped me to think again about what the arts 
and sciences might share. 
 Along the way I have been aided by some generous support from institu-
tions. The ﬁ rst glimmerings of this book emerged during a term as a Fairchild 
Fellow at the California Institute of Technology. I began to draft chapters as 
a Fellow at Northwestern University’s Kaplan Center for the Humanities, 
and continued during a residency at the Bellagio Center of the Rockefeller 
Foundation. An Emeritus Fellowship from the Andrew W. Mellon Founda-
tion, as well as a term as a Visiting Fellow at Clare Hall, Cambridge, enabled 
me to carry the project through. And I applied some ﬁ nishing touches as 
M. H. Abrams Distinguished Visiting Professor at Cornell University. I am 
grateful for all these favors, not only for ﬁ nancial assistance but also for the 
intellectual communities they helped me to enter. 
 My debts to the students whom I have taught in many courses on the 
issues of this book, and from whom I have learned so much, are too great to 
be counted. Best of all were the occasions when young people from opposite 
ends of the campus came together, bringing habits of thought from many 
different ﬁ elds, and found that someone else’s perspectives could change their 
minds as well as the mind of their teacher. Many of the chapters of this book 
were born in a classroom. In addition, many were ﬁ rst formulated as lectures. 
For ten years, as a Phi Beta Kappa Lecturer, I traveled around the country, 
xv

xvi    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
gathering shrewd responses and searching questions, which often became 
my own. My ideas have also been clariﬁ ed through talks and exchanges 
at the University of Notre Dame, the University of Virginia, Northwest-
ern University, the University of the South, the University of Chicago, the 
University of California at Santa Barbara, the University of Reading, the 
University of Cambridge, and Cornell University. This book represents 
the meeting—and sometimes the collision—of a great many minds. 
 Any number of people, too many to credit or to remember, have lent 
me a helping hand. Jessica Keating and Samuel Y. Edgerton read and com-
mented on the manuscript as a whole. David Bevington, Paul Breslin, Julia 
Douthwaite, Christopher D. Johnson, Peter Sacks, and William West offered 
advice on individual sections. Robert Ackerman, Stanley Bill, Peter Dear, 
Alan Donagan, Freeman Dyson, Patricia Fara, Jeffrey Garrett, Reginald 
Gibbons, Owen Gingerich, Daniel Heller-Roazen, Rob Iliffe, Nick Jardine, 
Christopher Lane, Seth Lerer, Heather McHugh, Martin Mueller, Guy Orto-
lano, Sylvie Romanowski, Simon Schaffer, Richard Streier, Noel Swerdlow, 
and Helen Thompson have all assisted my project. And my wife, Joanna B. 
Lipking, posed questions that kept me from thinking I had all the answers, 
even while she provided unfailing support. 
 

  WHAT GALILEO SAW 


1
  Chapter 1 
 Introducing a Revolution 
 The Disenchantment of Nature 
 On Christmas morning of 1629, John Milton, just turned twenty-one, con-
ceived his ﬁ rst great poem, the ode “On the morning of  CHRISTS Nativ-
ity.” As a birthday present for Christ, the poem recreates the dawn of a new 
dispensation: the whole world is struck with amazement and celebrates the 
infant God in his manger. But the climax of the ode turns away from the 
Babe and pictures the global consequences of his coming. What happened 
in that dawn? The disenchantment of nature. As soon as the child is born, 
“the aged Earth” begins to shake, and the pagan deities are ﬂ ushed from their 
homes in rivers and hearths and shrines and trees. The new truth hurts; the 
old gods have to go. 
 The lonely mountains o’re, 
 And the resounding shore, 
 
A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament; 
 From haunted spring and dale 
 Edg’d with poplar pale, 
 
The parting Genius is with sighing sent, 
 With ﬂ owre-inwov’n tresses torn 
 The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.  1  

2    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 The “Genius” or Spirit of the Place melts away, while ghosts descend to 
their “infernall jail,” and a murmur of sorrow sweeps through the emptied 
landscape. Hence a curious wailing and whining take over the birthday. Joy 
to the world! the poem says, but the reader also feels that some part of the 
world has died. 
 The poet himself, as a Christian, allows no regrets. When the ancient 
fables vanished, they made way for truth, and no one should miss their fan-
ciful mumbo jumbo. Sensible people bade good riddance to nature worship, 
to dryads and sylphs and lares and fairies, a long time ago. From a skeptical, 
modern point of view, Milton’s eviction notice might well be considered 
somewhat belated, postdated 1,629 years. It was at the beginning of Chris-
tian time when nature learned that “her part was don,” according to the 
poem, “And that her raign had here its last fulﬁ lling.” Why should this dis-
enchantment still seem like news? 
 As a matter of fact, it did have news value in Milton’s time. Though 
the heathen gods had long since faded, the notion that Nature herself was 
a goddess—full of intentions and purposes, vital and sentient—continued 
to ﬂ ourish. Milton personiﬁ es her as a wanton woman in “naked shame,” 
polluted by original sin. Yet poets could hardly resist her charms, and many 
other people also accepted her reign. “Thou, Nature, art my goddess”; as late 
as Johnson’s  Dictionary , in 1755, Edmund’s words in  Lear  exemplify the ﬁ rst 
deﬁ nition of “Nature”: “An imaginary being supposed to preside over the 
material and animal world.” But the last deﬁ nition (number 11) is “Physics; 
the science which teaches the qualities of things,” illustrated by Alexander 
Pope’s familiar epitaph for Newton: “ NATURE and Nature’s Laws lay hid 
in Night. / God said,  Let Newton be!  and All was  Light .” By then the world 
had changed. It was no longer moved by godlings and godkins, or even by 
the Love that Dante thought had power to move the sun and stars, but by 
impersonal forces like the laws of gravity and thermodynamics. 
 The change had begun almost the moment Milton was born. Just in 
that year, 1608, word started to spread of an amazing new invention, the 
spyglass, later called the telescope. The following year Galileo pointed his 
upgraded homemade spyglass at the night sky, and the moon and the sun 
and the planets and stars would never again be the same. If any one date 
can be said to open the Scientiﬁ c Revolution (all such dates are controver-
sial, of course), a majority vote might settle on the Ides of March in 1610, 
when  Sidereus Nuncius — The Starry Message —revealed what Galileo had seen. 
Immediately the closed and stable universe began to crack. The cracks were 
still widening two decades later, when Milton wrote his Nativity Ode, and 
they gaped beyond repair a decade after that, when he visited Florence and 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    3
“found the famous  Galileo grown old, a prisner to the Inquisition, for think-
ing in Astronomy otherwise then the Franciscan and Dominican licencers 
thought.”  2  Milton waged a holy war against the papacy and thought control. 
Perhaps the Nativity Ode itself is aimed at Catholic idol-worship; both the 
pope and king Charles had often been associated with a pagan god, Apollo, 
whom the poem expunges along with his “pale-ey’d Priest[s].”  3  In any case, 
no educated person of Milton’s age could help being conscious that revolu-
tions were in the air. 
 Those revolutions have not yet come to rest. The Protestant break from 
a church that had reigned for more than a millennium, the discoveries of 
lands across the seas, the revelations—by Michelangelo, Shakespeare, Monte-
verdi, and many others—of unknown territories that art might explore, and a 
renaissance of learning in Europe all seemed, at least in retrospect, to change 
the course of history forever. Above all, the story of a decisive and irrevers-
ible breakthrough revolves around a new way of perceiving the world, a 
perspective that eventually came to be known as “science.” If Christian time 
began with the nativity of Christ, then another age, the dawn of modern 
times, began when Galileo looked through his spyglass. Even the name of 
 the Scientiﬁ c Revolution asserts its uniqueness. That story still casts its spell; 
some skeptics may doubt it, but they too fall helplessly under its sway.  4  Yet its 
meaning and signiﬁ cance remain disputed. Whole schools of thought have 
gathered around rival interpretations of each word: “scientiﬁ c,” “revolution,” 
and “ the .” Evidently the issues raised by the story have never been settled, 
and they are alive today. Understanding how the modern world came to be 
depends, to a large extent, on constructing a narrative about the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution.  5  
 At least three basic versions of that story are in wide circulation. Though 
they sometimes overlap, so that a casual observer might think them the same, 
their differences can be dramatic. A major academic discipline, the history 
of science, took shape largely through constant debates about them. Each 
version represents an interpretation of history as well as of science. The 
ﬁ rst, which Milton would have understood quite well, is epitomized by Max 
Weber’s famous phrase “the disenchantment of the world” ( die Entzauber-
ung [“demagicking”]  der Welt ).  6  Weber ascribed that disenchantment to the 
inﬂ uence of Protestantism and Puritanism, which “thought of science as the 
way to God”; by studying His works, in the exact natural sciences, people 
hoped “to ﬁ nd clues to His intentions for the world.”  7  But more generally 
this view of history deﬁ nes the Scientiﬁ c Revolution in terms of a single 
effect, an unrelenting assault on superstition. What Christ did to the pagan 
gods, according to the Nativity Ode, the heroes of the new philosophy did 

4    WHAT GALILEO SAW
to the false beliefs and inherited misinformation that had deluded humanity 
for thousands of years. Mystiﬁ cation would now be exposed; a curtain had 
been lifted on the ancient wizards of Oz. If this story is told in French, Des-
cartes and the  philosophes  traditionally play the role of its heroes. In English, 
Francis Bacon usually gets the lion’s share of the credit. It was he who had 
smashed the Idols: Idols of the Tribe, the Cave, the Theater, and the Market-
place (by which Bacon means primarily the trade in inexact and misleading 
words). In place of these Idols, he would found a great New Instauration 
ﬁ rmly on principles of observation and experimentation.  8  And Bacon suc-
ceeded (according to this version of the story). The triumph of the Royal 
Society, a product of the “Bacon-faced generation,” conﬁ rms the victory of 
his method, whether we call it Empiricism (in English) or Enlightenment 
(more popular in German and French).  9  
 A second version of the story of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution would 
shift its emphasis from smashing idols to designing machines. Leading 
seventeenth-century scientists such as Pierre Gassendi and Robert Boyle 
preferred the term “mechanical philosophy” to the older “natural phi-
losophy,” on the grounds that nature itself was best conceived as a sort 
of machine.  10  The model of clockwork, whirring its wheels and ticking 
away without any hand or interior soul to guide it, became the lead-
ing metaphor of this philosophy.  11  Aristotle had patiently explained that 
the stars were living beings, moving with purpose—“We are inclined to 
think of the stars as mere bodies or units, occuring in a certain order but 
entirely inanimate; whereas we ought to think of them as enjoying action 
and life”—and Giordano Bruno added that they had souls.  12  It was as if 
the spirits that Christ and Milton had banished still animated the world. 
But the new philosophy ﬁ nally sealed their doom. Although Johannes 
Kepler was always tempted to believe that something like a mind steered 
the course of each planet, in 1605 he declared that his goal was “to show 
that the celestial machine is not some kind of divine living being, but simi-
lar to a clock.”  13  A century later the 4th Earl of Orrery commissioned a 
beautiful model of the solar system, the apparatus named the  orrery , whose 
gears not only represented planetary motions but could also function as a 
calendar or timepiece. Nor was astronomy the only clockwork science. If 
the stars were not living beings, it came to be thought, then neither were 
ﬂ ora and fauna, scientiﬁ cally speaking, since they were driven by inter-
nal gears and springs rather than by the immaterial spirits or occult vital 
forces that former times identiﬁ ed with “life.” Even people, seen with the 
eye of a good engineer, could be explained quite adequately as ingenious 
mechanical devices.  14  The most notorious example of this line of thought 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    5
is Descartes’s conclusion that animals have no intelligence or rational soul 
at all, that they are  nothing but  the wheels and springs that move them—
not ghosts in a machine but pure machines.  15  This dogma may have done 
incalculable harm, from later humane points of view. But the mechanical 
philosophy certainly did lead to inventing better machines. One virtue of 
this story is that it helps to account for the technological as well as the 
scientiﬁ c revolution. Today most of us take scientiﬁ c progress for granted, 
because machinery has furnished visible proof of its theories: airplanes, 
atomic bombs, computers, and genetic engineering. 
 Yet another version of the story relies on less tangible evidence: the 
elegant, bodiless proofs of mathematics. Even if Galileo had never looked 
through a spyglass or built a machine, he would be remembered for refuting 
Aristotle’s theories of motion. Archimedes was Galileo’s ﬁ rst hero, geometry 
was his love, and if he had written his own epitaph, it probably would have 
read something like this: “He showed that the real world was made of math-
ematics.”  16  That project might describe the Scientiﬁ c Revolution as a whole. 
Descartes was among the greatest mathematicians of the seventeenth century. 
Despite his obsession with machines, his important early work on “univer-
sal mathematics” accustomed him to the relentless pursuit of abstractions 
that climaxed in the metaphysical thought experiments of his  Meditations . A 
similar point might be made about Pascal. Although his famous wager on 
God’s existence occurs in a fragment often labeled “Discourse concerning 
the Machine,” it has nothing to do with mechanics and everything to do 
with his groundbreaking studies of calculus and probability theory.  17  God 
himself, in this view, was the consummate mathematician. And the book 
that ﬁ nally crowned the revolution and converted everyone to nature’s laws 
(though hardly anyone could understand them), Newton’s  Principia  (1687), 
spells out the “mathematical principles of natural philosophy.” At the same 
time, Newton left tasks for future mathematicians: the calculations of time 
and space, of quanta, of multiverses, or at last of a Theory of Everything, a 
manipulation of symbols that might or might not have any consequences for 
insigniﬁ cant creatures like us who live on earth. 
 This book will not try to decide which version of the story might be best, 
nor will it sort out or adjudicate their various claims. Historians of science 
will debate such issues for ages to come. But it is worth noting that all three 
versions have something in common: a deﬁ nition of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution 
that explicitly opposes the methods of science to the wanderings of imagina-
tion. Breaking icons, building machines, and reducing nature to mathematics 
all partake in a distrust of myths and ﬁ ctions and fancies. At an extreme, one 
might say that they share a deep suspicion of what most people think of as 

6    WHAT GALILEO SAW
“life”—the messy stuff that fouls machines and spoils the perfect logic of 
equations. But without going so far as that, one still might argue that the 
deﬁ ning moment of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution has been understood essentially 
as a new conception of science itself: an activity that, whatever it studies, rejects 
all ways of grasping the world but those that deal with facts, experiments, and 
systematic principles.  18  Science occupies a separate sphere—housed in a dif-
ferent part of the campus from the arts and humanities—and what it wants 
is to recast the world as science. This story dominates most efforts to account 
for modern times. The emptying of the landscape depicted by Milton’s ode, 
the removal of human interest and sympathies from nature, signals the new 
god arriving—not Christ alone but the irresistible truth and power of science. 
 Along with the triumph of this arrival comes a good deal of weeping and 
wailing. A year after Galileo’s  Starry Message , John Donne’s  First Anniversarie: 
An Anatomy of the World  (1611) famously mourned that nature was dying or 
dead, because the “new Philosophy cals all in doubt, / . . . ’Tis all in pieces, 
all cohærence gone.”  19  Donne was lamenting the death of a woman, Eliza-
beth Drury, not Aristotle or Ptolemy, but his anatomy leaves little doubt that 
scientiﬁ c knowledge has delivered a deathblow to the world in which people 
once thought they lived. We have been hearing similar accusations ever since 
then. When science won its divorce from imagination, two points of view 
began to divide the world, and the custody battle continues. Most scientists 
feel understandably defensive about being stereotyped as enemies of life, as 
well as about the preposterous assumption that their work lacks imagination. 
But the charge has not been easy to dismiss. It lingers as the dark side of their 
glorious success, the story of freeing nature from illusions—particularly from 
the illusion that nature somehow resembles a person and responds to our 
interest in it. If the emptying of the landscape draws on a myth, neverthe-
less it summons a haunting pathos. “—But there’s a Tree, of many, one, / A 
single Field which I have looked upon, / Both of them speak of something 
that is gone: / . . . Whither is ﬂ ed the visionary gleam? / Where is it now, 
the glory and the dream?”  20  As Wordsworth’s ode suggests, his sense of loss 
is not unique but shared by everyone who still remembers childhood, when 
mysterious presences seemed to ﬁ ll the world. In this regard science stands 
for the killjoy grown-up. It shines its ﬂ ashlight into dark places to show that 
nothing is there; it numbers everything and roots out imagination. 
 New Worlds of Imagination 
 No one can turn back the clock and return to a past that was already molder-
ing in Milton’s time. But I do want to argue that something is wrong with 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    7
the usual story, in all three versions. At the very least it is anachronistic; that 
is, untrue or incomplete as an account of what actually happened during the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution. Imagination ﬂ ourished then and energized the minds 
of those who made the revolution. To change the old order, they needed 
ﬁ rst to conceive some possible new order. Any number of different ways of 
picturing the world, and other worlds as well, competed for attention, as this 
book will show.  21  Moreover, stories that discount imagination promulgate 
a dubious view of science that can still do damage not only to those who 
believe that it has nothing to offer them but also to scientists themselves. 
 To some extent the modern distrust of imagination reﬂ ects the doubts of 
earlier times. According to the psychology originated by Aristotle and devel-
oped by Avicenna and others,  phantasia , the faculty in which illusory appear-
ances arise, as in dreams, belongs to the organic or sensitive soul, not to the 
rational soul.  22  Sometimes it was distinguished from  imaginatio , which forms 
a mental concept of something not present to the senses, and which occupies 
a different part of the brain.  23  Hence imagination might be viewed either 
as a breeder of phantoms and deceits or as a productive, mindful type of 
cognition. During the early modern period both views were in play. Imagi-
nation might be lunacy or devil’s work, according to some moralists and 
physicians, but other theorists exalted the positive power of artistic creation, 
which might conceive a better, golden world.  24  Moreover, that power might 
alter the world in which humans live. “ A strong imagination creates the event , 
say the scholars”;  25  Montaigne entertains the possibility that imagination can 
affect external objects, as when witches kill with a glance or children in the 
womb are marked by their mother’s fancies. At any rate he endorses the pla-
cebo effect; the mind seems helpless to resist whatever images are planted in 
it, so that the power of suggestion alone can harm or cure the body. From this 
point of view, imagination could no longer be regarded as merely one faculty 
among others, an idle source of dreams. Instead it threatened to become the 
master of the mind, which might replace reality itself with its illusions. 
 In the seventeenth century most natural philosophers waged war against 
the dominance of imagination. Though Francis Bacon conceded that in its 
proper sphere—not only poetry but also politics and religion—imagination 
might further Truth and the Good, he constantly worried that its encroach-
ments on reason and science might corrupt both. The human mind, not 
content with the world as it is, “always compulsively hankers after something 
beyond” and fancies that nature corresponds to its own wishful thinking.  26  
Bacon’s attack on the false notions or Idols that barricade the mind against 
a reawakening of science implies that almost everyone succumbs to habit-
forming dreams. Imagination must be kept in its place.  27  

8    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Other philosophers went further yet. None raged against imagination 
more than Pascal. In the  Pensées he calls it the “mistress of error and false-
hood,” the “haughty and powerful enemy of reason,” and especially treach-
erous because it promiscuously mixes truth with its lies. Wise men are even 
more likely than fools to fall under its spell, which ﬂ atters their vanity and 
promises happiness far above reason. But worst of all, it cloaks its untruths in 
the guise of nature and custom, like the red gowns and ermines and ﬂ eurs-
de-lis that wrap judges in the illusion of justice. The authority of every pro-
fession depends on a sort of playacting, which conjures belief with the right 
tone of voice or with digniﬁ ed trappings. “Who dispenses reputation, who 
grants respect and veneration to people, to works, to laws, to the great, if not 
this imagining faculty? All the riches of the earth are insufﬁ cient without 
its consent.” The show of things prevails over their substance. In this way 
“imagination governs everything”; it rules the world.  28  
 The power Pascal ascribes to imagination also validates him as a hero, one 
of the very few who can resist its charms and stand up against the whole 
world for reason and truth. That role has suited scientists ever since. If most 
of society has been enslaved by collective fantasies, it needs to be liberated 
by the rare person who is not taken in. Hence Galileo owes his renown as 
the catalyst of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution not only to what he discovered but 
perhaps even more to the obstinacy with which he supposedly clung to 
truth against his persecutors. “Nevertheless it moves.” There is no evidence 
that Galileo actually spoke those words, but they remain an essential part of 
the man posterity has cherished. Scientists have a right to pride themselves 
on their refusal to be swayed by myths or orthodoxies, and on their deter-
mination to put all beliefs to the test. Yet they too sometimes subscribe to 
myths, such as Galileo’s heroic, imaginary words. Today, as in the seventeenth 
century, the repulse of imagination provides a useful ideal and self-image for 
those who aspire to pure science. But then as now, good science was seldom 
pure; imagination as well as reason impelled it. 
 One way of restoring the balance would focus on aspects of early modern 
science that historians until quite recently have preferred to ignore: its heavy 
investment in the very mystiﬁ cations that it was supposed to be dispelling. 
By now the outlines of such a challenge ought to be familiar, thanks to the 
important if controversial work of scholars such as Frances Yates.  29  Bacon, 
from this point of view, resembles a magus who draws on alchemical spirits 
to transmute nature and who “exalts the occult powers of the imagina-
tion.”  30  Galileo cast horoscopes. Kepler was immersed in hermetic patterns 
of thought and the magic of numbers. Rosicrucian secrets lie behind the 
sudden revelations of Descartes. Astrology, witchcraft, spirits, and humors 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    9
pervade the medical practice of Thomas Browne and other physicians. New-
ton spent much of his life investigating alchemy. And so on and so on. 
Whether or not we ﬁ nd these hints compelling, they do serve a purpose by 
making us put the fathers of science back in their own times and contexts, 
rather than judging them by how well they live up to what scientists now 
believe. The very word “science,” one ought to remember, meant something 
different to those early explorers, who studied “natural philosophy,” “natural 
history,” “natural religion,” and sometimes “natural magic.”  31  Two centuries 
would pass before “science” ceased to stand for all ﬁ elds of knowledge and 
became tied to nonhumanistic ﬁ elds—speciﬁ cally, to ﬁ elds whose methods 
were assumed to bar imagination. So Galileo and Newton cannot be cat-
egorized in any simple way as “scientists”; the concept as well as the word 
is anachronistic.  32  This book will often refer to early “science,” for want of 
a better term. But the variety of activities that it examines should serve as a 
warning against any assumption that seventeenth-century thinkers devoted 
themselves to one all-encompassing discipline or to the scientiﬁ c methods 
practiced today. 
 Whether or not the makers of the revolution dabbled in the occult, 
moreover, most of them were unquestionably masters of the arts. Leonardo’s 
spectacular fusion of science (as it came to be called) and art preﬁ gures 
the attainments of his successors, a century later, who used their gifts to 
reimagine what things might be.  33  Nature and art played equal parts in 
their work. When Milton refers to Galileo’s sightings of the moon, he calls 
him “the  Tuscan Artist.”  34   Artist , a word that can imply a mastery of practi-
cal science as well as of the ﬁ ne arts, certainly ﬁ ts the case. Galileo worked 
with his hands as well as his eyes. He excelled at  disegno and could have 
made his living as a painter; an accomplished lutenist and singer, he pursued 
his father’s interests in the theory of music and consonances; a sometime 
poet and inveterate writer, he claimed to have modeled his often dazzling 
prose on the style of Ariosto, his favorite poet.  35  Nor were these arts mere 
diversions for him; each of them contributed decisively to his discoveries 
in science. Kepler’s great  Harmony of the World ( Harmonice Mundi , 1619) 
associates the composition of the solar system with recent developments in 
polyphonic music;  36  ingenious, punning poems, in his books and notebooks, 
reﬂ ect his love of playing with words and numbers; and the frontispiece 
he designed for  Rudolﬁ ne Tables (1627) shows how much he could convey 
with pictures.  37  Descartes’s ﬁ rst surviving work is a  Compendium of Music 
(1618); in his youth he loved poetry and claimed that poets brim over “with 
precepts more weighty, more sensible, & better expressed than those found 
in the writings of Philosophers”; he studied painting and ﬁ lled his books 

10    WHAT GALILEO SAW
with sketches that not only illustrate but embody his scientiﬁ c theories.  38  
Similar ties between science and art might be traced in the lives and works 
of Tycho Brahe, Francis Bacon, Christiaan Huygens, Robert Hooke, and a 
host of others. Their artistry breathes life into the projects for which they 
are known. 
 Above all, visions of what the world might be inspired their efforts. In the 
seventeenth century (if not beyond) the realms of imagination and science 
were usually not distinct, nor did natural philosophers simply discover images 
that later inﬂ uenced poets and painters. Most scholarly studies assume a one-
way trafﬁ c from science to art. The revelations of Newton’s  Opticks , Mar-
jorie Nicolson persuasively argued, set off a wave of light effects in poems 
(as well as in pictures and music).  39  Yet imagination often came ﬁ rst. Thus 
Kepler embedded his most sophisticated picture of the moon in an allegori-
cal  Dream ( Somnium ) that he drafted in his youth and periodically revised 
throughout his life, and Descartes’s lifework was predicted (he thought) by 
his interpretation of three vivid dreams during the night of November 10, 
1619. Those dreams were not aberrations; Kepler’s phantasmagoria encodes a 
secret history of his life, and Descartes believed that his revelations came from 
God (that is, the Being who sends signs to tell some lucky mortals what they 
are born to do). Nor did Descartes lack courage to inquire whether what he 
knew and what he was might be only a dream. Yet despite his cultivation of 
doubt, he asked his readers to imagine a new world, created from the laws of 
nature that he called forth.  40  Imagination validated science, in this new world; 
and science, imagination. 
 New worlds obsessed the age in practice as well as in theory. In the wake 
of Columbus, the European voyagers who found unheard-of lands across 
the seas and opened routes for trade and colonization also brought home a 
sense of previously unimagined possibilities. The earth contained varieties of 
people and things, ﬂ ora and fauna, languages, gods, and natural wonders that 
the ancients had never known. Discoveries such as these redrew the map; the 
patchwork of terra incognita slowly ﬁ lled in with global perspectives. At 
the same time the expansion of frontiers prepared the ground for intellectual 
adventures. The famous frontispiece to Bacon’s  Great Instauration  pictures a 
ship that sails beyond the Pillars of Hercules, the boundary of the ancient 
world, and into uncharted waters of exploration and knowledge. Its motto, 
 Plus ultra , helped to inspire the Royal Society, which itself was supposed to 
have been prophesied by another of Bacon’s visions of a state “far beyond” 
present limits of learning, the  New Atlantis .  41  Moreover, the past as well as 
the future seemed to offer rich veins that had yet to be mined—a renaissance 
of knowledge once known and now about to be brought again to light. 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    11
Though Bacon scorned Aristotelian idols, he too attempted to revive the 
wisdom of the ancients.  42  The time had come to reconceive both heaven and 
earth. As Tommaso Campanella wrote to Galileo in 1632, just at the moment 
when the  Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems  came under attack, “This 
news of ancient truths, of new worlds, new stars, new systems, new nations, 
etc., is the beginning of a new age.”  43  
 Imagination Fills the Void 
 Campanella imagined other new worlds as well.  The City of the Sun , the 
utopian dialogue he wrote in 1602 and published in Latin in 1623, describes 
a marvelous tropical commonwealth that anticipates a brave new European 
future. But Campanella’s dreams extended further. As soon as he read  Sid-
ereus Nuncius  he leapt to the conclusion (as did Kepler) that otherworldly 
creatures must inhabit those starry realms.  44  Few readers could refrain from 
building castles in the air; from the beginning, extraterrestrials peopled the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution.  45  As early as 1609, when Kepler put his  Dream on 
paper, he viewed the moon through the perspective of its inhabitants, the 
“Subvolvans” (those who dwell on the hemisphere that always faces Earth). 
In 1638 John Wilkins published  The Discovery of a World in the Moone , a 
habitable and inhabited world. Cyrano de Bergerac’s lively fantasies of other 
worlds, in his  Voyages to the Moon and the Sun  (1656; 1662), mix scientiﬁ c 
speculations, inspired by Descartes and Gassendi, with ﬁ gures from classical 
mythology and history.  46  At the end of the century Christiaan Huygens, 
who discovered the ring of Saturn, left as his legacy  Kosmotheoros  (1698), an 
account of how rational beings on other planets perceive their worlds. And 
these are only a sample of the teeming hordes that crammed each corner of 
the universe, according to seventeenth-century suppositions.  47  If God had 
put mountains and deserts on the moon, he must have put mountaineers and 
nomads in charge there. A durable image, the Great Chain of Being, which 
pictures the universe as a plenum with no missing link, may well have inﬂ u-
enced this tendency to ﬁ ll space with life. And another set of discoveries, the 
microscopic organisms (descried by Hooke and Leeuwenhoek) inhabiting 
the air, the surface of a pond, and human bodies, also made it easy to imag-
ine life in distant or invisible places.  48  From this point of view, most early 
scientists could no more conceive of an empty cosmos than early poets and 
painters could picture an empty landscape. 
 Yet imagination also struggled to tame the implications of these vast new 
open spaces. The Ptolemaic universe had long ago been civilized by poets, 
and Dante and Ariosto had effortlessly ascended to the moon on wings 

12    WHAT GALILEO SAW
of thought—impelled by Beatrice—or on a chariot like Elijah’s, on which 
Astolfo passes through the ring of ﬁ re.  49  But the voyage proved harder for 
Copernicans to manage. In one of the most popular poems of the seven-
teenth century,  Adonis ( L’Adone , 1623), Giambattista Marino pays effusive 
tribute to his friend Galileo, an Argonaut of the telescope, whose explora-
tions have emblazoned him forever in the stars. Marino had absorbed the 
 Starry Message ; he borrows some of its language in comparing the surface of 
the moon to that of the earth. Yet Adonis rides a chariot that ﬂ ies through 
a “zone of ﬁ re” to the “sphere” of the moon, and “Cynthia” retains her 
Ptolemaic purity.  50  Lunar geography will not sustain such works of art. They 
need the resources of poetic tradition (Marino begs both Dante and Ariosto 
to aid him), the associations that had accumulated in the heavens through 
many generations, and above all the human interest that mythological ﬁ gures 
confer on places and events beyond the reach of mortals.  51  In this respect the 
world had not been disenchanted. Even Christian poems deploy old gods, 
as Mercury holds the reins for Marino’s Adonis and plays the role of astro-
nomical cicerone. The moon, decked out with relics of the past, seems not a 
fearsome foreign wilderness but comfortable and oddly familiar. 
 Milton himself could not shake off that sort of enchantment. When he 
imagines the cosmos in  Paradise Lost , majestically and sublimely, he takes in 
crystalline spheres as well as Jupiter’s moons, the sapphire of Heaven’s walls 
as well as spots on the moon and the sun; ancient and modern models are 
woven together. Milton was well informed; he had met Galileo and seems 
to have looked through telescopes and read some recent astronomy books.  52  
Apparently the angel Raphael had also read them. He answers Adam’s ques-
tions about the universe, in book 8 of  Paradise Lost , with a brief version of 
Galileo’s  Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems , comparing Ptolemaic or 
geocentric explanations with Copernican heliocentrism. But unlike Galileo 
he does not take sides, and in the end discourages Adam from choosing: 
“Heav’n is for thee too high / To know what passes there; be lowlie wise: / 
Think onely what concernes thee and thy being; / Dream not of other 
Worlds, what Creatures there / Live, in what state, condition, or degree.”  53  
The rebuke seems aimed not only at Adam but at all those dreamers who 
envisioned other worlds. Yet it also provokes some tension. As many readers 
have noticed, someone who is commanded not to think about something 
will ﬁ nd it very difﬁ cult to obey, just as someone forbidden to eat the fruit of 
one particular tree may keep wondering why. Perhaps Milton also harbors 
that tension. Putting words in Raphael’s mouth, expounding world systems, 
tracing Satan’s journey through space, exploring the highest heaven itself 
to understand and justify God’s ways, he can hardly avoid bold speculations 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    13
about the nature of things beyond the ken of humankind. Nor can he help 
imagining what it might be like to visit other worlds, or to hang in a void. 
 The tension is most acute in Satan’s journey through chaos. A “dark /  
 Illimitable Ocean without bound, / Without dimension, where length, 
breadth, & highth, / And time and place are lost,” that uncreated realm of 
anarchy and night deﬁ es astronomy; no such “wilde Abyss” appears in either 
the Ptolemaic or the Copernican system.  54  In imagining it, Milton draws his 
dark materials from the opening lines of Genesis and his beloved Spenser as 
well as from classical sources, especially the blind collisions of atoms in Lucre-
tius’s  De rerum natura .  55  Yet precedents cannot throw light on the uncanny 
emptiness through which Satan must ﬁ nd his way, nor can they register his 
bafﬂ ement. This is a region where nothing makes sense, a waste outside the 
range of Hell and Heaven and the world of Creation. How then can it be 
pictured? Milton calls on all his resources. Clinging to Satan, the narrative 
explores the “vast vacuitie” through the assault on his senses: the confusion 
that clouds his eyes, the hubbub that peals in his ears, and above all, registered 
on his body, the warring elements that toss him up and down, as he “With 
head, hands, wings or feet pursues his way, / And swims or sinks, or wades, or 
creeps, or ﬂ yes.”  56  Momentarily the devil becomes a clown; when high and 
low places lose their meaning, dignity also tumbles. But Milton’s effort to 
imagine a featureless void is soon exhausted. In a short while the muddle and 
bedlam of chaos and night resolve into personiﬁ ed ﬁ gures, Chaos and Night, 
who with their minions—Confusion and Discord among them—receive 
their ally Satan and purposefully direct his course to the frail world that he 
will bring down. Thus emptiness, within the poem, makes perfect sense. It 
can be caught in words, expressed by giant presences who understand the 
little world of human beings and have designs on them. Eventually, the poet 
discloses, Sin and Death will pave the way from Hell to Earth, allowing devils 
“easie intercourse” to mortals. Superseding chaos with Chaos, imagination 
reenchants the world. But the poem itself already builds that bridge, by mak-
ing something out of nothing. 
 Natural philosophers as well as poets tended to shrink from conceiving 
a void. Whether or not Nature abhorred a vacuum, as Aristotle famously 
argued, most early seventeenth-century scientists certainly did.  57  The thought 
of emptiness was troubling not only for technical reasons but also episte-
mologically, theologically, and metaphysically. In his  Principles of Philosophy 
(1644) Descartes stated categorically “that it is contradictory for a vacuum, 
or a space in which there is absolutely nothing, to exist.”  58  A trick of lan-
guage might tempt people to think that an urn was “empty” when drained 
of water, yet still it was full of air. Similarly, the cosmos, for Descartes, admits 

14    WHAT GALILEO SAW
no space without a substance, even though its “subtle matter” might be 
difﬁ cult to perceive. Hence he constructs a system with no missing parts, a 
plenum of ideas as well as of matter, in which simple thoughts and simple 
substances press on each other and join together to make a fully integrated 
world. Descartes believed that wholeness, or an explanation of everything, 
might be within his grasp, and that he could deﬁ ne it by means of clear and 
distinct ideas. Yet paradoxically his unwillingness to contemplate a vacuum 
required him to imagine a universe crammed with something that could not 
be seen, a hypothetical something outside the reach of any clear and distinct 
perception. When Descartes visited Pascal, in September 1647, they argued 
about the vacuum and subtle matter. A month later Pascal published  New 
Experiments concerning the Vacuum , which ridicules those whose fear of the 
void compels them to ﬁ ll space with invisible matter, a substance that exists 
only in their imagination.  59  
 To illustrate his point, Pascal cleverly uses one of Descartes’s own argu-
ments against the possibility of a vacuum. People who believe that a box is 
empty because they cannot see anything in it have been deluded by their 
senses (as Descartes had said); but those who have been taught that there is 
no such thing as a vacuum are equally deluded, because their common sense 
has been corrupted, so that they fancy something where they see nothing.  60  
Imagination has led Descartes astray, according to Pascal. An implicit self-
reference lurks behind this passage. Many years earlier, building on Evange-
lista Torricelli’s experiments with a column of mercury in an inverted tube 
(a  barometer , as it came to be known), Pascal had persuaded his brother-in-
law to carry such a tube up the Puy-de-Dôme, and the level of mercury 
dropped; this famous experiment seemed to show that the air that supported 
the column weighed less at the top of the mountain than at its foot. And 
since the mercury fell when deprived of air and surrounded by nothing, Pas-
cal thought he had proved the possibility of a vacuum.  61  Mechanical means 
had contrived a mechanical effect, conﬁ rmed by mathematics and reason. 
Imagination had nothing to do with the case. 
 Yet Pascal himself was profoundly imaginative. Even the experiments that 
he relied on to replace illusions with hard evidence were sometimes suspected 
by Boyle and others of having been “mentally manufactured” rather than 
performed.  62  Such thought experiments were common at the time. But a 
deeper sort of imagination colors Pascal’s whole worldview. If his natural 
philosophy joins in the task of disenchanting or mechanizing or quantifying 
the cosmos, his faith demands a leap of the soul: “The heart has its reasons of 
which reason knows nothing.”  63  Like Milton, Pascal struggles to make sense 
of chaos. Looking into the immense new universe as into an abyss, he sees 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    15
that human beings are nothing there. “The eternal silence of these inﬁ nite 
spaces terriﬁ es me.”  64  As a mathematician Pascal is well acquainted with the 
inﬁ nitesimal as well as the inﬁ nite, and as a physicist he has a prophetic grasp 
not only of the vastness of the galaxy but of the inﬁ nite worlds that might 
be found within the conﬁ nes of an atom. Placed between these abysses, he 
loses all sense of proportion. “When I consider the little span of my life, . . . 
the little space that I ﬁ ll and even can see, engulfed in the inﬁ nite immensity 
of spaces that I do not know and that do not know me, I frighten myself and 
am amazed to see myself here rather than there.”  65  This famous Pascalian 
moment of panic leads him eventually to peaceful acceptance of his middling 
human state between extremes, and to a surrender to God. Yet what lingers 
in the  Pensées  is a voyage of thought. Pascal imagines himself in the inﬁ nite 
spaces, and pushes his imagination so far that it becomes lost in macrocosmic 
and microcosmic reaches. Of course he does not belong there. But how can 
a mind imagine the cosmos except in reference to itself, the spaceship Self 
that hears the silence and sees the nothing and somehow expects them to 
recognize him? The eternal silence and inﬁ nite spaces would have no power 
to terrify unless a vision conjured them up. Hence testing the world also 
requires Pascal to test the limits of what he can imagine. 
 Most natural philosophers felt the same compulsion. Despite Donne’s 
fears, the new discoveries did not reduce the world to a dead body. Instead 
they led to more and more ingenious efforts to imagine a cosmic spirit or 
life force, some way to make sense out of chaos. Most of all, philosophers 
searched for God’s presence in nature. When Newton set down nature’s 
laws, he quite explicitly kept God in mind, not only as a First Mover but 
also as an agent continuously involved in tuning his creation. Divine intel-
ligence was “very well skilled in Mechanicks and Geometry” and knew 
how to make repairs—with comets, for instance.  66  It is always tempting for 
modern readers to interpret such statements as public relations, the tribute or 
tithe that scientists pay to the church. Hence the perpetual homage to God 
in the writings of Bacon, Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, Boyle, and Newton 
can be treated like static and quietly smothered. Another form of skepti-
cism would view most early scientists as secret Deists, content to formulate 
the laws of a machine that needed no presence to run it. Despite Newton’s 
active opposition to such mechanist views, Deists soon managed to accom-
modate his laws to their own creed.  67  Yet there is no good reason to doubt 
that seventeenth-century scientists believed what they said. Imagining God 
in nature was not a postscript for them, or an oath to secure a license, but 
an essential part of their vision of how the world functioned. Whether they 
thought, like Kepler, that they could read a part of God’s mind through the 

16    WHAT GALILEO SAW
advanced geometry he wrote in the heavens, or like Pascal that God’s grace 
was beyond any rational comprehension, again and again they testiﬁ ed, like 
Boyle, that studying nature itself was a form of worship. All of them found 
some image of God impressed on the world. At the limits of everything 
humans could know or discover, imagination managed to ﬁ ll the void. 
 The Art of Science, the Science of Art 
 If this is true, however, one question remains: Why has the opposite story, 
the story that deﬁ nes the Scientiﬁ c Revolution as a systematic purging of 
imagination, been such an article of faith for so many people? The answer, I 
think, is that the story has been so useful. It serves both sides in a long his-
torical debate: those who regard the early masters of science as heroes, casting 
out idols and marching along the straight road to truth, whatever the cost; 
and those who suspect the same masters of reducing the world to their own 
Flatland, a two-dimensional desert devoid of life. Right from the start both 
sides found ways of telling a story that ﬁ t their interests. Galileo, Descartes, 
and Newton were heroes of thought to many in their own times, because 
they allowed no dogma to corrupt their celestial, mathematical visions; and 
they provided models for the future. Yet other morals can also take over the 
story. Pascal was not the only one whom the new lifeless universe ﬁ lled with 
terror. From Margaret Cavendish and Jonathan Swift to William Blake—to 
speak only of England—satirists reconﬁ gured those heroes as deathly fanat-
ics, ready to sacriﬁ ce everything to their obsessions. Resistance to the new 
philosophy proved to have a life of its own, evolving through changing times 
and circumstances. Eventually the story of a war between imagination and 
science became so powerful that it divided the world. We still are living in 
that story today; we still are invited to choose. 
 Yet neither version of the story rings quite true. When an impassable 
gulf divides scientiﬁ c ways of thinking from the fables and visions of art, 
both sides seem diminished. Historically, any account of the early masters 
of science that wipes out imagination clearly distorts not only who they 
were but also what they saw. Astronomers who perceived the heavens con-
stantly shaped and reshaped them into systems that matched the models in 
their minds. Thus Kepler clung to cosmic fantasies, arranging the orbits of 
the planets to accord with the ﬁ ve Platonic solids as well as with musical 
harmonies. Yet in the end these conceptions, which he never wholly relin-
quished, spurred him to discover three elegant laws that took the measure of 
the solar system. Fantasy and calculation are not opposed, for Kepler; they 
join in mighty acts of creation. Similarly, the great English naturalist John 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    17
Ray (1627–1705), who did more than anyone else to disenchant nature and 
substitute hard evidence for pretty stories that humanized ﬂ ora and fauna, 
spent his life observing not only particular facts but also their ultimate mean-
ing:  The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of the Creation  (1691). Patient 
investigations of what nature is prepare the ground for speculations about 
what it might represent. Again and again the work of scientists has resulted in 
new ways of imagining life and the world. This process is not an abnegation 
of science but part of science itself. 
 If the story of an eternal divorce between science and art diminishes sci-
ence, moreover, it may have induced a still more damaging view of the arts. 
In retrospect, the triumph of the new philosophy has tempted humanists to 
lament their displacement from the center of culture and education. Donne 
pictures human history as a long, cataclysmic decline from the Garden of 
Eden to his own shrunken times, when even the heavens have fallen apart 
and colors have lost their luster; and two centuries later Keats would agree 
that cold philosophy could “conquer all mysteries with rule and line” and 
“unweave a rainbow.”  68  Many historians and critics have sympathized with 
that dismay about the corrosive effects of reason. In the eighteenth century 
the ﬁ rst major history of English poetry, by Thomas Warton, suggested that 
“the fashion of treating everything scientiﬁ cally” had stiﬂ ed imagination, and 
since then a consistent strain of modernist and antimodernist thought has 
weighed the costs of disenchantment.  69  Even Max Weber betrayed mixed 
feelings about the replacement of magic by intellectualization.  70  Regrets like 
these often express a nostalgic craving for a supposedly simpler, more har-
monious time, when unseen spirits lent a touch of poetry to everyday life. 
It is as if the chorus of petty gods in Milton’s ode were wailing to return. 
Yet such views also patronize the arts, reducing them to a pathetic remnant 
of an earlier, outmoded stage of civilization.  71  Some artists enjoy their role 
as enemies of reason; their alienation from the modern world seems to con-
nect them with primal, prehistoric depths of imagination, as if the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution had never happened. But their handiwork always exposes the 
grip of history that leaves its mark even on rebels, whose styles of deﬁ ance 
reﬂ ect the times that spur their discontent. Nor can artists ignore their own 
irresistible involvement with science. The history of the arts keeps pace with 
technical advances: the laws of perspective, the camera obscura, photography, 
ﬁ lm stock, computer imaging. In this respect one might argue that in practice 
science continually joins with art to reenchant the world.  72  
 Yet no simple formula could ever account for the intricate interrelations 
between the new philosophy and imagination during the seventeenth cen-
tury. If “science” did not yet refer to any particular way of thinking or 

18    WHAT GALILEO SAW
acting, then neither did “art.” One reason why the meaning of the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution has been so disputed must be that it takes in so many differ-
ent interests and ﬁ elds. The relatively tidy history of astronomy, progressing 
from Copernicus to Newton, hardly resembles stories about what happened 
in mechanics, natural history, anatomy, microscopy, mathematics, chemistry, 
biology, geology, or the arts of agriculture and healing; and many new worlds 
had yet to be discovered. No single grid or mode of interpretation can hope 
to traverse the inexhaustible labyrinth of ideas. Nor did the thinkers who 
made the revolution always follow one path. Francis Bacon keeps shifting 
his shape, in this book, from chapter to chapter; he plays the part of a natural 
historian and poet, a life scientist, a scourge of error, a magus who fought 
against magic, a father of experimental methods, a genius who cut genius 
down to size, and incidentally both a defamer and an advocate of ancient 
wisdom. These roles may be inconsistent, but Bacon ﬁ lled each of them ably 
during the ups and downs of his stormy career. At every turn he needed 
to match the world as it was with the world that he could imagine. Bacon 
tries to encompass all branches of learning.  73  Forever in motion, his story 
resembles that of the revolution itself. 
 The entanglement of scientiﬁ c and imaginative ways of thinking was 
played out constantly not only in the new world pictures but also in individ-
ual minds. Few natural philosophers escaped it. Even those who inveighed 
against imagination often found themselves caught, like Pascal, in its web. 
Newton is a particularly interesting case. Disdainful of “ﬁ ctions,” he savagely 
spurned any speculation or ﬂ ourish that might stray from unequivocal truth. 
Yet behind the marble face that he turned toward the public, “Immagina-
tion. & Phantasie & invention” inspired and troubled him.  74  The struggle 
between ideas of what might be and rational certainty is expressed most 
fully by his immersion in the mysteries of alchemy and theology. Newton 
brought to both the same intensity and depth of study that had determined 
the principles of optics and celestial mechanics; nor would he be content 
with mere conjectures. Nevertheless, his best efforts could not reach the 
incontrovertible answers he wanted so much to ﬁ nd. In mathematics a peer-
less intuition guides Newton’s hand, and answers often come so ﬂ uently that 
they might be mistaken for nature’s voice—though no one else could hear 
or translate her instructions. But the language of alchemy requires decoding 
from symbols or allegories that must be interpreted not only chemically but 
spiritually. This is the dark side of Newton’s insight. Despite his zeal for 
calculation and demonstration, his mind roams freely through a realm of 
thoughts that stretch the bounds of possibility. When Newton denounced 
ungrounded suppositions, therefore, perhaps he was also arguing against a 

INTRODUCING A REVOLUTION    19
part of himself. The unending clash of a wide-ranging imagination with 
stringent standards of proof does not undermine Newton’s quest to bring 
truth to light. It is the very heart of that quest. 
 Nor did he or other philosophers ever stop dreaming. Whatever else it 
may have been, the Scientiﬁ c Revolution was never an age unpeopled by 
visions and myths. The vein of mysticism in Newton responds to the rev-
elations of Henry More, which draw in turn from the spiritualism of Jacob 
Boehme. But more important, the most advanced science often harbored 
imaginary agents and beings, like the spirits that guided the planets, according 
to Kepler, or the spirits of life in the body, according to Bacon. In context, 
the disenchantment, mathematization, and mechanization of nature might 
well be seen as rites of puriﬁ cation, making way for Christ (in Milton’s 
version) or God the Pantokrator (in Newton’s). Such rites defy the popular 
ideas and sentiments that shrink reality to  phantasia —appearances registered 
on the senses. A deeper thinker was compelled to look for something more. 
Hence the effort to reconceive the universe in terms of geometrical ﬁ gures 
or clockwork machines, as in the schemes of Galileo and Descartes, called on 
immense reserves of imagination. Science sometimes battled art, and some-
times depended on it. But whether the two were locked in combat or linked 
in arms, their relations furnish a key to what seventeenth-century scientists 
once thought and did. Those tensions and frictions and unions sparked new 
ways of seeing the world. It is time to explore them again. 

20
  Chapter 2 
 What Galileo Saw 
 Two Fables of Sound and Seeing 
 The Afterlife of a Cicada 
 Sometimes the urge to speak in parables can descend on a natural philoso-
pher, as on a poet or prophet. At the center of his polemical masterpiece  The 
Assayer  ( Il saggiatore , 1623), Galileo clinches his argument by telling a story. 
“Once upon a time,” it begins, “in a quite solitary place, a man was born 
blessed by nature with a very perspicacious brain and an extraordinary curi-
osity.” Delighted by birds, he admires “the lovely artfulness with which at 
will they would transform the very air they breathed into various songs, and 
all surpassingly sweet.” Then one night he hears another delicate song, and 
pursuing the singer discovers instead a shepherd boy “blowing into a piece 
of perforated wood and moving his ﬁ ngers over the wood.” Inspired to travel, 
the man encounters a boy who makes sweet sounds with a bow that saws 
sinews stretched over wood; a temple door whose hinges sing; a man whose 
ﬁ ngertips draw melodies from the rim of a glass; insects who trill by beating 
or shaking their wings; and any number of other unlikely instruments. At last 
he comes upon an ultimate mystery: a cicada. He cannot silence it by closing 
its mouth or stopping its wings, nor do the scales that cover its body move. 
Perhaps the sound originates in the vibration of thin hard ligaments on its 
chest. He tries to break them with a needle. “Yet all was done in vain until, 
pushing the needle further in, transﬁ xing the creature, he took away, along 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    21
with its voice, its life.” The origin of the song remains undetermined; but 
the dead cicada cures him of his obsession. In later years, “when called on to 
tell how sounds were generated, he responded generously that he knew some 
ways, but that he ﬁ rmly held that there could be a hundred others unknown 
and unforeseeable.”  1  
 Tactically the parable was brilliantly conceived, and its effect was stun-
ning. In its immediate context, the tale distinguishes its wise and tolerant 
author from his opinionated adversary, the pseudonymous “Lotario Sarsi” 
(Orazio Grassi), whose effort to ﬁ x the comets in a path determined by sys-
tematic proofs and ancient authorities can only deny the bounty of nature 
and the limits of human understanding. Galileo himself does not pretend to 
know exactly what comets are. In fact he had never observed the three com-
ets that kindled the controversy in 1618, and his hypothesis that they might 
rise like vapors from the earth is offered not as truth but merely as one pos-
sible explanation (he was right to be modest).  The Assayer  sets out to weigh 
the matter contained in Grassi’s  Astronomical and Philosophical Balance  (1619) 
on a precise and delicate scale; it spends its energy detecting counterfeit 
arguments, not ﬁ nding gold. The causes of comets, like those of the cicada’s 
song, evade any ﬁ nal answer. But the story that Galileo tells is persuasive less 
as a formal argument than as a model of style or self-presentation. Its author 
commands the art of a virtuoso. 
 Galileo knew a great deal about the many ways that sounds are produced. 
His father, Vincenzio, a professional musician who took a special inter-
est in relations between the theory and practice of music, had passed that 
interest on to his son, who was also an accomplished lutenist and singer. 
In 1588–89 Vincenzio set out to refute the classical theory that musical 
consonance is determined by precise numbers, rather than by a trained ear, 
and the experiments he conducted—perhaps assisted by his son—proved 
that the traditional mathematical ratios did not work in practice.  2  Technical 
and theoretical expertise support Galileo’s fable. Yet he carries his learning 
lightly and ridicules pedantry with contemptuous  sprezzatura . In  Galileo, 
Courtier , Mario Biagioli has argued that the fable of sound “was the epitome 
of court culture itself,” which took its pleasure in appreciating the wonders 
of nature, not in pinning them down.  3  An exercise in courtly condescension, 
 The Assayer  plays with its foe as it plays with ideas, and quotes Dante and 
Ariosto (Galileo’s favorite poets) as tokens of its own literary ﬁ nesse. Thus 
Galileo turns an astronomical dispute into something more personal, an 
affair of honor. Defending his reputation, he sketches a portrait of himself 
as a lover of song and story. An intellectual giant, the parable shows, can also 
be a man of the world. 

22    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 When the book was published, it marked the high point of Galileo’s 
career. Its reception seemed, one might say, almost too good to be true. The 
ofﬁ cial imprimatur by Father Niccolò Riccardi not only certiﬁ ed the ortho-
doxy of Galileo’s doctrine but also worshipped at his shrine, praising “the 
deep and solid reﬂ ections of this author in whose time I count myself fortu-
nate to be born.”  4  Then, while the book was still in press, heaven seemed to 
smile on it: Gregory XV died, and the Florentine cardinal Maffeo Barberini 
succeeded him in August 1623 as Pope Urban VIII. Barberini was Galileo’s 
friend and fellow intellectual, who had written a Latin poem in his honor 
three years before and called him brother. This was an opportunity. The 
Academy of Linceans, which had encouraged and sponsored the work of its 
member Galileo, added the arms of the Barberini family to the frontispiece 
of  The Assayer  and dedicated the book to His Holiness as one who “has 
turned his heroic mind to the highest undertakings” and could be hoped in 
future “to continue favoring our studies with the gracious rays and vigor-
ous warmth of your most benign protection.”  5  The new pope responded in 
kind. He asked Giovanni Ciampoli, another Lincean, to read passages from 
the book at mealtimes; and he especially admired the fable of sound. The fol-
lowing spring (April 1624), when Galileo came to Rome, Urban VIII quickly 
granted him a private audience, the ﬁ rst of six friendly conversations. Galileo 
went back to Florence with a papal brief (written by Ciampoli) praising his 
merits and commending him as the pope’s “beloved son.”  6  He and his book 
had been blessed. 
 One reason that the fable of sound so delighted Urban VIII must have 
been that it seemed to reﬂ ect his own most cherished ideas. The pope did 
not care about the nature of comets. A man of letters, he took pleasure in the 
wonders that Galileo had found in the sky—who would have believed that 
there are spots in the sun?  7  —just as he relished gems of good writing. But 
the rights and wrongs of scientiﬁ c debates meant little to him. All efforts to 
explain the ways of nature could only be provisional, he thought, because an 
omnipotent God might always have arranged things in some different way. 
The fable of sound exempliﬁ ed that position. As time passed, the pope had 
recourse to the fable so often that it served as part of his creed, as if he had 
written it himself. In one conversation, when Galileo spoke of proving his 
cosmological theories, the pope “asked if God would have had the power 
and wisdom to arrange the orbs and stars differently in such a way as to save 
the phenomena that appear in heaven.” If the answer was yes, as it must be, 
then the possibility of another arrangement must always exist. “You cannot 
say that this is the only way God could have brought it about, because there 
may be many, and perchance inﬁ nite ways that He could have thought of and 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    23
which are inaccessible to our limited minds.” Galileo was overmastered by 
the lesson of his own fable. Augustinus Oregius, a theologian present at the 
conversation, took silence for acquiescence. “Having heard these arguments, 
that most learned man was quieted, thus deserving praise for his virtue no 
less than for his intellect.”  8  In that still moment, unmarred by any rejoinder, 
the pope and his beloved son—both teacher and pupil—could imagine that 
they shared a sense of communion. 
 The silence did not last. Indeed, in retrospect it may have covered a colos-
sal and fatal misunderstanding. What the pope interpreted as submission—
was the reproach of systems and theories not Galileo’s own?—Galileo seems 
to have interpreted as tacit permission to keep exploring God’s manifold 
ways—if those included Copernicanism, so much the better. The rift would 
continue to grow. Eventually it would divide the whole world of learning, 
and the pope and the man he once had called his brother and son and friend 
would come to stand for cosmically opposite views of what could and should 
be known. Even today, the issues have not been settled. A host of scholarly 
studies have analyzed the “crime of Galileo” in every detail; nor have they 
all exonerated him from the charge of philosophical as well as political and 
theological misprision.  9  
 Perhaps he even betrayed his own fable. The ﬁ nal break with Urban 
VIII, which delivered Galileo into the hands of the Inquisition, was set off 
by another version of the pope’s favorite argument. Near the end of the 
 Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems, Ptolemaic and Copernican  (1632), one 
speaker says, “I always keep before my mind’s eye a very ﬁ rm doctrine, which 
I once learned from a man of great knowledge and eminence”—clearly the 
pope. Could God, with his inﬁ nite power and wisdom, have caused the tides 
by some other means than the one proposed by “Salviati” and Galileo? Of 
course. Hence “it would be excessively bold if someone should want to limit 
and compel divine power and wisdom to a particular fancy of his.”  10  The 
homage to Urban VIII, as well as the warning against bold dreamers who 
would circumscribe God’s creative resources, was hardly casual. As a matter 
of fact it had been explicitly negotiated by the Vatican, which had stipulated 
that the  Dialogue  must terminate with such words, to “quiet the intellect.” 
But when printed the book did not end there. As Urban VIII soon noticed, 
his doctrine of “epistemological modesty” was immediately rephrased or 
reﬁ ned by another speaker, who points out that ﬁ nal answers would hin-
der “the exercise of the mind.” Worse yet, the very ﬁ rm doctrine itself had 
been put in the mouth of “Simplicio,” whose name meant “simpleton,” and 
perhaps, as Galileo’s enemies murmured, was a stand-in for the pope. Urban 
VIII was outraged; his words had been twisted, the friendship was over. In 

24    WHAT GALILEO SAW
September 1632, a Special Commission reported to him, recommending that 
Galileo be indicted on the grounds, among others, “that he put the ‘medicine 
of the end’ in the mouth of a fool and in a place where it can only be found 
with difﬁ culty, and then he had it approved coldly by the other speaker by 
merely mentioning but not elaborating the positive things he seems to utter 
against his will.”  11  The charge conﬁ rmed itself. Galileo’s doom had been 
decreed from on high. 
 What had gone wrong? No question in the history of the trials of science 
has been examined more thoroughly or has seemed so vital to answer. In 
1979 John Paul II lent his own voice to the search, hoping that theologians, 
scholars, and historians “will study the Galileo case more deeply and, in a 
loyal recognition of wrongs from whatever side they come, will dispel the 
mistrust that still opposes, in many minds, a fruitful concord between science 
and faith, between the Church and the world.” A “tragic mutual incompre-
hension,” he added in 1992, had resulted in the “myth” of “the Church’s 
supposed rejection of scientiﬁ c progress.”  12  But the wounds have not healed, 
nor has the case been closed. Despite John Paul’s hopes, studies have reached 
no consensus on whom or what to blame: political circumstances, Jesuit 
machinations, church dogma in the Counter-Reformation, the patronage 
system, or Galileo’s own intransigence and blunders.  13  Even as the Vatican 
began to relent and apologize for its errors, many historians of science turned 
against Galileo. Not only a heretic, they continue to say, he also promoted a 
pernicious view of scientiﬁ c truth, insisting that he could decipher the mind 
of God. In this respect Urban VIII was right: the business of science is not 
to arrive at ﬁ nal explanations, but merely to “save the phenomena,” offer-
ing hypotheses that a later time might always falsify and supplant.  14  Galileo 
remains on trial. Whether or not we accept this indictment, the question of 
what went wrong still casts its shadow over Rome and far beyond.  15  
 No study will ever answer that question once and for all; at best we can 
hope to save a few more phenomena. But one place to look might be the 
fable of sound itself, a text whose meaning and implications have all too 
often been taken for granted. Perhaps it is not so simple. Like any parable, 
like Christ’s own teachings, it offers a moral to which any listener can assent 
in his or her own way, but which in practice might lead to very different 
sorts of behavior. Galileo himself left no doubt about what he intended. 
Long experience had taught him one ﬁ rm principle: “The less someone 
understands and knows [about intellectual things], the more insistently he 
wants to speak up; and on the contrary, the multitude of things someone rec-
ognizes and understands makes him slower and more hesitant to pontiﬁ cate 
about something new.” The positive Sarsi had exposed his own incapacity. 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    25
By contrast, Galileo knows where to stop: “The difﬁ culty of understanding 
how the cicada’s song is formed even when we have it singing to us right in 
our hands is more than enough to excuse us for not knowing how a comet 
is formed at such an immense distance.”  16  A prudent seeker of truth will be 
content to ask some questions—or to propose a few new ideas. Thus Sarsi 
must stand in the dock; he is suspected of butchering nature by forcing his 
theories on it. 
 Yet Sarsi is not the protagonist of the story. If the man “blessed by 
nature with a very perspicacious brain and an extraordinary curiosity” can 
be identiﬁ ed with anyone, he must be Galileo himself, the great discoverer 
who has learned to be cautious. Nor does the killing of the cicada make 
him unsympathetic; instead his reaction adds generosity of mind to his other 
endowments. From Aesop to modern times, fables typically disseminate 
conservative folk wisdom about the dangers of wanting or risking too much: 
ﬂ ies get caught in honey, scorpions lurk among the locusts boys snatch at, 
greed kills the golden goose. The fable of sound draws on the same pattern. 
But here the seeker does not pay for his excess, nor will the world miss one 
cicada. Rather, the moral is turned against less experienced, less humble 
reasoners. The storyteller confesses no weakness, and even his alter ego, 
within the tale, might be excused for his overreaching because, unlike the 
well-connected Galileo or his antagonist Grassi, professor of mathematics 
at the Collegio Romano, he comes from “a quite solitary place” where he 
has never heard a ﬂ ute or violin or been instructed by more worldly guides. 
Brilliant and innocent, he learns his lesson. The pope himself might have 
offered protection to such a good soul. 
 Beneath the surface, however, the fable also harbors a tension it never 
resolves. Its protagonist ﬁ rst appears a lover of song, who raises birds as a 
hobby and prizes sweet sounds. Yet he readily sacriﬁ ces that pleasure to a 
consuming rage for knowledge; he wants to know how sounds are  produced , 
not how or why they please. In this regard he lacks the courtier’s insouciance. 
But more than that, he pursues a particular kind of knowledge. One of the 
most famous passages of  The Assayer  accuses Sarsi of being a slave to authori-
ties, spellbound by written words and not the book of nature: 
 Possibly he thinks that philosophy is a book of ﬁ ction created by some 
man, like the  Iliad or  Orlando Furioso —books in which the least impor-
tant thing is whether what is written in them is true. Well, Sig. Sarsi, 
that is not the way matters stand. Philosophy is written in this grand 
book—I mean the universe—which stands continually open to our 
gaze, but it cannot be understood unless one ﬁ rst learns to comprehend 

26    WHAT GALILEO SAW
the language and interpret the characters in which it is written. It is 
written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, 
circles, and other geometrical ﬁ gures, without which it is humanly 
impossible to understand a single word of it; without these, one is 
wandering about in a dark labyrinth.  17  
 This argument has often been cited to mark a turning point in the history of 
science.  18  As well as rejecting the authority of Aristotle and other pillars of 
doctrine, it sets out a program of “physico-mathematics,” redirecting natural 
philosophy—or reducing the book of nature—to the study of ﬁ gures and 
numbers. Such calculations, unlike the ﬁ ctions of Homer, Aristotle, or Sarsi, 
represent the essential truth about heaven and earth.  19  From this point of 
view, the quest of the fable could hardly stop at cataloging particular sources 
of sound. A curious and penetrating mind would surely want to understand 
the causes of these effects. At the end of the fable, when asked “how sounds 
are generated,” the seeker deﬂ ects the question by replying that he knows 
only some of the ways. But Galileo himself wanted more. At the begin-
ning and end of his life he pondered the mathematics of music, and either 
conducted or witnessed experiments that measured the ratios of vibrating 
strings or waves in water and air.  20  Sounds, no less than the tracks of comets, 
are composed of geometrical ﬁ gures. And though the fable is not written in 
that language, it goes beyond ﬁ ction and tries to probe the essence of sound. 
 An inquisitor might notice a still more disturbing turn. Not content to 
listen, the seeker insists on taking apart the instruments that intrigue him. In 
this way he distinguishes appearances, or the manifestations of sound, from 
the physical properties or mechanisms that bring them about. When he hears 
music, for instance, it is not the notes and tones that fascinate him, but rather 
the engine that drives them: for instance, “that little iron reed that, hung 
between the teeth, in a strange way makes from the cavity of the mouth a 
resonance throughout the body, and from the breath a vehicle of sound.” 
Later in  The Assayer , Galileo explains his conception of sound. “Sounds are 
created and heard by us when—without any special ‘sonorous’ or ‘transono-
rous’ property—a rapid tremor of the air, rufﬂ ed into very minute waves, 
moves certain cartilages of a tympanum within our ear.” What we hear, that 
is to say, depends entirely on our perceptions, not on something inherently 
“sonorous” that exists in the world outside us. “I think that if ears, tongues, 
and noses were taken away, shapes and numbers and motions would remain 
but not odors or tastes or sounds. These, I believe, are nothing but names, 
apart from the living animal”—just as tickling means nothing without an 
armpit.  21  

WHAT GALILEO SAW    27
 To a modern reader, such notions might seem not only inoffensive but 
banal. But Catholic readers at the time might smell a whiff of sulfur. Grassi 
himself sniffed out a deviation from church doctrine.  22  The issue of whether 
the senses perceived “real qualities”—heat, colors, or sounds inherent in 
material things, as Aristotle had said—or instead only impressions given vari-
ous names, agitated the church far more than did any squabble on comets. 
It went to the heart of the doctrine afﬁ rmed by the Council of Trent, on 
which the church stood. An anonymous document found in the archives of 
the Holy Ofﬁ ce by the historian Pietro Redondi, who used it as the cen-
terpiece of  Galileo Heretic , accuses  The Assayer  of subverting the Eucharist. 
The Council of Trent had decreed that the body and blood of Christ are 
really present in the consecrated host of bread and wine, as substance, not 
as symbol, while remnants of the bread and wine are merely accidents or 
properties of the senses. But Galileo, apparently an atomist and Democritean, 
seemed to have denied that distinction. If substances consist of particles (or 
shapes, numbers, and motions), then transubstantiation could not separate 
the holy substance from the accidental host in which it dwelt. Galileo’s pur-
suit of truth had not saved the phenomenon of the real presence of Christ, 
according to this accusation, but rather implied that any phenomena might 
be subjective illusions.  23  Such speculations amounted to heresy. In 1625 the 
denunciation of  The Assayer  failed to convince the Holy Ofﬁ ce, and the 
storm soon blew over. But later it would return and bring Galileo down. 
 To charge the fable of sound—the pope’s own jewel—with heresy would 
certainly be strained. Yet the story did raise one problem that no amount of 
ingenuity could dispel: it called into question the innocence of perceptions. 
Right from the start, when Galileo pointed his telescope at the sky, the con-
vulsions caused by the new things he saw there could always be justiﬁ ed by 
the detachment of an impartial eye. His sight might be keener than that of 
other observers, and his equipment was surely better than theirs, but the cliffs 
on the face of the moon, the myriad stars that dotted the Milky Way, and the 
moons of Jupiter were not the products of any theory; they could be seen, in 
the future, by anyone willing to look. Hence those who disbelieved the starry 
messenger—and at ﬁ rst they were many—would surely be brought round 
eventually, unless they denied the evidence of their own eyes. Galileo was 
right. Despite the initial resistance, many of his discoveries soon became self-
evident parts of nature, or phenomena that had to be saved. But Copernican-
ism, and theories of tides and comets, were not self-evident. From this point 
of view, Galileo began to stumble when his eyes tried to pierce the unseen, 
as if one could look at objects and perceive them as geometrical ﬁ gures, or 
atoms, or numbers. His sight would never again be innocent. 

28    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Yet the notion of pure perception itself is ﬂ awed. Even the eye of a lynx 
takes in only what the structure of its mind and vision allow it to see; it 
is always an interested eye, in search of its prey. The fable of sound car-
ries a lesson that complicates epistemological modesty: to see things is to 
change them. The seeker who kills the cicada has gone too far, but that was 
his nature. As soon as he left home, his attention turned from song to the 
mechanics of sounds, and his perceptions sharpened until he could recognize 
not only sounds but their physical causes. In fact he was right about the 
origins of the cicada’s song, though he never repeated the test. The logic of 
his inquiry induced a way of listening that identiﬁ ed music with waves and 
vibrations in air; substance and accident were only different names for one 
perception. Similarly, the gaze of the telescope, everyone knew, had forever 
stained the immaculate heavens, as surely as the needle broke the cicada. The 
Milky Way would never be the same; there was no going back. To see things 
is to change them. 
 Capturing Moons 
 In November 1609, when Galileo looked at the sky and began to change it 
forever, he took advantage not only of a spectacular new instrument but of 
an exceptionally well-trained eye. It seemed, in retrospect, that he had been 
preparing for this moment all his life. According to his ﬁ rst biographer, 
Vincenzio Viviani, young Galileo’s “great genius and talent” for drawing 
( disegno ) tempted him to make his living as a painter, until his father man-
aged to dissuade him.  24  Viviani modeled the life on Vasari’s “Life of Giotto” 
and showed the continuity of genius by ﬁ xing the date of Galileo’s birth 
to coincide exactly with Michelangelo’s death.  25  Many painters belonged 
to Galileo’s circle, including Peter Paul Rubens, Artemisia Gentileschi, and 
especially the Florentine master Ludovico Cigoli, a fellow student and life-
long friend who shared Galileo’s interest in astronomy and mathematics as 
well as  disegno . These interests were linked; to picture the heavens, one had 
to know how to draw as well as how to see. In the controversy that fol-
lowed Galileo’s observations of the moon, Cigoli maintained that someone 
like Christopher Clavius, who was “without  disegno , was not only half a 
mathematician, but also a man without eyes.”  26  In this respect Galileo’s eyes 
were superb. His wash drawings of the phases of the moon in 1609 display a 
reﬁ ned and subtle mastery of chiaroscuro in which his brush makes the lunar 
surface come alive with piebald light and depths of shadow (see   ﬁ g. 1  ).  27  
Each phase is rendered with a technique that varies according to the particu-
lar moment of the cycle, and with a palette that moves from an intense white 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    29
 Figure 1.  Galileo’s wash drawings of the moon. Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze, Gal. 48, 
f. 28r. 

30    WHAT GALILEO SAW
shimmer to mixed tinges of rusty red and brown. Together, the hand and eye 
collaborate in seamless works of observation and art. 
 Indeed, Galileo was gifted at using his hands. An early essay,  The Little 
Balance  ( La bilancetta , 1586), tells how to make an improved device for deter-
mining speciﬁ c gravities; and whether or not in his twenties Galileo did drop 
weights from the Leaning Tower of Pisa, as the story goes, he certainly did 
like practical experiments that tested how things really worked and Aristotle’s 
theories as well.  28  He was a doer as much as a thinker. After he took the chair 
of mathematics at Padua in 1592, he spent much of his time inventing and 
making instruments to solve technological problems—for instance, a bet-
ter quadrant to help gunners measure their targets.  29  This handiness would 
serve him well in 1609, when he ﬁ rst heard rumors about a new spyglass that 
seemed to bring distant objects near. At once, he later testiﬁ ed, he set out to 
build his own improved version.  30  “Sparing no labor or expense,” grinding 
his own lenses to deepen the eyepiece and increase the power, he constructed 
an instrument that magniﬁ ed nine times, and then another, a few months 
later, that magniﬁ ed more than twenty. When this was ﬁ nished, in Novem-
ber, he turned it toward the moon. 
 In a curious way, even a defect of vision may have contributed to Galileo’s 
success. As he notes in  The Assayer , early in his life “as a result of a certain 
afﬂ iction I began to see a luminous halo more than two feet in diameter 
around the ﬂ ame of a candle, capable of concealing from me all objects 
which lay behind it.” Eventually this aureole diminished, but never disap-
peared. As Stillman Drake points out, those so afﬂ icted learn to shrink the 
halo by squinting through a small aperture such as a clenched ﬁ st or peep-
hole, and this insight might have taught Galileo to stop down or narrow his 
convex lens with cardboard, so that the stars appeared sharp and distinct.  31  In 
1609 he already knew how to compensate for the shortcomings of his eyes. 
To some extent, in fact, his instrument functioned like eyeglasses, correct-
ing blurred vision. Not yet called a “telescope” (a word invented in 1611 to 
honor Galileo’s “far-viewing”),  32  it was referred to in Italian as  occhiale  (from 
 occhio , “eye”) or in the Latin of  Sidereus Nuncius  as  perspicillum , “something 
to see through.” The obsolete English word  perspective , used for magnifying 
glasses or concave mirrors, as in Shakespeare’s “natural perspective” ( Twelfth 
Night  5.1.209), conveys that sense of eyeing or seeing through. In any case 
Galileo’s technical knowledge of the art of perspective clearly affected his 
vision.  33  Others did not at once see what he saw, and though poorly made 
spyglasses and obstinate ill will must have been responsible for much of this 
blindness, untrained eyes and a lack of know-how also helped veil the heav-
ens. Galileo’s acute mental vision enabled him to look harder and longer than 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    31
others. It is not accidental that, at the banquet where the word  telescope was 
used for the ﬁ rst time, he was inducted into the small, select academy named 
after the eye of the lynx.  34  
 Moreover, he also knew how to describe what he saw. As a narrative of 
discovery,  Sidereus Nuncius  evokes the new world of the heavens with words 
even more than with pictures.  35  Galileo took pride in his writing. An accom-
plished poet and literary critic, he studied the best Latin and Italian authors, 
and claimed that the inﬂ uence of Ariosto was responsible for his own clear 
and graceful prose style.  36  Perspicuous language, he thought, could be trusted 
above the visual arts, which necessarily relied on illusions. Even in its title, 
 Sidereus Nuncius  announces a “message,” a straightforward account of aston-
ishing, distant sights unadorned by imagination. But pictures do not interpret 
themselves. Galileo expands on what he has seen not only through analogies 
between the things of heaven and earth—“This lunar surface, which is deco-
rated with spots like the dark blue eyes in the tail of a peacock, is rendered 
similar to those small glass vessels which, plunged into cold water while still 
warm, crack and acquire a wavy surface, after which they are commonly 
called ice-glasses”  37  —but also by telling a story—the way that his observa-
tions developed and changed. The phases of the moon, and especially the 
sightings of the moons of Jupiter, occur less in space than in time. More than 
twenty pages, out of the ﬁ fty pages of the work as a whole, are devoted to the 
two months of observations during which Galileo came to realize that what 
he ﬁ rst assumed to be “ﬁ xed stars” near Jupiter were actually four “planets.”  38  
It is the sequence of pictures, not any one picture, that matters; and the dra-
matic effect depends on a process of thought, not on the naked eye. 
 Despite its air of objectivity, in fact,  Sidereus Nuncius  is a very argumenta-
tive text. Galileo’s writing seems always energized by disputes and debates. 
For sheer polemics  The Assayer  stands out, but it is hardly alone in its con-
temptuous attack on lesser minds. Galileo swims in controversy like a ﬁ sh in 
the sea. Even when he tries to temper his arguments by writing dialogues, 
most crucially in the  Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems , his diplomatic 
effort to give voice to opposing views tends to be unconvincing; the sop 
thrown to the Ptolemaic view of the world seems condescending when sub-
jected to Copernican logic and scorn.  39  To some extent this polemical style 
reﬂ ects the tenor of a time that prized debate, a time when universities, like 
city-states, chose champions through public jousting. The arts were similarly 
contentious. In practice as well as theory, the  paragone or quarrelsome com-
parison largely set the terms of evaluation.  40  Galileo was accustomed to tak-
ing sides. His most extended piece of criticism,  Considerazioni al Tasso , offers 
a detailed commentary that pits the many faults of Tasso’s “mannerism” 

32    WHAT GALILEO SAW
against the glories of Ariosto’s classical art. Such “critical purism,” Erwin 
Panofsky argued long ago, “may be said to be the very signature of [Galileo’s] 
genius.”  41  But a relish for combat often drives the purist to his extremes. In 
order to think about Ariosto, the critic needs a foil: Ariosto vs. Tasso, the 
treasure room vs. the  Wunderkammer , truth vs. ﬁ ction or lies. The moon itself 
becomes the site of a debate, as Galileo perceives it. 
 Above all he argues that the moon resembles the earth. By observing the 
many small spots that sprinkle the lunar surface—“observed by no one before 
us”—he has reached the conclusion that “we certainly see the surface of the 
Moon to be not smooth, even, and perfectly spherical, as the great crowd of 
philosophers have believed about this and other heavenly bodies, but, on the 
contrary, to be uneven, rough, and crowded with depressions and bulges. And 
it is like the face of the Earth itself” (40). This inference, conceived in proud 
opposition to the crowd of ignorant philosophers, conditions Galileo’s way 
of seeing as well as what he sees. When bright points appear in the dark part 
of the moon, then gradually increase until they join the luminous part, the 
reason is always already apparent. “Now on Earth, before sunrise, aren’t the 
peaks of the highest mountains illuminated by the Sun’s rays while shadows 
still cover the plain? Doesn’t light grow, after a little while, until the middle 
and larger parts of the same mountains are illuminated, and ﬁ nally, when the 
Sun has risen, aren’t the illuminations of plains and hills joined together?” 
(42) Analogy and observation join here in one perception: the peaks of the 
earth at sunrise bear witness to peaks on the moon. In such descriptions, the 
boundary between what is seen and what is inferred seems to vanish. When 
Kepler responded to Galileo’s new picture of the moon, what excited him 
most were exactly these demonstrations of earth-like features. Indeed, he 
acquiesced not only to the lofty lunar mountains that Galileo envisioned—
and measured with surprising accuracy—but even more enthusiastically to 
the lunar seas and atmosphere that Galileo wrongly inferred from similar 
terrestrial analogies.  42  Nor could Kepler refrain from jumping to a further 
conclusion, that there must be inhabitants on the moon and probably on 
Jupiter too. Galileo, with his own eyes, had seen a new earth. 
 Yet how was that lunar earth to be pictured? Brought near by a telescope, 
the moon presents a dynamic visual challenge to its explorer. The problem 
of how to represent it depends on what the observer conceives it to be. Its 
shifting shapes, as it moves through so many phases, have marked it tradition-
ally as an emblem of supernal ﬁ ckleness: another name for mutability. At one 
extreme, there seem to be many moons—new moon, crescent, half-moon, 
gibbous, full—each with its own associations, auguries, and iconographical 
conventions. Invisible when new, and subject at times to eclipses, the moon 
conjures up a world of phantoms and illusions; and when it shines on earth, it 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    33
touches mortals with romance and madness.  43  And yet Diana vies with Pro-
teus: the image of the moon can also stand for spotless purity. One tradition 
popular in Galileo’s time linked the immaculate moon to the Immaculata or 
Virgin Mary,  pulchra ut luna  (“beautiful as the moon,” in a phrase from the 
Song of Songs), who was pictured standing on a ﬂ awless, transparent sphere.  44  
The telescope dismantled that image forever, except as a relic of holy purity 
superimposed on nature. But the eclipse of one iconographical convention 
did not establish another. Cigoli’s cratered and spotted moon, in the great 
fresco he painted at Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome (1612), undoubtedly 
derives from Galileo’s lunar message. Yet Cigoli’s maculate sphere, more suit-
able for the Woman of the Apocalypse than for the Virgin,  45  had little or 
no effect on later artists. The Galilean earth-like moon deﬁ ed conventional 
otherworldly representations. 
 Nevertheless, what Galileo saw and what he drew clearly have a source 
in what painters already had seen. The key was “secondary light”: the light 
reﬂ ected from a bright surface onto a surface that shines more dimly with a 
radiance not its own. When Renaissance artists painted interiors, they often 
exploited this effect quite brilliantly; and by analogy Leonardo, in a series of 
notebook entries, reasoned that the  lumen cinereum  or “ashen light” that bathes 
the shaded surface of the new moon must really be “earthshine,” reﬂ ected 
from the face of the earth.  46  Long afterward, in 1604, Kepler explained the 
phenomenon at length in his  Optics .  47  But Galileo makes this discovery his 
own by combining the perspectives of an artist and an astronomer with his 
personal observations.  Sidereus Nuncius  mocks philosophers who had attrib-
uted the ashen light to emanations from the moon itself, to a shine cast from 
Venus or the stars, or to penetrating rays from the sun. Those theories are 
childish nonsense. The truth is that “in an equal and grateful exchange the 
Earth pays back the Moon with light equal to that which she receives from 
the Moon almost all the time in the deepest darkness of the night.” Still more, 
understanding the role of secondary light refutes the anti-Copernican claim 
that “the Earth is to be excluded from the dance of the stars”; “For we will 
demonstrate that she is movable and surpasses the Moon in brightness, and 
that she is not the dump heap of the ﬁ lth and dregs of the universe” (55, 57). 
A kind of terrestrial patriotism inspires the celebration of earthshine. 
 Galileo’s seven sepia drawings—in brown ink diluted and diversiﬁ ed by a 
series of washes—subtly convey the mutual dance of moonlight and earth-
light. A remarkable variety of contrasted shadings, ﬁ lling the gaps between 
pitch dark and absolute brightness (untouched white paper) with stipples 
and mottled grays that look truly ashen, alert the viewer to the weakness of 
eyes that perceive the moon only as something that shines. Here darkness 
has its own iridescence and presence. Galileo is trying to see the moon as a 

34    WHAT GALILEO SAW
place, not merely an image.  48  Samuel Edgerton suggests that in these moon-
scapes Galileo “has anticipated the independent landscape in the history of 
art. His almost impressionistic technique for rendering ﬂ eeting light effects 
reminds us of Constable and Turner, and perhaps even Monet.”  49  Yet moon-
scapes differ from landscapes; they are an alien light show, ﬂ oating in space—
less Constable than Rothko. Aside from the absence of ﬁ ne detail, the faces 
that the moon turns toward the earth present an unearthly, dramatic line—a 
 terminator —between light and dark, a line that Galileo can rufﬂ e but cannot 
erase. Nor can the telescope ﬁ nally close the distance between the perceiver 
and what is perceived. Galileo’s pictures require a technique that will some-
how make that remote and eerie circle resemble the earth. In particular, as 
an artist he needed to solve a problem posed by what he understood as well 
as what he saw: how to paint an apparently two-dimensional, ﬂ at surface in 
such a way as to suggest a third dimension of mountains, valleys, and seas. 
Formal perspective, at that distance, could only hint at this rugged terrain. 
But chiaroscuro and secondary light enabled him to bring the moon closer 
to home. No one before had ever captured the play of reﬂ ections that adum-
brate heights and depths on the moon, and, by extension, allow us to think 
of the earth itself as a globe moving through space.  50  
 These ﬁ ne effects of light do not appear, however, in the pictures that 
illustrate  Sidereus Nuncius . The striking differences between the original 
drawings and the printed illustrations, composed only months apart, provoke 
speculation. In 2005 the “discovery” of a set of watercolors of the moon, 
in a previously unknown copy of  Sidereus Nuncius , electriﬁ ed scholars who 
thought they had found a missing link. Unfortunately both the book and its 
pictures turned out to be forged.  51  Galileo supplied no link. Yet he clearly 
did intend to revise his ﬁ rst lunar sightings. A letter to an unknown cor-
respondent ( January 7, 1610) includes ﬁ ve sketches of the moon and four 
of craters, as well as verbal descriptions that he would repeat in his book.  52  
Moreover, he probably made the printed illustrations himself. A roughness 
in the execution of the prints, which appear less skillful than the work of a 
professional engraver, suggests that they were etched; etching, an amateur’s 
medium, would not have required Galileo to master the difﬁ cult technique 
of engraving.  53  In any event, the relatively coarse hatching inscribed by the 
burin cannot hope to reproduce the delicate gleam of washes. The pictures 
in  Sidereus Nuncius  are cruder than the earlier moonscapes in Florence, and its 
etchings ﬂ atten the depths envisioned by Galileo (see  ﬁ g. 2  ).  54  
 Yet the difference between the Florentine drawings and printed pictures 
may also expose a tension in what Galileo saw and wanted to show. From one 
point of view, he might have been painting a moonscape; but from another, 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    35
 Figure 2 . Galileo’s etchings of the moon from  Sidereus Nuncius  (1610). Northwestern University 
Library. 

36    WHAT GALILEO SAW
he might have been making a map. Here another set of conventions or other 
ways of seeing and picturing come into play. Galileo was well versed in 
those ways. As a young man he gave two lectures at the prestigious Floren-
tine Academy on the topography of Dante’s Hell—its layout, location, and 
size  55  —and though he later stopped agreeing with Dante that the earth was 
the dump heap of the universe, he never lost his knack for visualizing how 
things are positioned and move in space. His mind’s eye grasped so much, in 
fact, that historians still argue about whether some of his studies of motion 
were thought experiments or actually tested in practice.  56  He also taught car-
tography. The great age of voyaging and exploration had stimulated an age 
of increasingly sophisticated mapmaking, which proved valuable for military 
as well as colonial ventures. Several of Galileo’s early inventions had military 
applications; and in an era of warring city-states the telescope itself quite soon 
excited interest in prospects for long-distance spying. If maps collected a store 
of useful knowledge for travelers, they also stirred thoughts of possession. 
 Galileo was not the ﬁ rst observer to chart the moon. Around 1600 
William Gilbert, the great English philosopher of magnetism, drew a full 
sketch of the features he saw (or thought he saw) with his naked eye, including 
continents, seas, and islands. He even provided names; as might be expected 
from Queen Elizabeth’s court physician, one island is called “Brittannia” 
[ sic ].  57  That sketch was not published until 1651, nor could Galileo have seen 
the primitive telescopic “map” of the moon that Thomas Harriot drew in 
July 1609. In any case those observers were bafﬂ ed by what they dimly saw. 
When Sir William Lower reported to Harriot on what his “cylinder” had 
descried, he understood that he was looking at earthshine, not the man in 
the moon, but the rest was a jumble: “In the full she appeares like a tarte that 
my cooke made me the last weeke. Here a vaine of bright stuffe, and there 
of darke, and so confusedlie al over.” Only after Lower and Harriot read  Sid-
ereus Nuncius  did they begin to appreciate how much more might be seen.  58  
Galileo alone had comprehended the design of what he observed, and the 
honor of discovery belonged to him. Raw sightings and crude charts were 
not enough to make a Columbus or a Magellan; a true explorer had to open 
the way to a new world where others might follow. 
 The starry messenger opened that way. In terms of accuracy as well as 
artistic merit, the printed pictures take a distinct step backward from Galileo’s 
ﬁ rst drawings. But a map is not, nor is it intended to be, the thing it represents. 
Instead of an illusion of reality, it offers a scheme of relations, in which the 
often muddled shapes and vistas that meet the eye resolve into intelligible and 
clearly distinguished marks and points. Maps, like names, contract the richness 
of the world into abbreviations and simpliﬁ cations, and necessarily distort it. 

WHAT GALILEO SAW    37
The pictures in  Sidereus Nuncius  exaggerate what Galileo saw; they force 
the viewer to interpret some appearances as he did. Hence the ambiguous 
shades of the drawings now suggest discrete topographical features, while the 
“uneven, rough, and very sinuous” terminator calls attention to the depres-
sions and bulges that Galileo envisioned. Still more dramatic is the very large 
and perfectly round “cavity” or crater that straddles the terminator just below 
the middle, as if it were the navel of the moon. Three of the ﬁ ve illustrations 
in  Sidereus Nuncius  highlight that spot. Yet no such feature appears in the 
earliest drawings. Perhaps Galileo remembered, from his sightings, the crater 
Albategnius; and perhaps, as Owen Gingerich suggests, he was registering its 
“psychological impact” rather than its true size.  59  Circles did cast a spell on 
Galileo. Alexandre Koyré remarks the obsession with circularity that tied him 
to older ideas of heavenly motions and may have kept him from recogniz-
ing Kepler’s elliptical orbits.  60  But Galileo’s text explicitly enlists the crater as 
“a very strong argument for the roughnesses and unevennesses scattered over 
the entire brighter region of the moon.” Like a Bohemian valley enclosed in a 
perfect circle by very high mountains, the cavity is bathed in sunlight on the 
dark side of the dividing line between light and shadow (47).  61  Once again 
Galileo maps the earth onto the moon. The huge mountain range in the 
drawing marked “5,” and the little study at the lower right of the ﬁ rst moon 
drawing, an elegant exercise in modeling depth through light and shade, seem 
trial runs for a more conclusive proof of what the artist meant to show. In 
print the crater is impossible to overlook. Its bold relief draws the eye and 
neatly balances the composition by placing a circular bowl within another 
circle, a tiny crescent moon within the moon. Like Wallace Stevens’s jar in 
Tennessee, it makes the slovenly wilderness surround that hill—or rather, hole. 
Hence the crater functions, in several ways, as a  landmark : a means of orienting 
the viewer; a proof of heights and depths on the land of the moon; a feature 
that no one else had discovered; a beacon engraved on a map. 
 In all these ways the landmark ministers to human needs, the rage for 
meaning and order. Whether or not Galileo saw such a crater, or something 
like it, he needed it to organize his pictures. The illustrations implicitly claim 
a right to heighten or even to tamper with the evidence of the eye. Artists 
have always enjoyed that prerogative, and Galileo was surely an artist.  62  But 
more important, he was an explorer, who had to communicate not only the 
reality of what he had found but also its signiﬁ cance and excitement. And 
like other explorers, he seems to have felt the special pride and privileges of 
ownership. As proprietor of the moon, he was responsible for keeping it up; 
other people must be instructed to see it in the right way. The text and maps 
offer a guide to the nature of the moon, not merely to its surface. Hence 

38    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Sidereus Nuncius  too is a landmark. It represents a means of orientation, an 
urgent message that cannot be overlooked. Later explorers would see more 
and draw more accurate maps, but they could not share that sense of revela-
tion. The ﬁ rst discoverer claims the right to name what he alone has seen, as 
Galileo names the moons of Jupiter “the Medicean Stars.” 
 Glory and Darkness 
 Glory was certainly very much on Galileo’s mind. The dedication to the little 
book begins with images of immortality, the monuments created by sculp-
tors and poets to keep great names alive, and then moves on to the stars, 
where human ingenuity has contrived to translate “the fame of Jupiter, Mars, 
Mercury, Hercules, and other heroes” into incorruptible symbols. Henceforth 
a new hero, young Cosimo II de’ Medici, will be emblazoned in the sky.  63  This 
master stroke of courtiership deﬂ ects attention from the observer to the divine 
and human grace that had inspired him. The Medici myth had long been tied 
to Jupiter, and Cosimo to the cosmos, so they were surely entitled to ascen-
dance. All glory to the patron.  64  And Galileo duly won his reward, an appoint-
ment as Cosimo’s philosopher and mathematician, as well as a highly lucrative 
nonteaching professorship at Pisa. A humble satellite could not ask for more. 
 If the grand duke’s name was written on high, however, a secondary light 
shone intensely on his servant and former tutor: 
 Since I was evidently inﬂ uenced by divine inspiration to serve Your 
Highness and to receive from so close the rays of your incredible clem-
ency and kindness, is it any wonder that my soul was so inﬂ amed that 
day and night it reﬂ ected on almost nothing else than how I, most 
desirous of Your glory (since I am not only by desire but also by origin 
and nature under Your dominion), might show how very grateful I am 
toward You. (32) 
 These astronomical images, however fawning, extend the radiance of Cosimo 
to everyone in his orbit, as in the solar system itself. A similar appeal to family 
likenesses allows an unusually direct and daring assertion of Copernicanism: 
the “Medicean Stars” speed around Jupiter “with mutually different motions, 
like children of the same family, while meanwhile all together, in mutual har-
mony, complete their great revolutions every twelve years about the center of 
the world, that is, about the Sun itself” (31). Here the cosmos and the patron-
age system mirror each other, reﬂ ecting glory all around.  65  Indeed, the Medici 
name, according to Galileo, lends honor to the stars, and everyone who saw 
them in the future would murmur that name. But Galileo had christened 
them; he had changed the heavens, and henceforth would himself be a star.  66  

WHAT GALILEO SAW    39
 Nor would his life be the same. As more and more observers cast fresh 
looks at the skies, and reported and argued about the new things they saw 
there, Galileo’s world also expanded. Even if he was not the ﬁ rst to identify 
sunspots, it was he who understood what they portended, “the Last Judg-
ment of pseudophilosophy,” as the immutability of the heavens shattered for-
ever.  67  The  Letters on Sunspots  (1613) are decorous, by Galileo’s standards; they 
condescend to lesser minds but do not savage them, nor do they claim to have 
solved every problem they raise. Yet no one could ignore their self-esteem. In 
the last of the letters, the author assumes something close to the royal “we” 
as he associates himself with human progress: “It seems to me, moreover, 
that we degrade our condition too much, not without offending Nature to 
a certain extent, and, I would almost say, divine Goodness—who, to help us 
understand His vast ediﬁ ce, has granted to us 2000 more years of observa-
tions and vision twenty times as acute as what Aristotle had—by preferring 
to learn from that philosopher what he did not and could not know, rather 
than from our eyes and our own discussions.”  68  Nature gave Galileo the tele-
scope, and he will not insult her by inferring that her purposes—and those of 
Providence—might differ from his own. Such pride was justiﬁ ed, to be sure. 
In general he was right (though not about Saturn, comets, or tides), and his 
opponents were wrong. But more than that, he felt that he owned the skies. 
When he looked at sunspots, as when he ﬁ rst observed the moon nearby, he 
saw what no human being had ever seen before: not only earthshaking phe-
nomena but also their meaning. For the moment he stood alone, uniquely 
relishing his vantage on the hill of truth. Moreover, he thought that he could 
look from there into the future, where new observations would conﬁ rm “the 
great Copernican system, to whose universal revelation we see such favorable 
breezes and bright escorts directing us, that we now have little to fear from 
darkness and cross-winds”—like the clouds and winds on the sun.  69  
 Those breezes, like Walter Benjamin’s storm called progress, were also 
irresistibly propelling the great explorer into the future, and they would leave 
destruction in their wake.  70  In 1613 Galileo did not foresee the strength of 
resistance to changing the heavens, nor the frailty of his protection. The 
wonderful conﬁ dence that prompted him to deliver opinions on everything 
that happened in the skies, and even to adjust the face of the moon in 
order to make a point, betrayed him in the end. Nor did his eyes retain 
their cunning. His sight began to fail in the 1620s, and by 1637, four years 
after his condemnation, he was completely blind. If the skies were no longer 
his domain, however, his mind’s eye and memory ﬂ ourished. His last and 
arguably greatest work, the dialogues on  Two New Sciences  (1638), returned 
to his early interest in the science of motion and mechanics. Drawing on 
experiments performed and imagined, it pioneered key principles of modern 

40    WHAT GALILEO SAW
engineering, and even includes a digression on sound that might have satis-
ﬁ ed the inquisitive man in the fable.  71  The restless, lynx-eyed mind could still 
see farther than others. 
 Yet the world that he saw had changed. The skies had come closer, and now 
reﬂ ected the turmoil of earth itself; the authorities, not the explorer, owned the 
moon. Galileo now saw what he had been told to see. In one of his ﬁ nal let-
ters, he insisted that the Copernican system must be false, on “the irrefragable 
authority of Holy Scripture interpreted by the greatest masters in theology.” 
Experience had taught him again, as in the fable of sound, not “to pretend to 
hamper God’s hand and tenaciously maintain that in which we may be mis-
taken.”  72  But geocentric systems like those of Ptolemy and his followers were 
even  more  false, refuted by observations and the deductions of human reason. 
At the horizon everything moved, and instruments could not measure whether 
the earth or the stars were the source of that motion. The order of the heavens 
had fallen apart; no one could be certain that what he saw there would stay. 
 A Fable of Seeing 
 Once upon a time, in a very high place, a man was born with amazing insight 
and an extraordinary curiosity. In the evening he loved to look at the sky, and 
with the eye of an artist he wondered at the order he saw there, the stately 
procession of constellations, the moon and planets and stars, serene and beau-
tiful. They were so perfect, so different from his own world. Then one day 
he walked off the beaten track and found a pair of twisted spectacles; and 
when he put them on, they seemed to have been made for him. Suddenly the 
heavens came near. The moon swelled above his head; the planets and stars 
grew sharp and distinct. He felt that he could reach out and touch them. And 
when he did reach out his hand he saw that its movements were in harmony 
with those of the moon and the planets. They were his neighbors, no longer 
distant and cold. Soon they became his other home. He knew they were like 
the earth, rough restless places forever spinning, and he knew he was moving 
too. That knowledge was power. He used that power to shape the sky into 
new ﬁ gures, no longer serene, but precise as a line or a circle; and what he 
shaped, he saw. He liked the roving, unfamiliar sky that he had made. Then 
he felt the earth shaking beneath him, and other people also felt it shake. 
They started to look strangely at him. Rich landowners, who ruled that place, 
told him that he had unsettled their property; they bound him and kept him 
from moving. But still the earth shook, and still he gazed at the sky. And 
even when he grew blind, he felt the earth shake, and he felt the sky move, 
and knew he had changed them forever. 

41
  Chapter 3 
 Kepler’s Progress 
 Imagining the Future 
 I 
 The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake : Past, Present, and Future 
 As Johannes Kepler walked across the great Charles Bridge in Prague, one 
day in 1610, ﬂ akes of snow began to fall on his coat, and he suddenly noticed 
something remarkable: all of them had six corners and feathered radii, like 
tiny tufted stars. Why six, never ﬁ ve or seven? There must be a reason. Kepler 
loved puzzles, and this one arrested and ﬁ xed his wandering mind. He looked 
high and low for an answer—perhaps in heaven, from which those stars had 
descended, perhaps on earth. And since he was used to trying out his ideas by 
writing them down, he soon wrote a little book on the cause of that unac-
countable ﬁ gure. 
 Strena, Seu de Nive Sexangula  ( A New Year’s Gift, or On the Six-Cornered Snow-
ﬂ ake , 1611) is a self-confessed triﬂ e. The title already brands the text as a pres-
ent for Kepler’s friend and patron Johannes Matthäus Wacker von Wackenfels, 
counselor at the imperial court, and the introduction plays on Wacker’s special 
fondness for little nothings. Even the subject matter forwards the joke, since  nix , 
the Latin for “snowﬂ ake,” sounds in some German dialects just like  nichts , or 
“nothing.”  1  This book, the author insists, is no more than a droplet, as close to 
insigniﬁ cant as any gift could be. Indeed, its ﬁ nal words, before “The End,” are 
 Nihil sequitur  : “Nothing to follow.” That prophecy did not prevent a number 

42    WHAT GALILEO SAW
of scholars, including Descartes, from picking up the thread that the book had 
laid down.  2  Nonetheless it remains obscure, unmentioned by many studies of 
Kepler. 
 Yet  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake  might also be taken as an epitome of 
Kepler’s work. In its search for the cause of a geometry inscribed in nature, 
an archetypal or divine mathematics, it follows in miniature the course of his 
quest for celestial designs, the geometrical patterns that shape the cosmos and 
underlie the harmony of the world. In its effort to bridge the gap between 
mathematical abstractions and the tangible, particular phenomena that bring 
them to life, it meshes with his revolution in astronomy, his stubborn refusal 
to separate the calculations of astronomers from the actual movements of 
physical bodies, stars, planets, the sun, and the earth. In its constant testing 
of theories, a habit of mind that launches one hypothesis after another and 
then relentlessly probes their faults, as Kepler dispels his own speculations on 
snowﬂ akes, it draws on the method that he applied to celestial physics: the 
scrupulous, painstaking task of checking the numbers, and refusing to doc-
tor them when they clash with his best ideas. In its oscillation between an 
ancient, animistic view of nature and progressive modern insights that often 
appear to be centuries ahead of their time, it recalls the “watershed” between 
old and new sciences where historians customarily place Kepler, with one 
foot in the universe of Pythagoras, Aristotle, Plato, Proclus, and Galen and 
the other in the emerging worlds of Copernicus, Galileo, Descartes, New-
ton, and Einstein.  3  And like all his writings, it offers not only evidence and 
deductions but also a glimpse of Kepler’s own agile mind at work, which 
creatively strives to mirror the image in which it was made, the mind of God. 
 Moreover, the idiom of  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake , the quirky, personal 
style that is Kepler’s trademark, at once serene and agitated, conveys at every 
point a sense of the distinctive way he imagines the world. That imagina-
tion is interactive; it looks for a soul and purpose like its own in everything 
that exists, in even a snowﬂ ake. In that respect his curiosity acknowledges no 
limits. He tries to see the universe from the varying perspectives of each of its 
parts, adopting the point of view of a comet, a dog, a plant, a moon dweller, 
or water vapor at the moment when it is translated into a dainty crystal. Most 
of all, his point of view moves through the heavens; it is heliocentric not only 
in theory but also through an active adjustment of vision, which peers into 
space like the Kepler Satellite of our own times. When Kepler discovered that 
the planets moved in elliptical orbits, against his own instinctive attraction to 
perfect circles as well as the unchallenged circular reasoning of all astronomers, 
the crucial turn was his decision to center his calculations on “the actual body 
of the sun.”  4  He had to imagine, for the ﬁ rst time, a genuine solar system. 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    43
 Kepler’s lifework reﬂ ects that adjustment of vision. The  New Astronomy 
(1609) originated in 1600 as “Commentaries on Mars,” when the great 
astronomer Tycho Brahe tested his would-be assistant by assigning him to 
work out the notoriously difﬁ cult “theory of Mars,” its path through space. 
Kepler expected to do this in a few months. Instead it took more than ﬁ ve 
years and required him to conceive two radically new models of motion, 
Kepler’s ﬁ rst two Laws: planets move in ellipses with the sun at one focus; 
and in the plane of the orbit the radius vector (the line between the planet 
and the sun) sweeps out equal areas in equal times. But what held the system 
in place was a power or force (magnetic, he thought) exerted by the sun.  5  
Mars did not guide itself. Even if some planetary intelligence or angel steered 
it, Kepler surmised, its route would be too complex for that intelligence to 
ﬁ nd its bearings. But the sun could orient it; and once that one great central 
power was put in charge, the task of computing and predicting the orbits 
became much simpler. For Kepler, who worshipped the sun as an image or 
symbol of God, this proof of its dominion was profoundly satisfying.  6  His 
imagination paid homage to it; and so did his calculations. 
 To enter the point of view of a snowﬂ ake presented a different sort of 
challenge, however. For one thing, the hexagonal pattern seemed to lack any 
useful function. In an age when it was supposed that everything in nature 
had been designed to serve some greater good, especially the good of human 
beings, such sports of nature needed to be explained. The laws of the solar 
system testiﬁ ed to a benevolent Creator whose geometry sustained order and 
life in the most economical way. But, as Kepler admitted, “no purpose can 
really be observed in the formation of a snowﬂ ake, nor does the six-cornered 
ﬁ gure make the snowﬂ ake last long, or make a natural body into a well-
deﬁ ned, ﬁ xed, and durable form” (32). Here nature seemed to be  playing , or 
at best contriving a pretty form to adorn ephemeral matter. In a remarkable 
image, Kepler compares the snowﬂ ake to Olympias (the mother of Alexander 
the Great), who when slain by assassins took care (according to Euripides) 
“not to fall ungracefully or shamelessly” (34). A graceful attitude redeems 
the death of each dispensable ﬂ ake. This is imaginative, and certainly shows 
the writer, like nature, at play. Yet it also threatens to reduce the patterns of 
nature to a trivial game, if not to nothing. 
 Nevertheless, the player ﬁ nds a principle, a shaping spirit or formative 
faculty (   facultas formatrix ), in the starlets that fall on his coat. Just as William 
Blake can see “a World in a Grain of Sand,” so Kepler perceives a world 
soul at work in the snowﬂ ake: a spirit inherent in Earth itself, which “in 
accord with the internal state of each material or something external builds 
one thing or another” (34). This spirit or master builder provides a universal 

44    WHAT GALILEO SAW
rationale for all the puzzles and patterns of nature. At the same time, however, 
it conjures up a world of magical thinking, potentially hostile to science. The 
all-creating vital principle of form can account for the process by which 
anything is generated; Kepler resorts to the adjective  formatrix twelve times in 
 The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake . But its secret and mysterious power evades any 
possibility of a test or a proof. In this respect Kepler seems to follow the ways 
of ancient animists such as Lucretius, or the popular mysticism of Paracel-
sus.  7  The search for a primal geometrical cause of the shape of a snowﬂ ake 
tempts him to posit a like-minded author or spirit, deliberately molding a 
form that expresses its own archetypal being. “Since it is quite certain that 
souls themselves incorporate quantities in their innermost essence—whether 
with or without physical matter, I will not debate—it is reasonable that they 
should incorporate shapely rather than rough quantities, and, if shapely, why 
not regular, solid shapes, since souls are not attached to surfaces but to solid 
bodies” (36). Hence the Earth-spirit replicates its favorite shape, the six-
cornered octahedron, in the snowﬂ ake as in the diamond. Imagination has 
carried Kepler away. But immediately he recognizes his folly: “Am I now 
presenting the soul of the thrice-greatest animal, the globe of the earth, in 
an atom of snow?” (38). And providentially the snow again begins to fall, 
and when he examines the starlets “none of them was anything but ﬂ at” 
(38)—not three-dimensional octahedrons at all. So his mystical excursion has 
come to nothing.  8  Perhaps this reversal marks the essential spirit of Kepler. 
Devoted to ﬂ ights of fancy and magical thinking, he also can turn on himself 
with skeptical matter-of-factness and rigorous logic. 
 Both sides of Kepler are involved in the stories he tells.  The Six-Cornered 
Snowﬂ ake  is far from a straightforward treatise. Like virtually all his publica-
tions, it winds about and takes the reader into his hesitations and divagations 
and sudden changes of course. Even his major works often present their 
theses obliquely, in a stream of consciousness that dwells on the process of 
discovery, and the many missteps along the way, rather than on the results. 
It is characteristic of Kepler that his greatest insights, including the laws that 
changed the cosmos, tend to be introduced as outgrowths or digressions from 
some larger argument.  Mysterium Cosmographicum  ( The Secret of the Universe , 
1597), the book that made Kepler’s name and attracted Brahe’s attention, sets 
forth a theory that stunned and thrilled its author: the distances between 
the planets are proportioned to the ﬁ ve “Platonic solids” or polyhedra (the 
four-sided tetrahedron; the six-sided cube; the eight-sided octahedron; the 
twelve-sided dodecahedron; the twenty-sided icosahedron). That was why 
there could be no more than six planets; God had used geometry to build the 
solar system, and now his plan had been revealed.  9  In the long run, as more 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    45
planets swam into view, this wonderful idea would collapse. But in support-
ing it Kepler casually broached some incidental theories—the relation of the 
periods of the planets to their distance from the sun, and the power of the 
sun to move them—that would last forever. 
 Similarly, the  Harmonice Mundi  ( The Harmony of the World , 1619) erects a 
magniﬁ cent ediﬁ ce to demonstrate that all the universe obeys an unheard 
music, precise mathematical regularities or harmonies that not only derive 
from God but also show us an image of God the Creator. Yet the crowning 
touch, the Third Law, which laid a foundation for Newton—the squares 
of the periods of the planets are proportional to the cubes of their mean dis-
tances from the sun—is tucked away among the eighth of thirteen proposi-
tions in book 5, chapter 3. In fact Kepler discovered it only after most of the 
book had already been written. He weaves this revelation into a little story, 
with the aid of a quotation from Virgil’s ﬁ rst Eclogue. For seventeen years he 
had been laboring on the observations passed down by Tycho, as the shep-
herd Tityrus had been held in place by his love for the nymph Galatea. But 
after she left him, Tityrus ﬁ rst saw Rome, thanks to “Freedom, who, though 
late, yet cast her eyes upon my sluggishness / . . . Yet cast her eyes on me, 
and after a long time she came.”  10  Kepler cleverly associates his delay in ﬁ rst 
seeing “Rome,” the pinnacle of his research, with servitude to Tycho, and 
celebrates the exact day of his release from darkness, May 15, 1618, when his 
laborious star charts and beautiful theories conspired together and brought 
forth harmony.  11  Yet soon this particular vision closes. He turns back to his 
cosmic theme, and the book ends with a hymn to God and the conductor of 
God’s orchestra, the sun. 
 There is no such climax in the story of  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake . It cir-
cles around to confessing, “This thing is not yet comprehensible to me” (42). 
Kepler lacked the tools to solve his problem. More than 300 years would 
pass before scientists were able to formulate a relatively adequate explana-
tion: “The hexagonal symmetry of a snow crystal is a macroscopic, outward 
manifestation of the internal arrangement of the atoms in ice.”  12  Kepler 
knew nothing, of course, about oxygen and hydrogen atoms, and in any case 
he doubted the existence of atoms, whose champions were likely to favor 
minute invisible material causes of all phenomena, rather than a foundational 
geometry that left nothing to chance. Yet he did acknowledge where an 
answer might be found. At the end of the book he shrewdly passes the prob-
lem on to metallurgists and especially to chemists, who will need to analyze 
what snowﬂ akes are made of. This intuition proved to be quite prescient. 
Still more, Kepler had pioneered the science of crystallography. Almost a 
third of the little book consists of a long “parenthesis” or “preamble” that 

46    WHAT GALILEO SAW
considers the reasons why the six-cornered rhombus seems to provide the 
most efﬁ cient form for packing solid bodies together, as in the honeycomb 
or the pomegranate. This way of ﬁ lling space, Kepler concludes, is the pattern 
that “God himself, creator of the bee, designed when He set down for it the 
laws of its architecture” (16–18). When equal pellets or congruent spheres, 
like cannonballs, are stacked for maximum density, they take the form of 
either face-centered cubic packing or hexagonal packing. “The packing will 
make the tightest ﬁ t, so that no other arrangement could squeeze more pellets 
into the same container” (14). Kepler’s Conjecture was to become one of the 
most famous of all geometrical or mathematical problems. It resisted solu-
tion until 1998, when the mathematician Thomas C. Hales announced that 
he had conﬁ rmed it (assisted by computers and Samuel P. Ferguson).  13  Not 
for the ﬁ rst or last time, one of Kepler’s asides turned out to found a ﬁ eld. 
 The full signiﬁ cance of  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake , moreover, may not 
have been realized yet. In a foreword to the 1966 edition, Lancelot Law 
Whyte contended that “ This essay is the ﬁ rst recorded step towards a mathemati-
cal theory of the genesis of inorganic or organic forms , a theory which still lies in 
the future” (v-vi). Perhaps that future now looms even larger. Twenty-ﬁ rst-
century science, Freeman Dyson predicts, will follow a track envisioned by 
the microbiologist Carl Woese, exploring the dynamic patterns of inorganic 
or organic forms. “This picture of living creatures, as patterns of organi-
zation rather than collections of molecules, applies not only to bees and 
bacteria, butterﬂ ies and rain forests, but also to sand dunes and snowﬂ akes, 
thunderstorms and hurricanes. The nonliving universe is as diverse and as 
dynamic as the living universe, and is also dominated by patterns of orga-
nization that are not yet understood.”  14  Though Kepler could hardly have 
anticipated the genetic codes and computer models that led to these new 
pictures of bees and snowﬂ akes, the general line of thought might not have 
seemed strange to him. He had asked similar questions about the genesis of 
forms, or the wedding of geometry and creation, and his conjectures about 
the mathematical architectonics of nature often look fresh today. This is an 
ongoing conversation he helped to begin. 
 Nor would he have been surprised to learn that his ideas were still being 
talked about in the future. He was willing to wait for others to catch up to 
him; a hundred years might pass, he suspected, before the Third Law found 
the right readers.  15  But he also enjoyed the give-and-take of exchanging 
views or arguing with predecessors and contemporaries. A love of con-
versation pervades all Kepler’s work.  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake  begins by 
personally addressing its dedicatee Wacker, and ﬁ nishes by asking “what 
an exceptionally clever man thinks” (44). Internally, the sense of dialogue 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    47
is sustained by frequent interjections: “You may ask how I know this . . .,” 
“Someone may think . . .,” “You might argue thus . . .,” “Someone else may 
object . . .”. Soon after Kepler raises his opening question—why always six?—
a crucial remark slides by in a ﬂ ash. “When I had a conversation about this 
with someone recently, we ﬁ rst agreed that the cause was not to be sought 
in any material, but in an agent” (6–8). Kepler had many conversational 
partners in Prague. But it is also possible that the text is covertly referring 
to Thomas Harriot, the English natural philosopher, who had pondered 
these matters and might have shared his thoughts in correspondence long 
before the snowﬂ akes had fallen on Kepler’s coat. Had Harriot published his 
hypotheses, he might well have claimed a place as the founding father of sev-
eral ﬁ elds, including crystallography.  16  But Kepler cannot be fairly accused 
of concealing his debts. His speculations on snowﬂ akes do not pretend to 
offer important, original theories. Instead they enter a social world and try 
to engage a few friends and readers in joint, open-ended detective work that 
will probably come to nothing. This play of mind should be its own reward; 
it keeps up the conversation. 
 Conversing with Galileo 
 A similar love of conversation sparks the historic little book that Kepler had 
published the previous year, his  Conversation with the Sidereal Messenger  (1610). 
Soon after Galileo’s  Sidereus Nuncius  came out in March 1610, with its elec-
trifying telescopic revelations, he sent a copy to the Tuscan ambassador at 
Prague, asking him to pass it on to Kepler and to solicit a written reply. Most 
other experts responded cautiously, and more than a few expressed hostility 
or doubts about what Galileo claimed to have seen. But Kepler greeted the 
book with praise and conviction, almost with ecstasy. By April 19, eleven 
days after receiving it, he dispatched a long letter to Galileo, and within a few 
weeks an expanded version of that letter appeared in print. This was a happy 
moment for Galileo. Amid the initial storm and controversy over his message, 
while its fate still hung in the balance, one of Europe’s foremost astronomers, 
His Sacred Imperial Majesty’s Mathematician, had publicly declared his belief 
in these marvelous sightings. 
 Kepler, as usual, makes his reactions into a story. He had ﬁ rst heard about 
the four new “planets” around March 15 from Wacker, who told him the 
news “from his carriage in front of my house.”  17  Both men were overcome 
with intense astonishment and joyful laughter. But Kepler also felt anxious. 
Any increase in the number of planets would refute his favorite theory, the 
proportion between the six time-honored “celestial spheres” or planets and 

48    WHAT GALILEO SAW
the ﬁ ve Platonic solids; and as Wacker gleefully pointed out, Galileo’s amazing 
discoveries also supported Giordano Bruno’s speculation—strongly opposed 
by Kepler—that there might be an inﬁ nite number of other worlds.  18  Then 
the arrival of the book restored him to life. The new planets were actually 
Jupiter’s moons, and easily accommodated to a closed solar system; they did 
not back the heresies of Bruno and Wacker. Kepler’s relief casts a glow over 
his friendly tribute to Galileo. 
 At the same time the  Conversation  departs from the  Message in every way. 
The two little books could hardly be more different in genre, substance, and 
style. Their opposition begins with the two titles. Galileo announces a mes-
sage straight from the stars, a series of objective facts and descriptions that 
brook no dissent. These observations report exactly what he has seen, and 
even when he interprets the features he sees—for instance, by comparing the 
moon to the earth—he offers his views less as arguments than as clariﬁ ca-
tions. His spyglasses have brought the heavens nearer, and the heavens speak 
for themselves. To some extent the ambiguity of  nuncius , which readers like 
Kepler often understood as “messenger” rather than “message,” reinforces 
the sense of cosmic objectivity, as if the author as well as his message had 
descended as an ambassador from some unearthly, infallible realm. But Kepler 
chose another mode of discourse. His  dissertatio is clearly not a thesis but a 
conversation  with a fellow thinker, and it constantly brings other scholars and 
acquaintances into the circle of discussion. Wacker, Tycho, Michael Maest-
lin (Kepler’s teacher), and many more have something to contribute. Nor 
does Kepler hesitate to veer from one topic to another, or to draw his own 
novel conclusions from Galileo’s descriptions. Thus the large cavity, perfectly 
round, on the face of the moon, which Galileo had adduced or invented to 
show that its lights and shadows resemble Bohemian valleys surrounded by 
mountains, suggests to Kepler the “trained hand” of massive living beings 
who could be capable of constructing gigantic projects (28). (The way in 
which such round bowls do  not resemble elongated Bohemian valleys also 
leads the Bohemian Kepler to guess that the moon might be porous.) Under 
the pressure of these conversational gambits, Galileo’s ﬁ rm message breaks 
down into aperçus. 
 The  Conversation also thrusts Kepler’s own work and ideas aggressively 
between the lines of the  Message . Up until then he had not succeeded in 
getting Galileo’s attention. In 1597, ﬂ ushed with enthusiasm, he had sent 
copies of  The Secret of the Universe  to many qualiﬁ ed scholars, asking for their 
opinions; Galileo replied quickly and courteously that he looked forward to 
reading the book. This prompted an effusive letter from Kepler, who wel-
comed him as a fellow Copernican and implored him to share his thoughts. 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    49
But that did not happen. Galileo kept his thoughts to himself; nor did he later 
respond either publicly or privately to such major publications as Kepler’s 
 Optics  (1604) and  New Astronomy . In many ways Galileo should have been an 
ideal reader. Those works were full of rich calculations and speculations on 
topics that deeply concerned him, including atmospheric refraction, the way 
that the eye perceives images, lunar geography, the periods of the planets, and 
the cause of the tides. Yet he betrayed no sign of being interested, let alone 
inﬂ uenced. Even after the  Conversation , Kepler’s attempts at correspondence 
were not reciprocated. Notoriously, his discovery of the elliptical orbits of 
the planets was never acknowledged by Galileo; and when Kepler conceived 
the design of an improved telescope in his pathbreaking  Dioptrice  (1611), 
with a long preface extolling the sidereal messenger, once again he heard 
nothing from Galileo (who privately complained that he did not understand 
this invention—and neither did Kepler).  19  There are many plausible rea-
sons for such aloofness. Kepler’s blatant Copernicanism, and his assumption 
that Galileo would want to spread the heliocentric gospel, could have been 
embarrassing to an astronomer who had to be careful about the political 
and theological consequences of such positions.  20  Kepler stirred trouble; he 
had too many bright ideas. Moreover, both temperamentally and intellectu-
ally the two were incompatible. To the practical-minded Galileo, who kept 
his feet on the ground even while scanning the heavens, Kepler must have 
looked like a zealot who kept his head in the clouds.  21  
 From this point of view, the  Conversation  doubtless annoyed as well as 
delighted the man whose work it endorsed. Kepler’s tone is deliberately play-
ful. Unlike other debaters, he notes, he prefers to divert and amuse, not just 
to impress: “I seem by nature cut out to lighten the hard work and difﬁ culty 
of a subject by mental relaxation, conveyed by the style” (5). Nor should a 
reader mistake his generous praise for fawning: “I do not think that Galileo, 
an Italian, has treated me, a German, so well that in return I must ﬂ atter him, 
with injury to the truth or to my deepest convictions” (7). Some readers, in 
fact, confused Kepler’s freewheeling interrogation of the  Message with an 
attack. That was surely wrong. But it might not be wrong to think of the 
 Conversation  as a good-natured act of revenge for years of neglect, a constant 
reminder that Kepler too has been discovering new things, and thinking, 
and writing. The  Message had been a monologue, the record of one man’s 
original observations. Kepler sets each of those observations within a context 
of past and present thought, and thus assimilates the new revelations to the 
collective endeavor of astronomers through the ages.  22  However remark-
able, for instance, the telescope had been “announced” many years ago by 
Giambattista della Porta; and Plutarch and other ancients and moderns had 

50    WHAT GALILEO SAW
written about the spots on the moon.  23  These predecessors, Kepler insists, do 
not diminish Galileo’s achievement. Rather, they lend him support by pre-
paring the ground, so that skeptics ought to have faith in what he has done. 
And Galileo, whether or not he knows it, is strong because so many others 
stand with him. 
 Nor is Kepler himself the least of that band. The  Conversation  proper 
begins with Kepler thinking about Galileo; but what he is thinking about 
is what Galileo might think about him. Having just brought out his mas-
terwork, the  New Astronomy , “I supposed that among others Galileo too, 
the most highly qualiﬁ ed of all, would discuss with me by mail the new 
kind of astronomy or celestial physics which I had published, and that he 
would resume our interrupted correspondence, which had begun twelve 
years before” (9). But no. “Instead of reading a book by someone else,” “my 
Galileo” has been exploring the skies. Kepler takes this in good part, not as 
an affront so much as an opportunity for “all lovers of true philosophy” to 
plunge into a new discussion—especially “since I had written on the same 
topic six years before” (11). The pleasantry carries an edge; the last part of 
the  Optics , which Galileo obviously had not looked at, had speciﬁ ed the ways 
that better optical instruments could solve many astronomical problems. But 
Kepler prefers to construe the  Message as an invitation to present his ideas, 
and to acquaint the messenger with some work he has missed. In this new 
partnership, the precision of the telescope, joined to the methods and mea-
surements of Tycho and Kepler, will surpass what anyone could do alone. 
“Therefore let Galileo take his stand by Kepler’s side” (22). 
 Perhaps it was just as well, all the same, that these partners would never 
meet. Each had his own entrenched ideas, and each his vanities. Though 
Kepler freely concedes that on some points the new discoveries have proved 
him wrong—for instance, he had believed that the density and blue color of 
air would obscure and distort distant things, so that “it was vain, I understood, 
to hope that a lens would remove this substance of the intervening air from 
visible things” (18)—he also corrects some of Galileo’s mistakes. On irradia-
tion, for instance, the statement in the  Message  that “the telescope removes 
from the stars their adventitious and accidental splendors” had already been 
refuted by a passage in the  Optics , which had identiﬁ ed the widened retina as 
the agent of those splendors: “The telescope on earth does not remove any-
thing from the stars in heaven, but it does take away from the retina whatever 
light is superﬂ uous” (34). When Galileo claimed that the  Conversation  had 
approved “all the particulars contained in my book, without contradicting or 
doubting a single detail, even the smallest” (122), he was proving once more 
his lack of attention to what Kepler said. 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    51
 He also needed to disregard the nature of Kepler’s approval. Much of the 
 Conversation  is haunted by a phantom text,  The Dream  or  Somnium , “a sort of 
lunar geography” ﬁ rst drafted in 1593 and rewritten in 1609, though pub-
lished posthumously, with added notes, only in 1634.  24  Here Kepler imagines 
himself on the moon and charts its zones, its views of Volva (Earth), its sea-
sons, and its inhabitants. This fantasy, minutely circumstantial, prepares the 
way for his embrace of Galileo’s moon. Yet it also sets the terms of his agree-
ment, or overagreement. The  Conversation  ﬁ lls the space descried by Galileo 
with atmospheric and geographic details, and most of all with other living 
creatures. “I cannot refrain from contributing this additional feature to the 
unorthodox aspects of your ﬁ ndings. It is not improbable, I must point out, 
that there are inhabitants not only on the moon but on Jupiter too” (39).  25  
A theological point supports this inference. Since everything created—even 
a snowﬂ ake—must have some purpose, the moons of Jupiter need to be 
explained.  Cui bono?  “For whose sake, the question arises, if there are no 
people on Jupiter to behold this wonderfully varied display with their own 
eyes? For, as far as we on the earth are concerned, I do not know by what 
arguments I may be persuaded to believe that these planets minister chieﬂ y to 
us, who never see them” (40). Those moons must do someone some good.  26  
Kepler’s logic adds to the glory of Galileo, who has discovered worlds invis-
ible to previous ages, and therefore new creatures, presumably, for God to 
look after. Yet it leaps far beyond the circumspect, workmanlike evidence 
that had inspired it. 
 Kepler leaps further still. Since no astrologer had known or calculated 
on these “planets,” a skeptic might use them to deride astrology itself. 
That would have touched Kepler too, because his career, and the living 
he made, depended heavily on prognostications.  27  In practical terms, what 
the emperor Rudolf II wanted from his Imperial Mathematician consisted 
largely of astrological advice; and in 1608 a horoscope that Kepler prepared 
for an “anonymous nobleman” turned out to have predicted the brilliant 
future of the great commander Wallenstein, who later offered him patron-
age and promised to pay his debts.  28  But Jupiter’s moons could hardly faze 
a prudent and legitimate astrologer. Kepler had consistently maintained that 
the inﬂ uence of the stars had nothing to do with arcane rules and esoteric 
powers, which were no more than “horrible superstitions,” but solely with 
“aspects”—angles “formed at the earth by the luminous rays of two planets.” 
Such rays could shape and guide the activities of sublunary creatures, either 
by affecting their minds or by imparting to the soul some portion of the 
universal harmony of creation. “Obviously the planets themselves do not act 
on us, but their aspects become, by inﬂ uence alone, bridle and spur for those 

52    WHAT GALILEO SAW
minds on earth that partake of the principle” (41). Perhaps Jupiter’s moons 
might “coincide in the aspects,” but their tiny rays could not accomplish 
much. They were mere satellites—a term that Kepler himself invented a 
few months later.  29  Therefore astrology was unscathed. But more important, 
humans need not feel diminished by the newly discovered worlds and their 
inhabitants. Aside from God’s own shining symbol, the sun, “there is no 
globe nobler or more suitable for man than the earth,” which orbits in the 
midst of the other planets and provides the best vantage to see them. “Let 
the Jovians . . . have their own planets. We humans who inhabit the earth can 
with good reason (in my view) feel proud of the pre-eminent lodging place 
of our bodies” (46). Galileo had claimed that the phenomenon of secondary 
light refuted “those who claim that the Earth is to be excluded from the 
dance of the stars,”  30  but Kepler glories in taking his stand on a prime focal 
point. We have come a long way from the  Message . In Kepler’s eyes, the ﬁ nal 
signiﬁ cance of what Galileo has seen, or indeed its “aspect,” is what it allows 
other human beings to imagine. 
 Above all, the  Conversation  tries to imagine the future. The palpable excite-
ment of Kepler’s prose reciprocates Galileo’s restrained excitement, which 
trusts the facts themselves to stun the reader. But what the two men share, 
among so many differences, is a sense that they stand on the brink of new 
worlds—worlds of thought as well as heavenly bodies. For Kepler, whose 
thoughts have wings, these inspiring discoveries immediately raise the pos-
sibility of unknown creatures to meet or of voyages across the vast expanse: 
“As soon as someone demonstrates the art of ﬂ ying, settlers from our species 
of man will not be lacking” (39). In years to come, many other writers would 
follow the path of the  Dream and devise ingenious methods to journey to 
the moon and beyond.  31  Yet few rivaled Kepler’s passionate commitment to 
exploring the universe and discovering its secrets. A modern reader, accus-
tomed to take the inexorable progress of science for granted, might easily 
overlook the novelty of that commitment. Contemporaries of Kepler and 
Galileo still tended to believe not only in a geocentric cosmos but in a natu-
ral order whose boundaries had long been ﬁ xed—subject perhaps to a few 
minor modiﬁ cations. Hardly anyone welcomed the signs of a rearranged sky 
and newfangled ideas. John Donne took a lively interest in the astronomical 
“new Philosophy,” but to him it represented the inescapable downward spiral 
of history, decay and decline. When he refers, in  Ignatius His Conclave  (1611), 
to “ Keppler , who (as himselfe testiﬁ es of himselfe)  ever since  Tycho Braches 
 death, hath received it into his care, that no new thing should be done in heaven with-
out his knowledge ,” the satire bites at the pride of the innovator (a short while 
later in Donne’s fantasy, Copernicus, boasting that he has “turned the whole 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    53
frame of the world,” will demand entrance to hell).  32  But whether we take 
Donne’s joke as praise or as censure, Kepler deserves it. Extrapolating from 
Jupiter’s moons, he already looks forward with joy to moons of Mars and 
Venus. He loves to watch the world of learning change. 
 II 
 Summing Up Kepler 
 When Paul Hindemith’s eagerly awaited opera  The Harmony of the World  ( Die 
Harmonie der Welt ) opened at the Prinzregententheater in Munich on August 11, 
1957, it represented a high point not only in the composer’s career but also in 
public fascination with the life of its hero, Johannes Kepler. Hindemith had 
been working on the project, both text and music, for almost twenty years, 
and he had come to identify with his subject. A glittering audience, including 
many musical giants and more than 150 critics, attended the premiere, which 
was broadcast throughout Europe. After the long night of war and postwar 
gloom, the time was ripe for a major work to conﬁ rm the recovery of high 
culture. But despite a “stormy ovation” the event was far from an unquali-
ﬁ ed success; Theodor Adorno would later compare it to a state funeral. The 
critics yawned and carped, and in the long run their disappointment might 
be called a turning point for Hindemith, who has never quite regained his 
place as one of the leading composers of modern times. What was at issue 
was more than the fate of one opera; it was an interpretation of history, and 
in particular of the charge that music should express the underlying tensions 
of its age. For Adorno, an advocate of alienation and of Arnold Schoenberg, 
Hindemith’s “afﬁ rmative ideology” had suppressed the essential tenor of the 
history of science since Kepler and marked the composer as a crass reaction-
ary opposed to modern music.  33  And even those more sympathetic to an 
eclectic musical style seemed unsure that the work and its message spoke to 
their moment. Did it herald a possible future, or was it immured in the past? 
 To some extent the opera itself might be regarded as an allegory of this 
situation. The composer joins his hero in an obsessive quest for a harmony 
that forever eludes them. This absorption in Kepler dates to the 1930s, when 
Hindemith’s textbook  The Craft of Musical Composition  framed rules for a 
tonal system of consonances and dissonances derived from nature. The 
extended major triad “is to the trained and the naïve listener alike one of the 
most impressive phenomena of nature, simple and elemental as rain, snow, 
and wind. Music, as long as it exists, will always take its departure from the 
major triad and return to it.”  34  In aspiration, though not in its details, this 

54    WHAT GALILEO SAW
principle resembles Kepler’s cosmic order. Yet natural harmony and order 
are not to be found on earth, except perhaps at times in musical inspirations 
or Kepler’s mind. Confusion and frustration reign in Hindemith’s opera, 
as attempts to seize power collapse in endless wars. The dreaming idealist 
Kepler bobs like a passive cork on an angry sea. Engulfed by characters who 
demand his allegiance, he dies with the word  vergeblich  (futile) on his lips; 
and no one understands him. Yet the opera ends with a mighty passacaglia, 
as all the characters return in a masque, transformed into heavenly bodies. 
As a dreaming chess player, exhausted by too many games, might translate 
people he knows into chess pieces on a board, so Kepler, or his departed 
spirit, arranges the companions of his life into an astronomical pattern like 
those that obsessed him. And at the same time these players take part in 
“God’s chorale”—a harmony that remains beyond them, but into which they 
merge.  35  Like Goethe’s  Faust , Hindemith’s  Harmony  concludes on a note of 
eternal striving, in which the struggle for truth is not so much resolved as 
absorbed into a major triad. Yet all this pageantry, with singers and dancers 
elaborately costumed to imitate the zodiac, accompanied by traditional musi-
cal forms, seems to point backward, to astrological mysteries and to a baroque 
aesthetic credo attuned to faith rather than progress. It is as if Kepler’s laws 
mattered less than his dreams. 
 Hindemith’s problem was not his alone. The question of how to imagine 
Kepler, both as an individual and as an emblem of the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion, has puzzled and energized many scholars and artists. To contemporaries 
of Hindemith and Adorno, who had lived through a Thirty Years’ War of 
their own, the predicament of an intellectual at odds with the community 
where he was born, caught between murderous factions, and forced into 
exile seemed strangely familiar. Hindemith’s tangled relations with the Nazis, 
who at one time embraced him and later cast him out, had tainted his integ-
rity as an artist.  36  Hence his sympathetic portrait of a pure soul who wants to 
be left in peace and serve only his art reﬂ ects a high-minded self-justiﬁ cation. 
Similarly, with music as well as words, he expresses his own predicament as a 
modern composer, exploring new harmonies and forms yet captivated by an 
eternal tonality. The opera ﬁ nds no exit from this impasse. Imagining Kepler, 
it revisits the dilemmas of its own time. 
 Science and scientists were also deeply involved in these conﬂ icts. The 
idea of progress, so vital to the emerging ﬁ eld of the history of science in the 
mid-twentieth century, could be conscripted equally by Communists and 
Fascists as well as their enemies, and it might also be held responsible for the 
anomie and rootlessness of modern times. If Kepler was a hero to some, to 
others his curiosity had served to dismantle the order of things. In “To the 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    55
Planetarium,” Walter Benjamin associates Kepler, Copernicus, and Tycho 
with an “exclusive emphasis on an optical connection to the universe” that 
broke from the ancient experience of communal, ecstatic contact with the 
cosmos. “It is the dangerous error of modern men to regard this experience 
as unimportant and avoidable, and to consign it to the individual as the poetic 
rapture of starry nights. It is not; its hour strikes again and again, and then 
neither nations nor generations can escape it, as was made terribly clear by 
the last war, which was an attempt at a new and unprecedented commingling 
with the cosmic powers”—a violent, imperialistic enslavement of nature.  37  
Kepler can hardly be accused of neglecting the ancient ecstatic intimacy 
with the cosmos. Yet neither did he succeed in creating a new community, 
or a more harmonious relation to nature, that might mitigate the turmoil in 
which he lived. In practice his passivity largely disables Hindemith’s opera, 
whose hero broods and is acted upon but very seldom acts. Such detachment 
implicates science itself. As the chorus points out, the disinterested pursuit of 
knowledge might lead to catastrophe: “The power of suns can be split, / To 
kill even more than before.” Perhaps Kepler bears some responsibility for the 
world he has helped to make. 
 For historians of science, Kepler presents another sort of problem. The 
amazing advances that he brought about, converting Copernican insights 
into a full-ﬂ edged solar system and preparing the way for Newton’s celes-
tial mechanics, cannot be separated from his deep commitment to mysti-
cal fantasies and Neoplatonic forms. Charles Gillispie has compared the 
geometrical structure of Kepler’s cosmos to a cathedral “embellished with 
gargoyles and ﬁ gures of saints,” and Kepler famously used a similar but more 
arcane image to introduce his Third Law: “It is my pleasure to yield to 
the inspired frenzy, it is my pleasure to taunt mortal men with the candid 
acknowledgment that I am stealing the golden vessels of the Egyptians to 
build a tabernacle to my God.”  38  Raptures like these are not deviations from 
the essential Kepler but part and parcel of the way he thinks. Hence the 
brilliant mathematician in whose clockwork universe mankind still lives also 
pays homage to ancient wisdom and astrological charts. The “Great Tradi-
tion” of the history of science, which tracks a series of decisive innovations 
from the Scientiﬁ c Revolution to the present day, has never quite managed 
a comfortable ﬁ t for Kepler.  39  From one point of view he plays the role of a 
founding father, a giant who, along with Galileo, transformed not only the 
standard model of the heavens but also the nature of science itself, which 
henceforth would search for laws inscribed in the language of mathemat-
ics and veriﬁ ed by evidence inscribed in the real world.  40  Yet from another 
point of view he represents an embarrassment to any triumphant narrative of 

56    WHAT GALILEO SAW
scientiﬁ c progress. His idiosyncratic cast of mind, attracted to theories that 
often bordered on the occult and made little impact in his own time, strikes 
skeptical readers as the mark of “a tortured mystic, who stumbled onto his 
great discoveries in a weird groping.”  41  Thus Kepler’s work is often cited to 
deny the logic of any “Great Tradition.”  42  The sheer bulk of his writing, 
moreover, invites discrepant views, depending on what has been cited; his 
scientiﬁ c breakthroughs must be distilled from an incredibly rich and murky 
reservoir of inklings and eddies. Such writers are hard to place. 
 Contrasting ways of imagining Kepler come to the fore in accounts of his 
quarrel with Robert Fludd, the celebrated Oxford physician and hermeticist. 
In 1617, when Kepler was about to complete the major work on harmon-
ics that he had conceived as long ago as 1599, he came across another study 
of universal harmony, the ﬁ rst volume of Fludd’s  Inquiry into the Macrocosm 
and Microcosm .  43  This rival theory had to be answered. An appendix to  The 
Harmony of the World  draws a sharp line between Kepler’s method, founded 
on mathematics, and Fludd’s reliance on ancient authorities and symbol-
ism. “He takes great delight in topics which are hidden in the darkness of 
riddles, whereas I strive to bring topics which are wrapped in obscurity out 
into the light of understanding.” Beginning with preconceived notions that 
picture man as a little cosmos and the cosmos as a magniﬁ ed image of man, 
“Fludd erects his cosmic music” on principles of analogy and numerology. 
“Thus for him his conception of the cosmos, for me the cosmos itself, or 
the real motions of the planets in it, are the basis of the cosmic harmony.”  44  
Fludd quickly struck back with a point-by-point rebuttal,  The Stage of Truth 
( Veritatis proscenium , 1621); Kepler replied in kind with an aggressive  Apologia 
( Pro Suo Opere Harmonices Mundi Apologia , 1622); and Fludd had a spiteful 
last word in  Monochord of the World  ( Monochordum Mundi , 1623). No truce 
was possible. Fludd, according to Kepler, was lost in enigmatic pictures and 
symbols, and Kepler, according to Fludd, had chased “quantitative shadows” 
that blinded him to essential qualities and ﬁ rst causes. Posterity would have 
to settle the quarrel. And until quite recently historians of science have not 
hesitated to render a verdict in favor of Kepler, the champion of modern 
scientiﬁ c thought, who told a friend, “I hate all cabbalists.”  45  
 Yet lately many scholars have questioned that verdict. An essay by the 
Nobel Prize–winning physicist Wolfgang Pauli, “The Inﬂ uence of Arche-
typal Ideas on the Scientiﬁ c Theories of Kepler,” reopened the debate, and 
since then its issues have seemed anything but simple. Drawing on Carl 
Jung’s theory that archetypes or “primordial images” in the unconscious 
initiate the rational, conscious formulations of ideas, Pauli traces Kepler’s 
natural philosophy to his fervent instinctive belief in the Trinity and its 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    57
image, the sun. “In Kepler the symbolical picture precedes the conscious 
formulation of a natural law. The symbolical images and archetypal con-
ceptions are what cause him to seek natural law.” From this perspective the 
dispute with Fludd seems less a matter of magic clashing with science—as 
Pauli points out, “Both Fludd’s and Kepler’s scientiﬁ c ideas about world 
music have lost all signiﬁ cance”—than a clash of opposing archetypes. Kepler 
focuses on “the quantitative relations of the  parts ,” Fludd on “the qualitative 
indivisibility of the  whole ”; the number three dominates Kepler’s “trinitar-
ian” worldview, the number four is the primal source of Fludd’s alchemical, 
“quaternary” outlook; Kepler represents “the thinking type,” and Fludd “the 
intuitive approach.” And although Pauli concedes that “Fludd was always 
in the wrong” on speciﬁ c points of astronomy and physics, he also ﬁ nds 
the alchemical worldview compelling. Jung’s studies of alchemy point to 
“a deeper unity of psychical and physical occurences,” and the “uncontrol-
lable interaction between observer and system” that affects all measurements 
in modern microphysics has dethroned “the detached observer of classical 
physics.” Most of all, the idea of complementarity—the idea that light can be 
 both particle and wave—suggests a synthesis of Kepler and Fludd, in which 
the quantitative and qualitative aspects of reality might be simultaneously 
embraced. In that respect Kepler’s devotion to symbols does not disqualify 
his contributions to modern science but rather shows a direction it might 
well take in the future.  46  
The revival of interest in the impact of hermeticism and Neoplatonism on 
early modern science has also inﬂ uenced views of Kepler. When Frances Yates 
discussed the controversy with Fludd, in  Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tra-
dition , she emphasized that Kepler, despite his disdain for numerology, “had 
carefully studied Pythagorean-Hermetic theory of world and soul harmony 
in the  Hermetica  and knew the tradition of religious Hermeticism.” Later, 
with growing enthusiasm, she placed him in an alchemical circle: “Kepler’s 
association with the Rosicrucian world is so close that one might almost call 
him a heretic from Rosicrucianism.”  47  Most historians have rejected that 
correlation; they continue to regard Kepler’s originality and independence 
of thought as far more important than any traces of the occult.  48  But this 
dispute, like the dispute with Fludd, may serve as a useful reminder of how 
many peculiar ideas circulated in Kepler’s time. In an age when most causes 
of disease remained mysterious, and the air seemed full of spirits and demons, 
not microbes, the followers of Paracelsus were not unorthodox.  49  Physi-
cians could hardly minister to the plague without resorting to metaphysi-
cal explanations; Galenic medicines were powerless against an astral scourge 
brought down on sinners.  50  Fludd, a respected physician patronized by James 

58    WHAT GALILEO SAW
I, sought remedies in astrology, which taught him to look to ethereal spirits 
for help. Magnetism (which also fascinated Kepler) showed that occult and 
hidden forces could move things in the absence of any apparent natural 
cause. Philosophers who distrusted magic might demand an explanation of 
such action-at-a-distance, as later skeptics would voice suspicion of New-
ton’s mystifying gravity or Pauli’s quantum physics. But magnetism proved 
itself in practice—as did ethereal spirits, according to Fludd.  51  Hence natural 
philosophy was threaded through with magic and metaphysics. Not even the 
best astronomer could be wholly immune from their spell. A modern reader 
should never forget that, modern as Kepler may seem, he lived in a world of 
strange ideas, a world we can never recover. 
 A Life of Allegory 
 The troubles of Kepler’s life and times add other complications. The con-
trast between his personal search for harmony and the spectacular discord 
of both religion and politics in an age of Reformation and Counter-
Reformation has been the organizing principle of several biographies as well 
as Hindemith’s opera. It provides a central thread of Max Caspar’s standard life, 
for instance, and also of James A. Connor’s biography,  Kepler’s Witch , whose 
subtitle blocks out the theme:  An Astronomer’s Discovery of Cosmic Order amid 
Religious War, Political Intrigue, and the Heresy Trial of His Mother . Indeed, the 
interest of this intriguing personal story has sometimes displaced the natural 
philosopher or man of science. “It is the halo of his personality,” Caspar 
argues in his preface, “which draws many under his spell, the nobility of 
his character which makes friends for him, the vicissitudes of his life which 
arouse sympathy, and the secret of his union with nature that attracts all those 
who seek something in the universe beyond, and different from, that which 
rigorous science offers.”  52  A wealth of letters—six volumes in the collected 
edition—allows the spellbound reader to draw very close. No other great 
scientist or natural philosopher has ever left a fuller account of his thought 
processes, his uncertainties and changes of mind, his mood swings, or the 
difﬁ culties of his daily life. Moreover, these musings and passions throw light 
on his methods.  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake , itself a sort of expansive letter, 
draws equally on personality and mathematics, and the spirits who transport 
a daemon to the moon in  Somnium  are conjured through the witchcraft of 
the narrator’s mother. Kepler tempts readers to interpret his life as an allegory 
in which a series of accidents and adventures turns out to have been provi-
dentially inspired. In the introduction to book 5 of  The Harmony of the World , 
his career becomes a prophecy fulﬁ lled; “the ﬁ nger of God” has guided him 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    59
to reveal “the very nature of things.”  53  Retrospectively, his discoveries have 
converted apparent disorder into a fated winding path to truth. 
 This journey might also be read less positively as “sleepwalking.” In 
Arthur Koestler’s sweeping survey of early cosmology,  The Sleepwalkers , 
Kepler exempliﬁ es the peculiar logic of the creative process, whose opera-
tions often require a sort of “black-out shutter” that blinds the discoverer to 
obvious truths that might not ﬁ t his theory. “The history of cosmic theo-
ries, in particular, may without exaggeration be called a history of collective 
obsessions and controlled schizophrenias; and the manner in which some of 
the most important individual discoveries were arrived at reminds one more 
of a sleepwalker’s performance than an electronic brain’s.”  54  Perhaps this 
diagnosis suits the disillusioned ex-Communist Koestler better than Kepler, 
who was not only supremely self-aware but also quite ready to falsify his 
own hypotheses. Consider the famous case of the “trivial” eight-minute gap 
between Ptolemy’s and Tycho’s calculations of Mars’s position. After incred-
ible labors in checking and rechecking those calculations (seventy times, 
according to Kepler!), he decided that the theory of the solar system itself 
would have to be changed. “Now, because they could not have been ignored, 
these eight minutes alone will have led the way to the reformation of all of 
astronomy.”  55  Koestler rightly admires this stubborn refusal to bend the facts 
to a convenient geometrical scheme, but he goes on to argue that only a sort 
of “miracle,” three crucial mistakes that canceled one another out, led Kepler 
to stumble on his Second Law. “It looks as if his conscious, critical faculties 
were anaesthetized by the creative impulse, by his impatience to get to grips 
with the physical forces in the solar system. . . . It is perhaps the most amazing 
sleepwalking performance in the history of science—except for the manner 
in which he found his First Law.”  56  
 Much of this analysis is specious.  57  Kepler certainly made mistakes, as he 
himself admitted, nor could he have anticipated the principles of inertia and 
gravity that his own work was reaching toward, but the way in which his 
intuitions leapt beyond cold calculation does not show that his reason was 
asleep. It shows only the complexity of any creative mind, the intricate twin-
ing of conscious and unconscious processes, which can entertain any number 
of odd ideas before settling on one that works. “The Imagination may be 
compared to Adam’s dream,” Keats wrote, “—he awoke and found it truth.” 
Kepler, like Adam, believed that God had inspired his dreams. Yet that did not 
stop him from putting them to the test of repeated mathematical veriﬁ cation. 
Everyone dreams; but few have awakened like Kepler and found the truth. 
 In science, however, the process of waking can be prolonged for genera-
tions, if not forever. Nearly four centuries had to pass before the vivid dream 

60    WHAT GALILEO SAW
of Kepler’s Conjecture was recognized to be true. Under the pressure of such 
reappraisals, the past keeps changing. As better telescopes and theories evolve, 
even an amateur like Koestler can see clearly—or thinks he can see—through 
the cosmic fog in which Kepler once struggled. Nor can anyone ever fully 
reenter Kepler’s mind and world. Good historians of science all understand 
the danger of teleology, the smug pseudo-omniscience that judges each past 
idea in terms of its future success; but no historian of science completely 
avoids it. A few discoveries, like Kepler’s Laws, live on, and scholars absorbed 
by the progress of science will always study how they came to be. Hence 
most of what Kepler thought and did appears irrelevant to his place in the 
pantheon—at best an interesting context for what he ﬁ nally accomplished, 
at worst a series of outmoded distractions and errors. From this perspec-
tive, the function of histories of science seems to be to “normalize” his 
work, eliminating the peculiar features of imagination and style that make 
him different from anyone else. The pure, foundational Kepler, the crucial 
link between Copernicus and Newton, has very little in common with the 
eccentric writer of allegories and letters and poems. To read through his 
writings is to encounter an astonishing, often comic disparity between the 
great giver of laws and the unpredictable, often capricious, incredibly mobile 
human being who expressed himself day by day. 
 Visions of Progress 
 Yet Kepler himself had much to do with the teleological view of history that 
turned him into an icon of progress. Perhaps he even invented that view. 
In  The Birth of History and Philosophy of Science , an aggressively titled edition 
and study of  A Defence of Tycho against Ursus , Nicholas Jardine argues that 
Kepler’s seminal work anticipates many later assumptions about science, in 
particular “the representation of theoretical progress as an ever more accurate 
and complete portrayal of the world.”  58  Since the  Defence , drafted in 1600 
at Tycho’s insistence, remained unﬁ nished and unpublished, it can hardly 
have inﬂ uenced subsequent epistemologies and histories of astronomy.  59  But 
Kepler continued to champion his vision of progress, in which the successive 
observations of astronomers since the Chaldeans had gradually been reﬁ ned 
and at last had culminated in the cosmic truths unveiled by Copernicus, 
Tycho, and him. The  New Astronomy  leaves no doubt that Tycho’s disciple 
has discovered secrets unknown to his master.  The Harmony of the World  not 
only claims to have completed and surpassed the insights of Proclus and all 
other geometers, but also maintains that the modern invention of polyphony 
has brought the harmony of the heavens down to earth: “Thus it is no longer 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    61
surprising that Man, aping his Creator, has at last found a method of singing 
in harmony which was unknown to the ancients, so that he might play, that 
is to say, the perpetuity of the whole of cosmic time in some brief fraction 
of an hour, by the artiﬁ cial concert of several voices, and taste up to a point 
the satisfaction of God his Maker in His works by a most delightful sense of 
pleasure felt in this imitator of God, Music.”  60  “The heavens themselves are 
singing polyphony,” and human beings now join the choir.  61  Collectively, 
with a few skilled conductors like Kepler to guide them, over the ages they 
learned to keep time with God. 
 These signs of progress gratiﬁ ed Kepler’s imagination. But they were largely 
theoretical and speculative, as well as controversial. In the end a far more prac-
tical work conﬁ rmed the advance of astronomy toward better pictures of the 
heavens. The  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  had been conceived by Tycho as the crowning 
achievement of a lifetime of meticulous observations and calculations, rising 
above the renowned but outmoded star tables of Ptolemy and Copernicus 
and inscribing his name (and his emperor’s) in the skies.  62  But Tycho did not 
live to complete his lifework. In 1600 he took in Kepler to collaborate with 
him—or serve him—and when he died, on October 24, 1601, it was obvious 
that no other assistant was qualiﬁ ed to carry on the project. The task would 
engage Kepler for most of the rest of his life; it would prove to be his fortune 
and his bane. On the one hand, his role as Tycho’s anointed successor brought 
him into the emperor’s service, and in principle, if not always in fact, assured 
him a steady income and an international reputation.  63  On the other hand, 
it engulfed him in unending squabbles with jealous heirs, who preferred to 
regard him as Tycho’s ungrateful and greedy lackey. Nor was Kepler ever 
convinced that the painstaking and backbreaking labor of compiling tables 
really suited his talents. “Don’t sentence me completely to the treadmill of 
mathematical calculations and leave me time for philosophical speculations, 
which are my sole delight,” he wrote to one correspondent.  64  
 Still worse, he feared that he might be betraying as well as completing 
Tycho’s commission. According to Kepler’s own report, on his deathbed 
Tycho kept repeating, “Let me not be seen to have lived in vain.” These 
poignant last words, addressed to Kepler rather than God, might be taken as 
encouragement to ﬁ nish the tables. But Kepler interpreted them more gener-
ally as a plea to align his cosmology with Tycho’s, rejecting Copernicanism 
and heliocentrism and embracing his master’s solar epicycle and modiﬁ ed 
geocentrism: “On his death bed [he] asked me, whom he knew to be of the 
Copernican persuasion, that I demonstrate everything in his hypothesis.”  65  
Kepler would not do that. Again and again, in his later writings, he admits 
his profound debt to Tycho and then ﬁ rmly distances himself from the 

62    WHAT GALILEO SAW
Tychonic system. If Tycho had not lived in vain, that was because he had 
enabled his successor to go far beyond him. 
 At the same time the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables , when ﬁ nally published in 1627, 
embodied complex, collaborative byways in the progress of knowledge. The 
project that Tycho had started was ﬁ nished with tools and methods on which 
he had not reckoned. Immediately after his death, his heirs took charge of 
his legendary, unparalleled astronomical instruments, which in years to come 
were ruined and dispersed. Kepler’s observations had to rely on less reﬁ ned 
devices. But the telescope, when Galileo pointed it toward the sky in 1609, 
expanded the visible heavens beyond anything Tycho had seen; henceforth 
the cosmos would swarm with uncharted moons and stars. Another crucial 
discovery, John Napier’s new logarithms, radically simpliﬁ ed astronomical 
calculations. To Kepler they seemed a gift from heaven, saving him years of 
labor.  66  The observations and notes he took from Tycho retained their value, 
thanks to their exceptional precision, but they would have to be accommo-
dated to a new universe and a new Milky Way. 
 Kepler spelled out the principles of this new universe in his  Epitome of 
Copernican Astronomy  (1615–21). In the form of questions and answers, this 
massive textbook not only shows the superiority of heliocentric theories in 
explaining celestial phenomena, the rotation of the earth, and the irregular 
motions of the moon, but also demonstrates that the introduction of elliptical 
orbits can result in unprecedented, elegant calculations of planetary motions, 
without resort to epicycles and other time-honored fudging. Not even 
Copernicus, let alone Tycho, had dreamed of such a comprehensive theory. 
Mathematics, like astronomy, had progressed; at last the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  could 
be completed. 
 Many vicissitudes still delayed publication, however. Patronage, war, and 
unreliable printers all stood in the way. By the time the volume appeared, 
the doomed Rudolf, its namesake and dedicatee, had been dead for ﬁ fteen 
years, and Kepler’s hope for redress from Ferdinand II, the current emperor, 
was met with promises more than with payment. Meanwhile the Brahe fam-
ily, who considered themselves the true patrons and owners of the project, 
claimed authority over the contents and proﬁ ts. In the end Kepler himself 
would ﬁ nance the printing. But perpetual warfare interfered with his plans. 
In 1626 a peasant army besieging Linz set a ﬁ re that destroyed the press where 
the printing of the book had already begun. Then at last, after Kepler found 
refuge and a printer in Ulm, the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  went before the public in a 
handsome folio edition of a thousand copies (1627). The book marked an 
era in Kepler’s life and in the triumph of the new astronomy.  67  The preci-
sion of the tables, bolstered by detailed instructions on how to use them, at 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    63
once made earlier calculations of events in the heavens obsolete. Henceforth 
every serious astronomer or navigator—or astrologer—would have to con-
sult them. Nor could such accuracy have been achieved without the progress 
in theory for which Kepler had lighted the way. Here was the practical proof 
of his laws. Skeptics who previously had doubted or ignored him eventu-
ally steered by the tables, acknowledging that Kepler’s outlandish ideas had 
worked. The solar system made better sense than ever before. 
 Even the author himself was impressed. The task that had weighed him 
down for so many years, distracting him from the speculations close to his 
heart, now seemed in retrospect the fulﬁ llment of his theoretical as well as his 
practical labors. Quietly and modestly he joined the immortals. The fron-
tispiece that he designed for the book (while concealing some of its details 
from Tycho’s heirs) illuminates his view of the history of astronomy and of 
his place in it (see  ﬁ g. 3  ). Verses titled  Idyllion , by the Ulm poet Johann Bap-
tist Hebenstreit, explain the symbolism at length.  68  Ten columns support the 
 Figure 3 . Frontispiece for Kepler’s  Tabulae Rudolphinae  (1627). Lilly Library at Indiana University. 

64    WHAT GALILEO SAW
roof of a temple to Urania, the muse of astronomy. Architecturally as well 
as intellectually they represent the progress of Observation. Crude logs at 
the back, where a Chaldean uses his ﬁ ngers to measure the distance between 
stars, yield to the basic bricks of the Greeks in the left and right foreground 
(Hipparchus and Ptolemy), until the circle is closed at the front and cen-
ter, where Copernicus sits beside a solid Ionic pillar and Tycho, draped in 
ermine, leans on an imposing Corinthian column decked with his instru-
ments. Copernicus holds out his hands to argue or plead for his system, 
but Tycho dominates the scene, pointing dramatically upward to a design, 
under the dome, of his personal geocentric vision, while his proud words 
 Quid si sic  ( What if it is  thus ?) ﬂ y up like sparks around a dangling plaque: 
TABULÆ RUDOLPHI ASTRONOMICÆ. High above on the roof, a 
ﬂ ock of goddesses personify the astronomical arts, including such new-
comers as Logarithmica and Optica (nymph of the telescope). Higher still, 
a hovering Hapsburg eagle showers coins on the seekers below. A massive 
base is the foundation of the temple. Its panels display, at the center, a map 
of Tycho’s island Hven, where he had ﬁ rst gathered his observations, and at 
the right a printing press (Kepler himself had paid for the type and paper 
and proofread the sheets). These images subsidize the progress of knowl-
edge, which depends on patronage and material props as agents of change.  
 A panel on the left, however, slyly holds the key to the book as a whole 
(see   ﬁ g. 4  ). In a cramped and dark little room Kepler sits at a table alone. 
He has been working late, by candlelight, which casts a shadow behind him, 
and his eyes ﬁ x us with a weary, somber gaze. The candle shines on a banner 
that abbreviates the titles of four of his major works. On the tablecloth he 
has jotted some numbers with pen and ink, and a few coins dropped from 
on high remind us of his poor rewards. This is a lonely scene. But another 
object on the table makes a bold, explicit claim: an unadorned model of the 
splendid roof and ﬁ gures above. Without the help of others, this unsleeping 
craftsman has designed the current state of astronomical arts, incorporating 
some arts unknown to Tycho (the heirs were not shown this panel). A casual 
viewer might overlook this lowly footnote to the great temple. Yet Kepler, 
like a playwright who watches from the wings the mighty pageant he has 
created, witnesses that all this show would never have happened without him. 
Tycho’s system, dimly ﬁ gured above, could not have produced the  Rudolﬁ ne 
Tables . Its true author sits below, and it is Kepler’s system that will prevail. 
 That system proved its worth. On November 7, 1631, a year after Kepler’s 
death, the transit of Mercury across the sun that he had predicted was observed 
by Pierre Gassendi. Earlier tables had miscalculated this transit by 5°, Kepler’s 
by less than 10´.  69  Here was radical conﬁ rmation of the new laws and the 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    65
 Figure 4 . Panel from the frontispiece for Kepler’s  Tabulae Rudolphinae  (1627). Lilly Library at 
Indiana University. 
heliocentric worldview, a vindication of progress. In practical terms, there 
could be no more looking back to Ptolemy or Tycho. And philosophically 
the universe seemed more and more in accord with Kepler’s geometrical 
idealism. Other astronomers had been content to save phenomena, with cal-
culations that approximated, more or less, the timing of what happened in 
the heavens; but Kepler’s effort to perceive the mind of God in patterns 
of celestial geometry was not only a grander ambition but saved phenom-
ena better. Those phenomena, he was certain, obeyed real and demonstrable 
physical causes, and astronomers who understood the archetypes that formed 
the world had learned to grasp reality itself. 
 Nevertheless a gap of even eight or ten minutes rankled. Despite his pride 
in the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables , Kepler was well aware of some discrepancies that he 
could not explain. The orbits of the planets and the moon, as well as the rota-
tions of the sun and the earth, seemed subject to small, irregular “perturba-
tions” that deﬁ ed precise calculation. Evidently brute dumb matter did not 

66    WHAT GALILEO SAW
always follow archetypal rules.  70  In the last years of his life Kepler lost some 
of his conﬁ dence in the power of mind alone to comprehend the universe. 
Slight ﬂ aws in his computations suggested not only a need for more reﬁ ned 
observations but also a possible limit to progress itself; perhaps some grain of 
fact would always fray the best laws that astronomers could conceive. The 
world in which Kepler struggled and suffered, a world of war, intolerance, 
betrayal, and pain, had frustrated his hopes again and again. That conﬂ ict 
between experience and high ideals provides the drama in any number of 
works, like Hindemith’s, that try to imagine his life. But an internal conﬂ ict, 
a drama staged in Kepler’s mind, may well be truer to what he himself imag-
ined. His devotion to a geometrically perfect cosmos, composed of simple, 
everlasting laws, continually fell afoul not only of intractable numbers but 
of his own dynamic, unpredictable torrent of ideas. Nothing stays at rest in 
Kepler’s prose. In this respect his eccentric ﬂ ights of fancy are not digressions 
from the arguments and laws that he presents but wound into their substance. 
He thinks in archetypes, and then he thinks again, elliptically; he cannot resist 
one more bewitching insight. 
 At the end of  Somnium , an imaginary voyage to the moon that incorpo-
rates an autobiographical allegory, Kepler provides one ﬁ nal twist, a charac-
teristic confusion of realms. Rain on the moon blends into an earthly rattle of 
rain that wakes the author and wipes out the book that he has been reading in 
his dream. But when he awakes he ﬁ nds a pillow over his head and blankets 
over his body. This chimes with an earlier moment within the dream, when 
the narrator Duracotus (a stand-in for Kepler) and his mother had covered 
their heads with their clothing, a rite that conjures up the daemon who will 
take them to the moon.  71  Draped in darkness, the dreamer and dreamed are 
one. But each of them mimics a real occasion, in October 1605, when Kepler 
and various courtiers had covered their heads with their coats to block day-
light while viewing a solar eclipse. “How magically magical!” If fancies and 
dreams rely on a bit of strategic darkness, sometimes science also works best 
out of the light. Kepler’s joke deliberately contrasts the illusion he has created 
with the smothered, all too real head from which it issued; now, as he puts it 
in the last sentence of  Somnium , “I returned to myself.” 
 The covert reference to the way he once observed an eclipse also hints 
at a deeper connection. In the preface to his  Optics , Kepler had composed 
a small hymn to eclipses: “These  darknesses  are the astronomer’s  eyes , these 
 defects are a cornucopia of  theory , these  blemishes illuminate the minds of mor-
tals with the most precious  pictures . O excellent theme, praiseworthy among 
all people, of the  praises of shadow !”  72  Eclipses, he insists, are “the most noble 
and ancient part of astronomy,” because they aroused observers in olden 

KEPLER’S PROGRESS    67
times to formulate the ﬁ rst theories about the motions of the sun and moon. 
Moreover, the wonder of these strokes of darkness, like secret messages sent 
from on high, testiﬁ es to God’s regard for the minds made in his image; the 
theater of nature, a secular scripture, not only inspires awe but also invites us 
to study God's works. This is true magic, according to Kepler. What begins 
in mystery, as in his dream, is destined to end, as in the sunlight of his notes, 
with science or revelation. 
 Yet still the shadows linger. No matter how far he has progressed, Kepler 
remains aware of secrets he will never understand. Even the cause of the six-
cornered snowﬂ ake eludes him, nor could his calculations quite predict the 
motions of the planets. Something was always missing. At best he could add 
notes to his ﬁ ndings, as in  Somnium , and then notes to those notes. Perhaps 
those second thoughts and that sense of radical incompletion, as much as his 
eternal laws, are Kepler’s legacy; perhaps an uneasy recognition of how much 
is still unknown lurks in the very idea of progress. From one triumphant 
point of view Kepler, like John the Baptist, might herald a future glory. His 
destiny was to prepare the way for Newton’s better laws and calculations, 
just as Copernicus (like Isaiah) prepared the way for Kepler and Galileo. But 
there were also tiny gaps in Newton’s reckonings, and later in Einstein’s. . . . 
The immaculate savior of science has never arrived. Meanwhile the inﬂ uence 
of Kepler continues to grow—not only because of the progress he helped 
bring about, but also because his imagination so far outstripped what he 
could know for certain. 

68
  Chapter 4 
 The Poetry of the World 
 A Natural History of Poetics 
 I 
 The Silence of Things: Lord Chandos and Francis Bacon 
 In Hugo von Hofmannsthal’s famous little story  Ein Brief  (“The Lord Chan-
dos Letter,” 1902), a ﬁ ctional alter ego, young Philipp, Lord Chandos, explains 
to his great friend Francis Bacon why he has abandoned his brilliant, budding 
literary career and stopped writing forever. Language itself has failed him; 
he is no longer able to utter words, especially abstract words such as “spirit,” 
“soul,” or even “body.” This alienation from language has stamped the letter as 
a founding classic of modernism. Steeped in the profound unease of ﬁ n-de-
siècle Vienna, just at the moment when not only words but the psyche and 
culture and music and art lost the sense of harmony that had sustained them, 
Hofmannsthal enters a disconnected and fragmented world, the world of the 
future.  1  Already a shadow looms across his path, a premonition of the death 
of literature that would haunt Paul Celan and Samuel Beckett and J. M. 
Coetzee.  2  Hofmannsthal wrote very few poems during the rest of his life. 
The things that spoke to him were frightened of words; they ﬂ ed into drama 
and action. 
 Yet the letter is also dated, in more ways than one. “August 22, 1603,” 
marks a crucial era in Bacon’s career. Queen Elizabeth had died early that 
year, and when James I ascended the throne, Bacon’s fortunes also began to 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    69
rise; on July 23 he was knighted (though Lord Chandos seems not to have 
heard). But more important, this was the period when he ﬁ rst drafted his 
plans for a new kind of natural history and a reformation of knowledge. 
“My ambition now I shall only put upon my pen, whereby I shall be able 
to maintain memory and merit of the times succeeding,” he wrote to his 
cousin Sir Robert Cecil. A silence follows; after July, James Spedding, whose 
standard  Letters and Life of Francis Bacon  (1861) Hofmannsthal probably stud-
ied, ﬁ nds no more letters until the next year. But Spedding imagines that 
“the intervening months were among the busiest and most exciting that he 
ever passed. For this is the time when I suppose him to have conceived the 
design of throwing his thoughts on philosophy and intellectual progress into 
a popular form, and inviting the co-operation of mankind.”  3  Manuscripts 
attributed to those months of vegetation include Bacon’s ﬁ rst naming of the 
“Idols” that breed fallacies in the mind, as well as of the “Great Instauration” 
of human dominion over nature.  4  Henceforth he would be obsessed with 
corruptions of learning. 
 Above all, words were not to be trusted. During the days when a loss of 
faith in language is supposed to have overwhelmed Lord Chandos, Bacon 
was founding a science on the same recognition, “that the subtilty of words, 
arguments, notions, yea of the senses themselves, is but rude and gross in 
comparison of the subtilty of things.”  5  Thus language routinely wreaked 
havoc on human understanding. Not only did words, like a debased cur-
rency, reﬂ ect the mistaken and confused opinions of the vulgar, but “worse 
still, those faulty meanings of words cast their rays, or stamp their impres-
sions, on the mind itself.”  6  A few years later, in  The Advancement of Learning 
(1605), Bacon would propose a method for healing the rift between matter 
and meaning. Yet even before then he had accused Aristotle, that enemy of 
sophists, of being himself a sophist, a mere monger of terms. Philosophers, no 
less than poets, spent their time spinning fables; they were the slaves of words. 
 One curious fragment, “The Masculine Birth of Time; or Three Books 
on the Interpretation of Nature” ( Temporis Partus Masculus , 1602–3?), might 
almost have been designed explicitly to answer Lord Chandos’s letter. Bacon 
fashions a monologue in which a sage instructs a young man to cast off 
ancient idols and schools and “to give yourself to me so that I may restore 
you to yourself.” No longer will language be allowed to enslave the mind. 
“My dear, dear boy, what I purpose is to unite you with  things themselves  in 
a chaste, holy, and legal wedlock; and from this association you will secure 
an increase beyond all the hopes and prayers of ordinary marriages, to wit, 
a blessed race of Heroes.”  7  In the future “masculine” science envisioned by 
Bacon, men will command all creation. But he also anticipates, in an uncanny 

70    WHAT GALILEO SAW
way, the problem that struck Lord Chandos dumb and that Hofmannsthal 
voices: “It is that the language in which I might have been granted the 
opportunity not only to write but also to think is not Latin or English, or 
Italian, or Spanish, but a language of which I know not one word, a language 
in which mute things speak to me.”  8  Bacon too wants to learn that language 
and teach it to others; it will be the language of science. 
 Yet Bacon was also engaged in silencing things, or at any rate in prevent-
ing them from speaking too glibly. Perhaps he was even the source of Lord 
Chandos’s aphasia. When Philipp remembers his happy early days as a poet, 
he conjures up a pre-Baconian world, a world in which he could disappear 
into things “and speak out of them with their tongues.” No barrier separated 
nature from literature then, or from the self. Thus “the fables and mythic 
tales” of the ancients seemed “hieroglyphics of a secret, inexhaustible wis-
dom.” Still more, “I lived at that time in a kind of continuous inebriation 
and saw all of existence as one great unity. The mental world did not seem to 
me to be opposed to the physical.” Immersed in the sweep of life, the young 
poet drank nourishment from books in the same spirit as he drank sweet 
milk from cows of his acquaintance. “At other times I had the intuition that 
everything was symbolism and every creature a key to all the others, and I 
felt I was surely the one who could take hold of each in turn and unlock as 
many of the others as would open” (119–20). 
 In retrospect, the astounding conﬁ dence and enthusiasm of such a project 
might evoke a devastating irony. Yet in his own time Lord Chandos would 
have been expressing something quite close to received opinion about the 
meanings to be found in nature. The wisdom of the ancients, the unity 
of macrocosm and microcosm, the correspondence of the physical to the 
mental world and of things to symbols, were not the illusions of one young 
writer; they were the organizing principles of natural history itself.  Nosce 
te ipsum  ( Know Thyself   ), the title intended for Lord Chandos’s masterwork, 
conventionally implies that knowing oneself and knowing the essence of 
nature should be the same.  9  But it was just this point that Bacon set out to 
contest. “For the mind of Man is farre from the Nature of a cleare and equall 
glasse, wherein the beames of things should reﬂ ect according to their true 
incidence; Nay, it is rather like an inchanted glasse, full of superstition and 
Imposture, if it bee not deliuered and reduced.”  10  The physical world must 
be protected from that warping mental enchantment. When Lord Chandos 
began to suspect that he saw things through a glass darkly, or that he was 
putting words in the mouth of nature, he became prematurely Bacon’s best 
pupil. But at the same time he felt unbearably lonely. Despite his vast empa-
thy for things, he could not talk to them, to other human beings, or to the 
past. A great conversation had ended.  11  

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    71
 Nevertheless, most natural historians in Bacon’s time continued to eaves-
drop on the language of things. Flora and fauna in particular communicated 
meanings and morals freely to scholars, as in the three volumes of Ulisse 
Aldrovandi’s  Ornithologiae  (1599–1603), the four volumes of Joachim Cam-
erarius the Younger’s  Collection of Symbols and Emblems  (1593–1604), and 
Edward Topsell’s  Historie of Four-Footed Beastes  (1607). When Bacon surveyed 
the ﬁ eld in 1605, he found it riddled with “fables, and popular Errors: For, 
as things now are, if an vntruth in Nature bee once on foote, what by reason 
of the neglect of examination, and countenance of Antiquitie, and what by 
reason of the vse of the opinion in similitudes, and ornaments of speeche, 
it is neuer called downe.”  12  And ﬁ fteen years later, in “A Description of a 
Natural and Experimental History of a Kind Fit to Serve as A Plan for the 
Basis and Foundations of the True Philosophy,” he still assumed that a “true 
and active” natural history, as opposed to “mere opinion and the ﬁ ctions of 
wit,” did not yet exist.  13  
 Perhaps he was underestimating how much had already been done. The 
New World discoveries of plants and animals hitherto unknown in Europe, 
and therefore untouched by antique fables or accumulated associations, had 
stimulated botanists and zoologists to describe with unprecedented accuracy 
and restraint what they or others had seen.  14  The Academy of Linceans, 
founded by the eighteen-year-old Federico Cesi in 1603, commissioned 
natural historical drawings of amazing reﬁ nement and beauty. Cassiano dal 
Pozzo, who sponsored and owned those drawings, wrote Cesi in 1625 that if 
Bacon “weren’t living in England, I’d want us to make every effort to make 
him one of us.”  15  But Bacon might not have been interested. “There is little 
point in the abundant wealth we ﬁ nd in natural histories of descriptions 
and pictures of species,” he claims. “Such minute differences are nothing 
other than nature’s sports and frivolities,” sometimes attractive and delight-
ful, but scientiﬁ cally superﬂ uous.  16  Bacon made no common cause with his 
contemporaries.  17  Devoted to his own experimental method, “the one and 
only method by which a true and practical philosophy can be established,” 
he disregarded most continental investigations of natural history. Yet time 
was on his side. The next generation would embrace his method, and, at 
least in Britain, the revolution in natural history would be carried through 
in his name.  18  
 Words, Things, Foucault 
 That revolution would forever separate words from things. In this respect, 
according to some recent historians of science and art, changing ideas of nat-
ural history may have been even more inﬂ uential than the better publicized 

72    WHAT GALILEO SAW
breakthroughs in astronomy and mathematics. It was not only ways of 
describing ﬂ ora and fauna that changed, but the very perceptions that made 
such representations possible. The old world of nature could no longer be 
taken for granted. The radical difference between old views and new has 
been expressed dramatically and drastically by Michel Foucault in  Les mots 
et les choses  (1966). In his famous second chapter, “The Prose of the World,” 
Foucault sets forth a sixteenth-century episteme based on similitude and 
resemblance, a world of knowledge in which the sign and its likeness coalesce, 
so that “nature and the word can intertwine with one another to inﬁ nity, 
forming, for those who can read it, one vast single text.”  19  Through the play 
of sympathies and antipathies, things are ceaselessly drawn together or held 
apart, as the sunﬂ ower yearns for the sun, and the olive and vine hate the 
cabbage;  20  through a system of “signatures,” the face of the world is covered 
with blazons or hieroglyphics that allow the invisible links between things 
to be read by visible signs, as the likeness of the walnut to the human brain 
tells an attentive observer that walnuts can prevent headaches. All knowledge 
thus consists of deciphering signs, whether through divination or erudition. 
“There is no difference between the visible marks that God has stamped 
upon the surface of the earth, so that we may know its inner secrets, and the 
legible words that the Scriptures, or the sages of Antiquity, have set down 
in the books preserved for us by tradition.”  21  Indeed, the world itself is a 
language, already written. In the beginning, when Adam named the ani-
mals, the relation of words to things was transparent. Since then interpreta-
tion has been required to restore that original Text—to make everything 
speak. The sixteenth century, through endless, searching commentary, took 
on that task. But the Classical period, Foucault argues, dissolved the primal 
bonds between words and things. Today no memory recalls the living being 
of language; except at times, quite faintly, by way of an archaic “counter-
discourse”—in Hölderlin and Mallarmé and Artaud and, one might add, in 
Hofmannsthal—through literature. 
 Foucault exaggerates. From a scholarly point of view, his brilliant formu-
lations are vitiated by loose chronology, an eccentric and tendentious choice 
of texts, selective quotations and misquotations, forced and garbled readings, 
and a lofty indifference to what other, and sometimes better, scholars have 
said.  22  Yet a stubborn valid residue persists through all his overstatements.  23  
One kind of evidence for the power of what Foucault calls the episteme or 
semantic web of resemblance or what William Ashworth calls the emblem-
atic worldview or what Bacon called natural magic, consists of the heroic 
efforts required to deny or refute it. Much of the polemic of  The Advancement 
of Learning  directly confronts the speculative metaphysics and mystiﬁ cations 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    73
that are assumed to dominate the learning of Bacon’s time. “For as for the 
NATVRAL MAGICKE whereof now there is mention in books, containing 
certaine credulous and superstitious conceits and obseruations of  sympathies , 
and  Antipathies and  hidden Proprieties , and some friuolous experiments, strange 
rather by disguisement, then in themselues, It is as far differing in truth of 
Nature, from such a knowledge as we require, as the storie of King  Arthur  of 
 Brittaine , or  Hughe  of  Burdeaux , differs from  Cæsars commentaries in truth 
of storie.”  24  True natural history should not beget more centaurs and chimeras. 
 Bacon is thinking of “degenerate” sciences, like alchemy and astrology, 
that feed on the occult. But he also implicates exactly those savants—for 
instance, Paracelsus, Della Porta, and Campanella—whom Foucault takes to 
speak for the age. They do not speak for Bacon; there is nothing he fears so 
much as being thought one of their party. Such fears were not unreasonable. 
Many modern scholars have argued that Bacon, despite his aim “to free the 
world from the domination of magic, . . . was ﬁ nally entangled once again in 
its snares.”  25  Yet Paolo Rossi, who wrote those words, eventually cast scorn 
on the picture of Bacon as a “transformer of hermetic dreams.” “According 
to Bacon, man is not at the centre of secret correspondences; the universe is 
not a web of symbols that correspond to divine archetypes; scientiﬁ c research 
in no way resembles an incommunicable and mystical experience.”  26  Rossi 
brings back the father of modern science. Yet the very fact that such hard 
work was needed to banish the magi points to their refusal to go. 
 Like many arguments about revolutions in ways of seeing the world—the 
before and after of some turning point in attitudes and ideas—this contro-
versy probably reﬂ ects not only differences of opinion but also differences 
in deﬁ ning the object of study. Deﬁ nitions of natural magic and natural his-
tory, let alone of emblematic and modern worldviews, are not set in stone. 
Before talking about the radical change in natural history, one needs to ask 
at least three prickly questions: Where? When? and What? (without ignor-
ing who). They are not easy to answer. Even if the  where is conﬁ ned to 
Europe, for instance, quite different accounts might emanate from Rome, 
Amsterdam, Paris, and London (to take only a sample). Thus the sixteenth- 
and seventeenth-century pioneers examined by Charles Raven, in his classic 
study  English Naturalists , play almost no part in Foucault.  27  The  when seems 
even more ﬂ uid. Despite Bacon’s strong attack on sympathies, similitudes, 
and signatures in 1605, that moment might be considered a high point, rather 
than the quietus, of the emblematic tradition. Emblem books like those of 
Camerarius poured from the presses, and they would retain their popular-
ity for many decades to come.  28  Foucault’s notorious unconcern for ﬁ xing 
causes and dates of epistemic change allows him to move freely through time. 

74    WHAT GALILEO SAW
Though he cites the appearance of Joannes Jonston’s  Histoire naturelle  in 1657 
as a landmark in which “all of animal semantics has fallen away,” stripping 
beasts of the words that were once interlaced with them, that only signiﬁ es 
“the apparent enigma of an event.”  29  Other dates might have been chosen as 
well; in fact Jonston’s book was published in 1650.  30  Whenever. 
 Nor does the  what escape similar transformations. “Natural history” is 
not a uniﬁ ed ﬁ eld or a term that explains itself; nature and history ﬁ t oddly 
and uncomfortably together. The old, archaic sense of “history,” as Aristotle 
understood it, refers to “a systematic account (without reference to time) 
of a set of natural phenomena.”  31  Yet many natural histories are anything 
but systematic. As conceived by Pliny the Elder (AD 23–79), whose massive 
 Naturalis historia  remained a standard guide throughout the Renaissance, the 
study of nature was historical in two ways: its facts were compiled and syn-
thesized, without any rigorous inspection, from a great many earlier authors 
(almost 500, he claims); and those sources provide encyclopedic testimonies 
or narratives on which Pliny comments, beginning with stories about the 
universe. This unmethodical acceptance of “thinges weakely authorized or 
warranted” distresses Bacon, such history “being fraught with much fabu-
lous matter, a great part, not onely vntried, but notoriously vntrue, to the 
great derogation of the credite of naturall Philosophie, with the graue and 
sober kinde of wits.”  32  A better natural history would put aside such childish 
stories; its business would be truth, not entertainment. And ideally, according 
to Bacon, its language would be so plain that “the treasure-house of words” 
would be demolished, and words and things packed together like building 
materials, to “take up as little space as possible in the warehouse.”  33  
 Yet language would not surrender so quickly. One clue to what is at stake 
in rival versions of natural history might be the different timetables assigned 
to the replacement of one worldview by another. If 1657 constitutes one 
landmark for Foucault, another chapter singles out a text from 1605: 
 Don Quixote  is a negative of the Renaissance world; writing has ceased 
to be the prose of the world; resemblances and signs have dissolved their 
former alliance; similitudes have become deceptive and verge upon 
the visionary or madness; things remain stubbornly within their ironic 
identity: they are no longer anything but what they are; words wander 
off on their own, without content, without resemblance to ﬁ ll their 
emptiness; they are no longer the marks of things; they lie sleeping 
between the pages of books and covered in dust. 
 In Cervantes’s masterpiece, on this account, the estrangement of words from 
things becomes absolute. Henceforth the old dynamic of natural history, its 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    75
empire of signs, will belong to the madman alone, or to his ghostwriting 
double, the poet. “Beneath the established signs, and in spite of them, he 
hears another, deeper discourse, which recalls the time when words glittered 
in the universal resemblance of things.”  34  It is because Lord Chandos no 
longer hears that discourse that he ceases to be a poet. But Bacon’s refusal 
to hear it allows him to cast out the idols. As  Don Quixote  frees words from 
things, its companion volume of 1605,  The Advancement of Learning , protects 
things from words, and prepares a future in which natural history will have 
no room for poets.  35  
 The World of Poetry, the Mustard Seed 
 Eventually poets themselves would lament their eviction from the fabulous 
garden of nature. No story about the history of English poetry has proved 
more powerful and lasting than the turn epitomized by Hofmannsthal’s let-
ter and also subscribed to by Foucault: a vision of that seventeenth-century 
moment when things lost their magic and sealed a divorce from words. That 
story, already well established, runs through the ﬁ rst great  History of English 
Poetry  (1774–81), by Thomas Warton. Warton prefaced his history with two 
long dissertations, “On the Origin of Romantic Fiction in Europe” and “On 
the Introduction of Learning into England,” and the opposition of romance 
and learning, or fancy and truth, sets a model for the work as a whole.  36  
During the past two centuries, he argues, “the fashion of treating every 
thing scientiﬁ cally” has advanced judgment over imagination. Warton is of 
two minds about this revolution, whose beneﬁ ts of “much good sense, good 
taste, and good criticism” he approves, but whose long-term consequences he 
passionately deplores: the “colder magic” and “tamer mythology” of modern 
times have devastated “true poetry.”  37  Like many poets of his generation, he 
idolizes the past, when imagination—or superstition—gave life to things. 
Their world is silent now. 
 Later histories of English poetry have regularly followed Warton’s line. To 
an extraordinary extent they share not only his sense of loss but also his two 
minds.  38  Competing narratives about developments in poetry vie from the 
seventeenth century to the present. One is progressive, a story about good 
taste and reﬁ nement that gradually unsnarled the fantasies, hyperboles, and 
pedantries of early writers and brought the pleasures of verse to a far wider 
audience. The other is retrospective, a story about a failure of imagination and 
feeling that shrugged off any sense of wonder and turned the whole world 
into prose. Dryden, Pope, and Johnson are the heroes—or more often the 
villains—of the ﬁ rst story, and the Romantics—at least in their own eyes—the 

76    WHAT GALILEO SAW
heroes of the second, who restored the wonder of the world. But a fuller 
story would take account of the interpenetration of these two modes. Pope, 
for instance, thought of himself as upholding older poetic values against the 
benighted hacks of his own time, and the Romantic revolt against eighteenth-
century verse not only harked back to earlier authors but also set out to bring 
a forward-looking purity to poetic language and a deeper sort of imagina-
tion to future poets. A similar doubleness of view impels the classic early 
twentieth-century modernists. As historians of poetry, both Ezra Pound and 
T. S. Eliot respond to the distant drum of ancient music—whether Li Po and 
Arnaut or Virgil and Dante—and prefer the traditional masters of verse to the 
insipidity or spilt religion of recent poetasters; but at the same time they are 
driven to reinvent tradition and Make It New. No one insists more strenu-
ously than Eliot that a sense of history makes a writer “acutely conscious” of 
“his own contemporaneity,” and that each new work of art forever alters the 
past. Yet Warton’s lament over the conquest of fancy by truth still resonates 
in Eliot’s regret about the seventeenth-century “dissociation of sensibility, . . . 
from which we have never recovered.”  39  For classic modernists too, it seems, 
poetry fell from grace when things lost their magic. 
 Moreover, science must primarily take the blame. When literary histo-
rians revived the metaphysical poets, in the twentieth century, and elevated 
them to ﬁ xtures of the canon, they customarily charged scientiﬁ c rationalism 
with having put an end to “the whole complex of physical and metaphysi-
cal analogies that had bound together man and his world and his Maker,” 
according to Douglas Bush. “In the scientiﬁ c and skeptical air of the later 
seventeenth century both poetry and religion were in danger of suffoca-
tion”; and though Bush concedes that “some persons might regard that as 
the ﬁ nal proof of maturity,” he is clearly not one of those persons.  40  Neither 
was Marjorie Nicolson, long acknowledged the leading scholar of relations 
between science and literature. Despite her learned and sensitive studies of 
the ways that poets made use of such discoveries as Newton’s optics, Nicol-
son regards the seventeenth-century rupture of the “Circle of Perfection” as 
an unmitigated disaster: “ ‘Correspondence’ between macrocosm and micro-
cosm, which man had accepted as basic to faith, was no longer valid in a new 
mechanical universe and mechanical world.” The prime instigator, or culprit, 
of this change was Bacon, who inveighed against the human tendency to 
impose regularities on nature. To him the notion that all celestial bodies 
move in perfect circles was no more than a ﬁ ction; nor did he accept the 
medical commonplace that four humors in the body, corresponding to the 
four elements, determine each person’s temperament. Such doubts would 
quickly sap the life from poems. To understand the literature of the English 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    77
Renaissance, Nicolson concludes, we must “think as they thought before the 
‘Death of a World,’ before the animate macrocosm and the living microcosm 
disappeared, and their place was taken by a mechanical clock and men with 
mechanical hearts.”  41  
 Nicolson’s fervent embrace of the Circle, or what once was called The 
Elizabethan World Picture, is sparked by “ﬁ lial piety” toward poets she 
loves—Donne, Herbert, Milton—and her urge to protect them not only 
from Bacon but also from “enlightened” critics like Samuel Johnson. Her 
defensiveness, however, often seems to extend to the poets themselves, who 
need protection from the centrifugal force of their own restlessness. Herbert, 
for instance, ﬁ gures as a poet “who found shelter from the incomprehensible 
universe in faith,” and whose most typical poem is “Content.” Yet Nicolson’s 
sheltered hero was in fact a good friend of the man who broke the Circle, 
whose  Advancement of Learning  he helped translate into Latin. And Bacon 
returned the favor when he dedicated his  Translation of Certain Psalmes into 
English Verse  (1625) “To his very good frend Mr. George Herbert”: “The 
paines, that it pleased you to take, about some of my Writings, I cannot 
forget. . . . I thought, that in respect of Diuinitie, and Poesie, met (whereof 
the one is the Matter, the other the Stile of this little Writing) I could not 
make better choice.”  42  The enmity that later critics would perceive between 
the ways of science and poetry evidently went unnoticed by these collabora-
tors, who pay homage to God and nature equally. 
 The brilliant Latin poem that Herbert wrote in 1621 to honor the recently 
published  Novum Organum  shows how well he read the work of his friend. 
After searching for twenty-four lines for an image or phrase that will epitomize 
Bacon, it settles on a peculiar emblem: “in his natural Grain / A Mustard-Seed, 
bitter to Others, growing great itself” ( ínque Naturalibus / Granum Sinapis, acre 
Alijs, crescens sibi ).  43  The little image stakes a mighty claim; as any Christian 
reader would know, it evokes Christ’s parables of sowing, speciﬁ cally Mark 
4:30–32. The mustard seed represents the kingdom of God. At ﬁ rst it is tiny, 
“but when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and 
shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the 
shadow of it” (King James Bible). How does this apply to Bacon? Herbert is 
clearly responding to Aphorism 116 of  Novum Organum , which conﬁ des that 
the author does not expect to live to complete his work but instead will con-
duct himself calmly and usefully, “and meanwhile sow seeds of a purer truth 
for the generations to come.”  44  Bacon’s own kingdom has yet to come, and 
Herbert’s last line calls on posterity to complete the portrait: “ O me probè las-
sum! Iuuate, Posteri! ” But the poem itself already envisions a new dispensation, 
where nature, divinity, and poetry will join in communion. Natural history 

78    WHAT GALILEO SAW
contains the seeds of faith, and as it grows it will ﬁ nd room for poets as well 
as all other creatures. 
 Herbert was a Baconian, it seems. Like his friend, he set out to protect the 
natural world from the tyranny of words and other idols. Suspicions of theory 
inform the new science as well as poems that respond to it. In recent decades, 
critics have tended to draw such poets outside the closed circle of faith and 
art and to place them ﬁ rmly in a world of political and social turmoil. But for 
Nicolson the turmoil in the heavens was more important. The new cosmol-
ogy broke the Circle of Perfection, and not even Shakespeare was immune; 
like Lord Chandos, he “ceased writing at the very time that the new Phi-
losophy called all in doubt to his contemporary poet [ John Donne]. Was that, 
I wonder, mere coincidence, or did Shakespeare, who always had his ﬁ nger 
upon the pulse of his time, deliberately retire to a simpler life from a world 
and universe that were growing unintelligible?”  45  Poor Shakespeare! Evi-
dently he could face the world and universe of  Lear but not Galileo’s moons. 
 Yet Nicolson’s ﬁ xation on cosmology seems rather myopic. Did the circu-
lar heavens really provide a sanctuary, or crutch, for the poets she loves? The 
evidence of their poems suggests a far more complex response. Consider the 
single most important witness for the disruptive effect of the new philoso-
phy, Donne’s “Anatomie of the World” (1611). A classic of correspondence 
theory, it argues explicitly that “ Weaknesse in the want of correspondence of heaven 
and earth ” (in the words of a marginal gloss) has destroyed art. But the art of 
the poem itself depends on the violent drama of shaking spheres; on strained 
comparisons, hyperbole, and frantic nostalgia for a harmony that is now in 
its grave. Cosmologically speaking, Donne goes over the top. “The Sun is 
lost, and th’earth, and no man’s wit / Can well direct him, where to looke 
for it. / . . . ’Tis all in pieces, all cohærence gone” (lines 207–8, 213). Yet this 
distraction is the enabling condition of the poem’s own wit. The crumbling 
of correspondences, a decay that began in Eden with original sin, excites the 
ingenious, far-fetched metaphors that both manifest and repair the current 
broken state of man. Donne immerses himself in the new learning; like the 
earth itself, he moves.  46  In that respect he reﬂ ects his age, whose writers vibrate 
to breaking circles, to mutability, and to the discord that follows the shaking 
of “degree, priority, and place, / Inﬁ xture, course, proportion, season, form, / 
Ofﬁ ce and custom, in all line of order” (Shakespeare seems to have relished 
Ulysses’s picture of chaos).  47  These jarring images are not departures from the 
art of Spenser, Shakespeare, and Donne. At critical junctures they  are  that art. 
 Viewed in this way, Lord Chandos’s crisis did not belong to him alone; it 
marks him as a poet of his time. Moreover, in looking backward at a world of 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    79
harmonies forever lost, he shares a point of view not only with poets but also 
with historians, including such unlikely confederates as Nicolson, E. M. W. 
Tillyard, C. S. Lewis, Foucault, Thomas Warton, and T. S. Eliot, who dream 
of an age when “The world itself was a ‘metaphysical’ poem,” in the words 
of Joseph Mazzeo, created by God to arouse the wonder of men, so that in 
the eyes of the poet “the universe is a vast net of correspondences which 
unites the whole multiplicity of being.”  48  The treasure-house of natural his-
tory proved especially rich in marvelous correspondences—or metaphors, 
analogies, and conceits—for poets to draw on, or to lament. Unfortunately, 
however, God, an inveterate punster, had written the world in riddles or secret 
code. Like the unity of many metaphysical poems, the unity of being had to 
be taken on faith. 
 Thus poets struggled to decipher the ingeniously cryptic Book of Nature 
and seldom agreed in their translations. Each Renaissance writer makes 
his own phoenix.  49  But it was just this competition, one might argue, that 
sparked a golden age of poetry. The metaphysical conceit expresses a tension, 
not an accord, between words and the things they can never directly name. 
Hence the art of similitudes burst with energy just at the moment when two 
epistemes collided (a moment that Foucault ignores on principle) or when 
the Circle broke, scattering images everywhere. As words were freed from 
things, they came to life. In retrospect, then, the poem that Lord Chandos 
was born to write was not the synthesis that would unite all being; it was 
the broken poem he coauthored with Bacon and Hofmannsthal, the Lord 
Chandos letter. 
 Nor did things really stop speaking. In 1600 and long afterward, natu-
ral history belonged largely to poets, whose business required attention not 
only to the human microcosm and cosmic macrocosm but also to everyday 
creatures and things: animals, ﬂ owers, rivers, trees, and even some stones. All 
of those talked incessantly, with voices lent from innumerable authors, from 
Homer, Ovid, and the Psalms, as well as from Aristotle and Pliny and other 
collectors of lore about the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Yet as natural 
history adapted to a disenchanted world, so did the language that writers put 
in the mouth of nature; the lyrics of birds, for instance, gradually stopped 
alluding to classical myths. When the cuckoo and the nightingale came face-
to-face with Bacon, they hardly ceased their everlasting chatter. But those 
who translated their songs into English had to ﬁ nd words that dull-eared 
human beings could understand. Such words can tell us how to hear the 
language of creation, the constantly shifting pidgin that ornithologists share 
with birds and poets.  50  This is the natural history of poetics. 

80    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 II 
 The Cuckoo and Nightingale Speak 
 What do birds say? In a state of nature—if such a thing were possible—they 
would speak for themselves, expressing their being, responding to the world 
around them, and conversing with all their fellow creatures, not least that 
creature man. “Here I am,” the cuckoo says; it tells us its own name. And 
since its song arrives at the beginning of spring, the famous Middle English 
lyric that mimics its sound is a  reverdie or joyous welcome of spring. 
 Svmer is icumen in, 
 Lhude sing cuccu! 
 Groweth sed and bloweth med 
 And springth the wde nu— 
 Sing cuccu! 
 Awe bleteth after lomb, 
 Lhouth after calue cu, 
 Bulluc sterteth, bucke uerteth, 
 Murie sing cuccu! 
 Cuccu, cuccu! 
 Wel singes thu cuccu, 
 Ne swik thu nauer nu! 
 Sing cuccu nu, sing cuccu! 
 Sing cuccu, sing cuccu nu!  51  
 (Spring has come in, / Loud sing cuckoo! / Seeds grow and meadows 
bloom / And the woods spring up now— / Sing cuckoo! // The ewe 
bleats after the lamb, / The cow lows after the calf, / The bullock leaps, 
the buck farts, / Merrily sing cuckoo! // Cuckoo, cuckoo! / You sing 
well cuckoo, / Don’t you stop ever now! // Sing cuckoo now, sing 
cuckoo! / Sing cuckoo, sing cuckoo now!) 
 We do not know who composed this song, preserved by monks in the 
mid-thirteenth century; if it is a folk song, the folk who wrote it must 
have been skilled and clever.  52  Much of the cleverness involves the musical 
form, a round for six voices that circle each other and, exhorted by lan-
guage, apparently never stop. The cuckoo is a very repetitious bird. “Cuckoo, 
cuckoo” is all it sings (at least in English), “Cryinge nothinge but her oune 
name even vnto a tædious importunitie,” according to one early modern 
guide.  53  Such monotony might express mourning or boredom—“bitter in 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    81
breast-hoard”—as in the Anglo-Saxon  Seafarer (lines 53–55). But in “The 
Cuckoo Song” it stands for irrepressible vitality.  54  The spring is alive—at ﬁ rst 
with the blossoming of the outdoors, seed and meadow and wood, then with 
the barnyard chorus of sound effects as young ones wander away from their 
dams and the rising generation kicks up its heels, and ﬁ nally, again and again, 
with the cheerleading cuckoo. Everybody sings. A remarkable redundancy 
of sounds—assonance, consonance, internal rhyme—links all these individu-
als together; for instance, “sed,” “med,” and “wde” intertwine, and the click-
ing  c ’s of “calue,” “cu,” “bulluc,” and “bucke” echo the “cuccu” that presides 
over the glee. But the special trick of the song is the way that the bird and 
the human voices share the refrain.  55  “Sing cuccu!” might be addressed to 
the bird, encouraging it to keep on cuckooing, but it also might be asking  us 
to join the chorus, to act like cuckoos, to sing our one song merrily and well, 
to sing eternally “cuckoo” and never stop. This is a very egalitarian note; it 
suggests that, caught up in the evergreen rounds and rites of spring, people 
are just as happy and mindless as the rest of creation. 
 That state of nature was only a fable, however; it soon became clear that 
not all creatures are created equal. By 1400, a sense of hierarchy informs 
the natural history of poets no less than the parliament or court. In “The 
Cuckoo and the Nightingale; or The Book of Cupid, God of Love,” a 
poem long attributed to Chaucer and later translated into modern English by 
Wordsworth, the rabble and gentry clash.  56  The cuckoo is a  low bird, authori-
ties agree. In debate with the high-toned nightingale, a rival herald of spring, 
its song seems not only monotonous but also  lewd , in the original sense of the 
word: ignorant, crude, ill-bred. One bird is a bumpkin and probably a Lollard, 
the other a noble soul. The words they voice deﬁ ne the gulf between them. 
He sings a “trewe and pleyn” vernacular; she trills courtly French jargon such 
as “Ocy! Ocy!”—which means “Kill!,” she sweetly explains, since uncouth 
unloving creatures ought to be dead.  57  Plain song and speech reﬂ ect dishonor 
on the cuckoo. Moreover, they point to his ill repute in matters of love— his , 
because by convention the cuckoo is male, even when sowing his eggs, while 
the nightingale is female, even though it is males who strike up their mating 
songs in the spring.  58  Cuckoos, like other lower-class males, want only one 
thing, one note in sex or song, but nightingales, like other well-bred females, 
spend their time brooding on reﬁ nements of love, its beauty and its power to 
educate the heart. The bird who “spekest wonder faire” is a lady in plumage; 
she looks down on nature. 
 By the age of Lord Chandos and Bacon, the language of birds had little 
to do with nature; their chatter had been translated into human tongues with 
human purposes. According to books of natural history as well as poets, birds 

82    WHAT GALILEO SAW
spoke directly to people, conveying messages or warnings. Thus Edward 
Topsell reports the opinions of many learned authors on what the cuckoo 
 means . For instance, “At this day in some Countreys when a man heareth 
ﬁ rst the Cuckoe, hee asketh her how many years hee shall lyve, and then after 
the quæstion hearkeneth to the nomber of the reiterated voices vttered in 
that place where hee ﬁ rst heard her, whereby hee maketh his coniecture 
of the leingth of his oune life, accountinge euery note or sound of the 
Cuckoe for a yeres life vnto himselfe. And this hee doeth very wisely.”  59  We 
are not told how the cuckoo obtained this information, or for what reason 
a bird should know such things. Nor do these signs suggest a universe of 
correspondences. Instead they transform the world of nature into a personal, 
magical resource, where a cunning man can decipher secrets written only 
for him. And poets also heard their own names when birds talked to them. 
Natural history offered a treasury of conceits, in which things could be 
interpreted, like cryptograms, as signatures or marks of their human owners. 
In this way the Renaissance Book of Nature resembles a rhyming dictionary 
more than a bible; the key poetic catchwords are always already inscribed in 
ﬂ ora and fauna, ready to pair with any mood or idea. 
 Philomel Talks to Poets 
 When most poets remembered the nightingale, therefore, they thought about 
poets, and mostly about themselves. Philomela leads her own life in myth and 
tradition, quite independent of the bird who is merely her earthly simula-
crum, and writers often identify with her as the archetypal poet, long suffer-
ing, self-pitying, and unappreciated.  60  Thus the Elizabethan pioneer George 
Gascoigne, “who ﬁ rst beate the path to that perfection which our best Poets 
haue aspired to since his departure” (according to Thomas Nashe), explicitly 
compares “my case to that of fayre  Phylomene , abused by the bloudy king 
hir brother by lawe.”  61  This was no idle complaint; an illegal marriage had 
cooped the author in court cases, debtors’ jail, and the army for more than 
a decade, and his books had been banned, in effect cutting out his tongue: 
“These ﬂ atterers, (in love) which falshood meane, / Not once aproach, to 
heare my pleasant song.” 
 In  The Complaynt of Phylomene  (1576), the nightingale rehearses her own 
desolating story, her rape and mutilation by Tereus, but she also directs her fury 
against the enemies of skillful poetry and art. Why should she sing to them? 
 For such unkinde, as let the cukowe ﬂ ye, 
 To sucke mine eggs, whiles I sit in the thicke? 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    83
 And rather praise, the chattring of a pye, 
 Than hir that sings, with brest against a pricke? 
 Nay let them go, to marke the cuckowes talke. 
 This poet will sing in solitude, like Philomene, for an audience sufﬁ ciently 
cultivated to tell the difference between “brute birds” and those of true feel-
ing and breeding. 
 For he that wel,  Dan Nasoes verses notes, 
 Shal ﬁ nde my words to be no fained thing. 
 Good nightingales have learned their art from Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso). 
Moreover, Ovid authenticates Gascoigne’s own story, not only by providing a 
classical source for Philomene but also by exemplifying the grieving, exiled 
poet whose woes and words are anything but “fained.” Both writers have felt 
the thorn in the breast that, according to legend, provokes the nightingale’s 
song. The circle of poetry is thus complete; the myth of the bird conﬁ rms 
the truth of the poet. 
 Gascoigne’s identiﬁ cation with Philomene goes further still. His major 
contribution to the natural history of poetics consists of a long and detailed 
“expo[si]tion of al such notes as the nightingale dot[h] commonly use to 
sing,” as a marginal gloss informs us.  62  Not once but twice, the poem records 
and explains the four distinct words pronounced by the song. This admira-
tion for the nightingale’s variety was quite traditional. From ancient times 
both naturalists and poets had marveled that so many different sounds could 
emanate from one small bird. Thus Pliny devotes the bulk of his nightingale 
lore to the endless ingenuity of her music. “In sum, she varieth and altereth 
her voice to all keies: one while, ful of her largs, longs, briefs, semibriefs, and 
minims; another while in her crotchets, quavers, semiquavers, and double 
semiquavers.”  63  But no one before Gascoigne had spelled out exactly what 
she was saying. “Hir foremost note,  Tereu, Tereu ,” recalls the savage Thra-
cian king who raped her and cut out her tongue. This sound was new, and 
it would resonate through English poetry. Henceforth a man or woman of 
letters who eavesdropped on the song might try to imagine, like T. S. Eliot 
or Virginia Woolf, that birds were speaking Greek.  64  
 Phylomene’s second note,  fye  or  phy , repeated thirty-two times in the next 
sixty lines, “declares disdaine” for the “ﬁ lthy lecher lewde” who befouled 
her, and it also ﬁ ts into her name. Next comes a learned disquisition on 
“ Jug ,  Jug ,  Jug .” Gascoigne associates the word both with Tereus, a “juggler” 
(deceiver and trickster), and with Phylomene herself, as a “jugulator,” who 
cut the jugular vein of Itys, Tereus’s son.  65  The fourth word, Nèmesis, is even 

84    WHAT GALILEO SAW
weirder. No one else (so far as I know) had ever heard that note in birdsong.  66  
But the goddess of revenge aims less at Tereus than at Gascoigne himself, 
admonished to “Remember al my words, / And beare them wel in minde, / 
And make thereof a metaphore” for personal application. The conclusion 
expounds the moral: the poet’s wrongful marriage has condemned him to 
be a wandering, hated bird who “howles and cries to see his children stray”; 
and he has learned his lesson. 
 Beare with me (Lord) my lusting dayes are done, 
 Fayre  Phylomene forbad me fayre and ﬂ at 
 To like such love, as is with lust begonne, 
 The lawful love is best, and I like that. 
 As the poem ends, all the mythological apparatus converts to self-reﬂ ection, 
perhaps with some self-satisfaction: “My Lord shal do no wrong, / To say 
( George ) thinke on  Phylomelâes song .” Every time he hears the nightingale, 
and still more when he writes about her, he will hear words that remind him 
of his own story. Indeed, he owns this bird, whom he has trained to sing to 
George. 
 Most Renaissance poets employed the same art; they made birds into words 
that spoke expressly to them. When Sir Philip Sidney compares himself to 
Philomela, for instance, he egotistically claims that his love-longing is worse 
than her rape, “since wanting is more woe then too much having.”  67  The art 
of genre compels this perverse rivalry: in the duel between men and women 
that underlies the conventions of lovers’ complaints, the “womanlike” bird 
must yield to the wounded man. Nature has nothing to do with the case. 
Edmund Spenser departed still further from nature. Images of nightingales 
ﬂ it through his early verse and haunt  The Shepheardes Calender  (1579) yet 
seem deliberately out of phase with the seasons. Indifferent to spring, his 
Philomel weeps in August through “wastefull woodes” and “gastfull grove,” 
and mourns in November as winter deadens the world.  68  This bird can-
not carry a tune of her own; she echoes the moods of the poet. And other 
poets also heard only what they wanted to hear. Brooding on the death 
of “Astrophill”—Sidney, the “phill” (or lover) of “astro” (Stella or star)—
Matthew Royden projects his grief into the air. 
 The birds di d tune their mourning call, 
 And  Philomell for  Astrophill , 
 Vnto her notes annext a phill.  69  
 Here singing seems identical with writing. Through the labored magic of 
words, the “Phil” of Philomell chimes with the “phill” of Astrophill, so 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    85
that the nightingale sings—or writes—another syllable into her call, recall-
ing “Phillip.” This terrible pun assumes the right of the poet to translate the 
language of birds. Philomell copies the notes of his heart and mind. 
 But what the cuckoo usually says is something else. When Shakespeare 
hears it cry its name in spring, at the end of  Love’s Labour’s Lost , he cannot 
help recalling another word: 
 The cuckoo then on every tree, 
 Mocks married men, for thus sings he, 
 
Cuckoo! 
 Cuckoo, cuckoo! O word of fear, 
 Unpleasing to a married ear!  70  
 Cuckoo and cuckold go together. That is because the cuckoo, as Chaucer 
had said, is “ever unkynde”—not only cruel but unnatural—since it does not 
hatch or raise its own kind but rather lays its eggs in the nests of other birds.  71  
This practice is supposed to account for the word “cuckold,” though many 
etymologists have noted the illogic of associating it with betrayed husbands 
instead of straying lovers. In any case, the song should jar the ears of Shake-
speare’s amorous swains, who have just ﬂ irted theatrically with marriage. 
The word is all the more ominous onstage because sung by “Ver”—that is, 
Vertumnus or Spring. A long-standing poetic tradition held that the ﬁ rst 
birdsong of spring would determine the lover’s fate. A lewd cuckoo foretold 
jinxing and jilting; a nightingale’s warble promised true, sweet love. 
 Thus Milton’s ﬁ rst sonnet prays for the nightingale’s favor: 
 Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day, 
 
First heard before the shallow Cuccoo’s bill 
 
Portend success in love; O if  Jove ’s will 
 
Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay, 
 Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate 
 
Foretell my hopeles doom in som Grove ny: 
 
As thou from yeer to yeer hast sung too late 
 For my relief; yet hadst no reason why.  72  
 The poet applies the classic debate between cuckoo and nightingale to his 
own situation. He also complains: evidently the bird of hope and love has 
kept missing its rendezvous with this young man, despite his allegiance to 
Love and the Muse. This poem is all about Milton. He wants the right bird 
to talk to  him , in words he will understand because they quote earlier poems. 
Had Milton actually listened to birdsongs? Surely he had, in Italy as well as 
England. Yet nothing in his verse can prove it. Signiﬁ cantly, both Sonnet 1 

86    WHAT GALILEO SAW
and “Il Penseroso” entreat Philomel to “daign a Song” without any indica-
tion that she has complied. 
 Sweet Bird that shunn’st the noise of folly, 
 Most musicall, most melancholy! 
 Thee Chauntress oft the Woods among, 
 I woo to hear thy eeven Song.  73  
 She is his soul mate; he woos her as if he were a lover whose gentle devo-
tion, and craving to hear her, might compensate for the violation that forced 
her to hide. In the romantic vision of these woods, as in Ariosto or Spenser, 
Philomela poses as an enchantress (the older meaning of “Chauntress”), 
ready to reveal her human form at any moment. But mostly, of course, she 
serves as the poet’s Muse, whose entreated song is already metamorphosing 
into his own. 
 The image of the poet as a solitary singer, a wanderer who haunts secluded 
places, shunning and shunned by the crowd, visible only by moonlight, a 
dreamer who lives in the past, communing only with night and the self, was 
not invented by “Il Penseroso,” but its nightingale conveyed an irresistible 
sweetness and charm, and afterward it could not be forgotten. The genera-
tion of British poets who loitered at evening by groves and graveyards, after 
the 1740s, carried a precious volume of Milton’s early verse in their pockets. 
It was the sweet bird they loved (they seldom loved women). What enrap-
tured them most, however, was the history of poetry, not natural history. 
Already in Milton’s time the birds who sang in poetry were usually quoting 
earlier poems rather than following nature. Yet naturalists might notice that 
something is missing: fresh ways of responding to aerial tones and timbres. 
Even the nightingale’s “jug jug,” a croak or warning call that interrupts the 
famous liquid crescendo, falls silent in Milton and his disciples.  74  A musical 
and melancholy bird must sing sweetly forever. 
 From Words to Things to Worlds: John Ray and James Thomson 
 As myths about nature faded, natural histories also began to shrink. By the 
late seventeenth century, words had lost much of their magic. Birds contin-
ued to sing in verse, to be sure, and any number of poets addressed them and 
identiﬁ ed with them. But poetic conventions drove the style, increasingly 
fatigued; young poets, like cuckoos, repeated one note, which they usually 
borrowed from Milton.  75  Nor did the naturalists supply new myths. In the 
great  Ornithology (1678) compiled by Francis Willughby and John Ray, things 
prevail over words; all the old stories and signs are ruthlessly cut and replaced 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    87
by precise description: “The beam-feathers of the Wings are nineteen in 
number.” Indeed, Ray can scarcely credit that cuckoos leave their eggs in other 
birds’ nests; “Which thing seems so strange, monstrous, and absurd, that for my 
part I cannot sufﬁ ciently wonder there should be such an example in nature; 
nor could I have ever been induced to believe that such a thing had been done 
by Natures instinct, had I not with my own eyes seen it. For Nature in other 
things is wont constantly to observe one and the same Law and Order agree-
able to the highest reason and prudence.”  76  The order of nature leaves little 
room for signatures or wonders. Nor do the words of poets impress a good 
Baconian like Ray: “He that uses many Words for the explaining any Subject, 
doth, like the  Cuttle-Fish , hide himself, for the most Part, in his own Ink.”  77  
 Thus natural history was no longer written for poets. Ray brings night-
ingales familiarly down to earth, securely ﬁ xed in a world of well-attested, 
ordinary facts. Even their songs are uninspired, learned from their elders or 
mimicked from other birds and sometimes from human beings. Similarly, 
whatever words they speak are parroted from overheard, unmagical human 
talk.  78  These are domestic birds; their habitat is mostly the cage, not the 
wild. Care and feeding dominate the article on nightingales in  Ornithology , 
reﬂ ecting the “large London market in singing birds” in the late seventeenth 
century.  79  Ray and Willughby even tell readers the best ways to make night-
ingales sing. Poets resisted this domestication, of course. In “To the Night-
ingale” (1713), Anne Finch prizes her freedom: “Poets, wild as thee, were 
born, / Pleasing best when unconﬁ n’d, / When to Please is least design’d.” 
And in  The Seasons  James Thomson indignantly defends the birds “by tyrant 
Man / Inhuman caught, and in the narrow Cage / From Liberty conﬁ n’d, 
and boundless Air.”  80  Women especially beat against the bars of their cage. A 
sense of isolation and voicelessness bonds Finch and Elizabeth Singer Rowe 
(“Philomela”) with their nightingale sisters. But such poets were also react-
ing to the amused condescension of men who put them in their place. They 
know why the caged bird sings. 
 Yet the poetry of earth, like natural history itself, is never dead. In the long 
run, one might argue, the turn from words to things proved wonderfully 
fruitful; it inspired a new kind of nature poetry, so dominant that it came 
to seem identical with poetry itself. The fulcrum of this revolutionary turn 
was Thomson, whose inﬂ uence on later poets can hardly be exaggerated.  The 
Seasons  brings to life not only Ray’s perspectives on nature but also Sir Isaac 
Newton’s “ pure intelligence , whom G OD /  To Mortals lent, to trace his bound-
less Works / From Laws sublimely simple.”  81  The  Principia  marked an era in 
human history; for the ﬁ rst time, it seemed that a human being had glimpsed 
the few simple physical principles from which God had created the world. 

88    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Yet nature included more than celestial mechanics. Both theologically and 
scientiﬁ cally, the principles of natural philosophy required a complementary 
insight into principles of natural history. John Ray had already formulated 
some of those laws, above all in  The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of 
the Creation (1691). His studies of ﬂ ora and fauna founded a new “Natural 
System” that revolutionized botany and zoology, and prepared the way for 
a “physico-theology” that would enable man to cooperate with nature in 
cultivating and civilizing the earth.  82  Later, in  The Moralists; A Philosophi-
cal Rhapsody  (1709), Anthony Ashley Cooper, the 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, 
argued that naturalists, who understood systems of plants and animals, should 
be especially qualiﬁ ed to grasp the principle that “all things in this World 
are  united .”  83  Thomson takes up the task as scientist, philosopher, poet, and 
choirmaster of nature. 
 No poem matches  The Seasons  in its effort to survey and understand every 
aspect of the natural world. This poet does not want to leave anything out. 
Notoriously,  The Seasons  kept growing in every edition; “Winter,” 405 lines 
when ﬁ rst published in 1726, swelled to 1,069 lines by 1744. But Thomson’s 
claim to be the ﬁ rst, if not the best, of British nature poets is not so much a 
matter of size as of multiple, shifting perspectives. He looks at nature through 
the eyes of earlier poets, of farmers, naturalists, historians, astronomers, theo-
logians, and landowners; he views each season from its beginning to its end, 
from high to low, from spreading plains to seeds beneath the ground, from 
bird to worm and sky to mire, “with a mind that at once comprehends the 
vast, and attends to the minute.”  84  And though he rhapsodizes over what he 
sees, he also wants to tell the truth about it. 
 Thomson wrote about nightingales many times, in many poetic styles, 
from many perspectives. But one extended passage of “Spring” introduced 
a radically new way of hearing birdsong. 
 Lend me your Song, ye Nightingales! oh, pour 
 The mazy-running Soul of Melody 
 Into my varied Verse! while I deduce, 
 From the ﬁ rst Note the hollow Cuckoo sings, 
 The Symphony of Spring, and touch a Theme 
 Unknown to Fame,  the Passion of the Groves . (lines 576–81) 
 Joined by the poet’s verse, the nightingale and cuckoo are no longer rivals; 
they sing together. Thomson was not the ﬁ rst poet, of course, to recognize 
that sexual desire or courtship moved all kinds of birds to greet the spring.  85  
But his song boldly pushes the theme to replace the old myths and repeal 
poetic tradition. The cuckoo is not ridiculing the cuckold, the nightingale 

THE POETRY OF THE WORLD    89
is not melancholy; one passion drives them both. Thus all compose a “har-
mony of mingled sounds” (a “symphony,” in its original meaning). It is a 
heightened awareness of this harmony that so stirs Thomson—not only the 
possibility of writing verse that remains faithful to nature, verse in which 
birds obey their own instincts rather than human conceits, but also a sense 
of nature as a whole, connecting and uniting each part. Johnson’s  Dictionary 
cites the passage from “Spring” to illustrate “deduce”: “To lay down in regu-
lar order, so that the following shall naturally rise from the foregoing.” One 
by one, in Thomson’s deduction, each bird joins the chorus that the cuckoo 
has started, until “the soul of love” ﬁ lls all the air. 
 The Thrush 
 And Wood-Lark, o’er the kind-contending Throng 
 Superior heard, run through the sweetest Length 
 Of Notes, when listening Philomela deigns 
 To let them joy, and purposes, in Thought 
 Elate, to make her Night excel their Day. (lines 598–603) 
 This Philomela, unlike Milton’s, will not be lonely or sad.  86  The social ritu-
als of courtship drive her, and if her kind “in woodland solitudes delight, / 
In unfrequented glooms, or shaggy banks” (lines 644–45), the reason is that 
they can safely make a nest and family there. Thomson describes the mating 
dance, the gathering of moss and sprigs, the feeding and protection of the 
young, with unprecedented detail and precision. All these contribute to a 
love song that is at once ideal and scientiﬁ c.  87  
 Thomson prides himself on his devotion to nature; he puts no words 
in nightingales’ throats. Yet he does put thoughts in their heads, as when 
Philomela “purposes, in Thought / Elate, to make her Night excel their 
Day.” Anthropomorphic projections animate the animal kingdom of  The 
Seasons  and plump its poetic diction: “gay troops,” “coy quiristers,” and 
“tuneful nations” not only humanize but camouﬂ age ﬂ ocks of birds. Ever 
since the Romantics, readers have recoiled from those circumlocutions. Yet 
such phrases, however affected, do serve to afﬁ liate birds with their fellow 
creatures, in quasi-human communities that suggest they are not so different 
from us. From one point of view, this might seem sentimental or conde-
scending, as if the social relations of people provided a model for all creation. 
Compared to earlier views, however, the idea that animals have purposes and 
thoughts of their own seems distinctly progressive. When cuckoos and night-
ingales spoke words that only human beings could understand, their language 
implied that all the world had been designed to serve and speak to man, as 
cuckoos warn cuckolds and Philomela gives advice to George. Most people, 

90    WHAT GALILEO SAW
including poets, considered themselves the sole proprietors of the animal 
kingdom as well as the earth. Thomson does not think so. His birds speak 
to each other, not to people; they make their little plans, enjoy the pleasures 
of companionship, and care unselﬁ shly for their own families; they are living 
beings, not hieroglyphics or emblems. Hence Thomson’s conscience strains 
at caging, hunting, or eating his fellow creatures, who all are part of God’s 
great plan of life. This sentimental vision made much of earlier poetry look 
like a tone-deaf translation of nature into mere human words. And it also 
helped change the world. 
 Thomson’s vision would spread. Despite their quarrels with his poetic 
diction, the great Romantics vibrated to his poetics of natural history. It 
breathes again in Blake’s “Vision of the lamentation of Beulah over Ololon” 
(a “Song of Spring” directly responding to Thomson’s),  88  in Wordsworth’s 
cuckoos and his “thousand blended notes of spring,” in the “One Life” of 
Coleridge and his nightingales, in Cowper and Shelley and Keats, and most 
of all in John Clare, whose future was determined once and for all at the age 
of thirteen, when the opening lines of Thomson’s “Spring” “made my heart 
twitter with joy,” and he was hooked forever on the thrill of catching birds in 
verse (in “The Progress of Rhyme” he would break all records by registering 
at least twelve distinct notes of the nightingale—with four more scribbled 
in the margin).  89  Nor could later writers and readers resist the encompassing 
view of a presence that ﬁ lled all nature: the spirit of Gaia or “th’ informing 
Author” who broods eternally over creation.  90  Many poets still cling to that 
ecological vision. 
 Yet a part of the future also belonged to Lord Chandos. When words lost 
their power over things, a new disquiet came into the world: the fear that 
human beings might be a blight on nature, a windy pathetic static invading 
its silence.  91  Today cuckoos rarely herald the spring. Recently, while visiting 
the English countryside, I was unable to ﬁ nd anyone who had heard one. In 
fact, according to ornithologists, the numbers of both cuckoos and night-
ingales have declined more than 60 percent in the last forty years—victims 
of climate change and the loss of habitats in Africa and breeding grounds in 
Britain.  92  Hence birdsong slowly departs from poems; we frighten away the 
nightingales, and perhaps some day soon none will be left to sing. The disap-
pearance of things always haunted Rainer Maria Rilke; and more recently, in 
the ambiguous phrase “After Nature,” W. G. Sebald implied that descriptions 
of the natural world now register an emptiness where things used to be.  93  
Even the spring might be changing. If so, the poetry of the world will have 
to learn a new language. 

91
  Chapter 5 
 “Look There, Look There!” 
 Imagining Life in  King Lear 
 Invisible Signs 
 Sometimes the line between life and death seems imperceptible. “I know 
when one is dead and when one lives,” King Lear insists, Cordelia’s body 
cradled in his arms; “She’s dead as earth.” But his next words already expose 
the claim as pathetic bravado. “Lend me a Looking-glasse, / If that her breath 
will mist or staine the stone, / Why then she lives.” Lear cannot trust his per-
ceptions. Suffering has racked his senses as well as his brain, and his former 
conﬁ dence in telling what is true from what is false has broken down. Now 
death seems very nearly one with life. Only a series of physical tests can draw 
out their subtle distinctions: “This feather stirs, she lives” or “looke on her. 
Looke her lips, / Looke there, looke there.”  1  
 Moreover, the audience shares his uncertainty. Cordelia had not died in 
an earlier play,  The True Chronicle History of King Leir , and those who ﬁ rst saw 
Shakespeare’s version of the story might well have been shocked by this sudden 
blow.  2  And modern viewers, although they may know what is coming, can still 
feel the shock. One reason for the incredible power of this harrowing scene 
is our involvement with the illusion of hope as well as with pain. As specta-
tors we view an actress who might still recover at any moment (anticipating 
Nahum Tate’s version). Bodies do come to life on the stage. When the fallen 
Falstaff, after his bloated carcass has been memorialized by Prince Harry—
“Poor Jack, farewell: / I could have better spar’d a better man”—suddenly 

92    WHAT GALILEO SAW
rouses and rises up, the wonderful coup de théâtre expresses the essence of 
theatrical magic. “To counterfeit dying, when a man thereby liveth, is to be no 
counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeede.”  3  The aftermath of 
every tragedy incorporates this moral; as life springs eternal, those who played 
dead come back, revived by applause. Against our better judgment, at the end 
of  Lear , we are forced to look for invisible signs of life. A feather stirs, at least in 
imagination (the feather too is imagined, in most productions); Cordelia’s lips 
undetectably quiver. “Looke there, looke there.” Just at this instant Lear him-
self dies, though neither we nor Edgar can be quite sure—“He faints” is the 
ﬁ rst reaction. Father and daughter alike will come no more; ﬁ ve unbearable 
nevers block their return. But pronouncing “never” does not close the scene 
for Lear, who continues to talk and to hope. So long as imagination survives, 
the appearance of death need not be conclusive. Some other test might always 
uncover a lingering vital sign, encouraging us to look there. 
 These doubts were not Lear’s alone. In Shakespeare’s time, and long before 
and after, the line between life and death proved hard to draw. Pliny the 
Elder had told many stories about people who appeared to be dead and 
then revived. Later the great Duns Scotus (ca. 1265–1308) was reportedly 
buried during a cataleptic ﬁ t until a canny servant dug him out. Miraculous 
examples of resuscitation—the “Lazarus syndrome,” as it is called today—
were almost routine in early modern lore. “Many are the cases of men left 
for dead, or laid out on the deathbed; or carried off for burial, or indeed who 
have been actually buried, who have none the less come back to life again.”  4  
Even medical experts often felt bafﬂ ed by such seeming life-in-death. When 
exactly did someone die? That was not easy to say. In January 1606, a month 
after  King Lear  was performed at court, Sir Everard Digby, convicted in the 
Gunpowder Plot, was hanged, drawn, and quartered. Afterward, “Here is 
the heart of a traytor!” the executioner cried, holding it up to the crowd; but 
what was left of Digby replied, “Thou liest!”  5  Or so the story goes. At the 
moment of indecision, no one could try a better test than Lear’s. “The way 
to know whether a man be dead or not,” according to John Ward, was to “lay 
a feather upon his lips; if it move he is alive, if not, dead.”  6  
 The public also witnessed these rites of passage. The ritual of the death 
watch, when friends and relatives gathered to take leave, offered many chances 
to observe the living ember as it ﬂ ickered and went out. Long before he took 
orders, John Donne must have kept this last vigil, as in “A Valediction for-
bidding mourning”: 
 As virtuous men passe mildly’ away 
 
And whisper to their soules, to goe, 
 Whilst some of their sad friends doe say, 
 
The breath goes now, and some say, no. 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    93
 On such occasions the priest had more to say than the philosopher or the 
physician. Practically speaking, death was no stranger, of course, not even to 
children; nor were the dying shuttled off to hospitals for their last rites.  7  But 
philosophies of nature struggled with deﬁ nitions, largely in vain.  8  Michel 
Foucault has argued that living beings were ﬁ rst invented in the nineteenth 
century, at least in France;  9  and even if that audacious claim is oversimpliﬁ ed, 
it does seem true that what we call the modern “life sciences” originated 
then, when not only the meaning of “science” changed but also the meaning 
of “life.” Biology came into being in 1802, as a word and a concept. Hence 
earlier ages seldom chose to deﬁ ne life as something “organic,” in which an 
internal structural plan coordinates parts into a vital whole that is capable of 
development and growth. Instead they sought the principle of life in some 
mysterious essence—in heat or a humor or most often in breath.  10  Such an 
essence could not be seen but only imagined. 
 Bacon on Life and Death 
 Consider the views of Shakespeare’s contemporary (if not alter ego) Francis 
Bacon. Issues of life and death preoccupied Bacon. In  De Sapientia Veterum 
( On the Wisdom of the Ancients , 1609), a year after  Lear  was ﬁ rst published, he 
traced those issues to the dawn of natural philosophy. When Orpheus fol-
lowed Eurydice to hell “to propitiate the infernal powers,” he represented 
“philosophy personiﬁ ed,” according to Bacon. “For natural philosophy pro-
poses to itself, as its noblest work of all, nothing less than the restitution and 
renovation of things corruptible.”  11  Bacon, like Orpheus, hopes to ﬁ nd har-
monious ways to snatch life back from death; that is the ultimate aim of the 
revolution in science to which he devoted his life. The dream of prolonging 
life indeﬁ nitely, or even of conquering death, inspired much of the medical 
research of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as it continues to do in 
our own times—at an accelerated rate.  12  Often that dream has proved decep-
tive. Notoriously, Bacon died at sixty-six when he caught a chill while pur-
suing his death-defying project (he was freezing a chicken); and Descartes, 
who saw no reason why he should not live to the age of a biblical patriarch, 
also caught cold and died of pneumonia at ﬁ fty-three.  13  Moreover, much of 
the search for an “elixir of life” derived from mystical or alchemical doc-
trines. Outdoing Orpheus, Paracelsus and his many followers believed that 
human bodies might be transmuted like metals in ﬁ re, with the ravages of 
age and illness burned away. Perhaps the Tree of Life that Adam knew could 
bloom again. But the fable of Orpheus might well yield another, contrary 
reading: all efforts to cheat death of its harvest run up against inescapable lim-
its, and the urge to prolong life forever by art must lead to despair in the end. 

94    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Yet Bacon believes that human beings are capable of living for hundreds 
of years. Holy scripture assured him of it, and even after the Flood, when 
“men’s lives had dropped to a quarter of their original length,” the span of 
life approached 200 years. A Roman census in AD 76, recorded by Pliny, 
found numerous centenarians, including at least twenty who were 125 or 
older ( OFB 12:197, 207). In recent times conditions may have changed, but 
longevity might still be restored, Bacon thinks, by healthy habits. Thus he is 
full of conﬁ dence that he can ﬁ nd ways to lengthen life. But unlike Orpheus 
or alchemists, Bacon relies on something more solid than wonder-working 
art: modern philosophy will far surpass ancient wisdom when it commits 
itself fully to facts it can prove and to the empirical method. Hence the 
tests for life that Lear devises—the looking glass, the feather—as well as his 
mistrust of the senses, so often deceived, ﬁ t very well with Bacon’s program. 
“Neither bare hand nor unaided intellect counts for much; for the business 
is done with instruments and aids, which are no less necessary to the intellect 
than to the hand” (11:65). 
 At the same time, no one campaigned so hard as Bacon against confusing 
the sports of imagination with reason and truth. The revolution he called for 
begins with an attack on idols, above all Idols of the Theatre: “In my eyes the 
philosophies received and discovered are so many stories made up and acted 
out, stories which have created sham worlds worthy of the stage” (11:81–83). 
Like Shakespeare’s lunatic, lover, and poet in  A Midsummer Night’s Dream , 
whose “seething braines” and “shaping phantasies” give form to airy nothing, 
the vast majority of pretenders to science had succumbed to “anticke fables” 
and “fairy toys” (5.1.3–17). Imagination, Bacon contends, strives to destroy 
the primal distinction between dead and living things. “Beeing not tyed to the 
Lawes of Matter,” it “may at pleasure ioyne that which Nature hath seuered; & 
seuer that which Nature hath ioyned, and so make vnlawfull Matches & 
diuorses of things” (4:73). In plays and poetry, as in the madness of dreams, 
inanimate objects come to life; a joint stool may be taken for a woman. Such 
“high and vapourous imaginations” resemble the degenerate natural magic of 
alchemy, which fancies that “a fewe drops, or scruples of a liquor” could pro-
long life or restore an old man to youth. Bacon’s project unmasks such theatri-
cal resuscitations. A proper study of nature must work to keep idols in check. 
 Yet Bacon’s own ideas of life seem highly fanciful, by later standards. In 
practice some of his theories fray the borders between dead and living things. 
The two Latin treatises he wrote on the topic,  The Ways of Death  (1611?)— De 
Vijs Mortis , ﬁ rst discovered in the 1970s—and  The History of Life and Death 
(1623), are haunted by invisible and intangible spirits that inhabit all objects, 
whether inanimate or alive. “Every tangible body here with us”—even a 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    95
stone—“contains an invisible and intangible spirit which it overlays and as 
it were clothes.”  14  In human beings two kinds of spirit, one vital, one lifeless, 
sometimes cooperate and sometimes part ways, with fatal results. Both are 
compounded of air and ﬁ re, but air predominates in the nonliving and ﬁ re in 
the living. The vital spirit ( spiritus vitalis ) serves as the “agent and workman” 
of the body, keeping its parts in motion and good repair, like a “vestal ﬂ ame.” 
But the more ﬂ ighty “mortal spirit” ( spiritus mortuales ) struggles against its 
conﬁ nement and constantly tries to escape. When it succeeds, the body dies. 
Yet ﬁ re too can be deadly, when “the spirit, like a gentle ﬂ ame, forever preda-
tory, with the external air colluding with it—air which also sucks and dries 
bodies out—, at last destroys the workshop of the body and its machinery 
and instruments, and renders them incapable of doing the job of repair” 
(12:147–49). Spirits, like temperamental artists, can ruin as well as renew the 
dumb matter they mold. 
 Thus a good physician must imagine ingenious ways to keep spirits bal-
anced and happy. Much of what Bacon prescribes seems directed toward the 
traditional formula of sound minds in sound bodies. Predictable, moderate 
regimens, untroubled by the tensions that tear Lear apart, should help to 
pacify the spirits. Hence diet and exercise should always avoid extremes. 
Similarly, the feelings and passions of the mind must be restrained: great 
joys diffuse the spirits and shorten life, “but joys recollected in tranquillity, 
or the consciousness of joys arising from hope or imagination, are good”; 
and the same rule of moderation applies to love. Nor should one think too 
much: “Admiration and idle reﬂ ection are wonderful for prolonging life, 
for they engage the spirits in business which pleases them, . . . but subtle, 
acute, and sharp inquiry shortens life, for it wearies the spirit and preys on 
it” (12:265–67). Most metaphysicians do not live long, by Bacon’s reckon-
ing, but naturalists and rhetoricians, who contemplate interesting bits of the 
world or chase after “the brightness of words rather than the darkness of 
things,” enjoy a pleasurable old age (even if words deceive them). In any case, 
so long as harmony and peace prevail, the particular course of life hardly 
matters. According to  Sylva Sylvarum , “It conduceth unto  Long Life  . . . Either 
that  Mens Actions bee free and voluntary  . . . Or on the other side, that the  Actions 
of  Men bee full of Regulation, and Commands within themselves .” An example of 
the former is “a Countrey life”; of the latter, “in  Monkes  and  Philosophers , and 
such as doe continually enioyne themselves.”  15  Freedom and self-restraint 
serve equally to frame a happy medium in which the spirits are content to 
stay at home. 
 Bacon also conceives some original last resorts. Both  The History of Life and 
Death  and the  New Atlantis  (1627) assume, for instance, that “life in dens and 

96    WHAT GALILEO SAW
caves where the air does not admit the Sun’s rays can contribute to long life” 
(12:273). Air, when heated, preys on the body, “for ordinary air is a starveling, 
and greedily swallows them all up, spirits, smells, rays, sounds, and the rest” 
(12:357). But most of all it attracts nonliving spirits, whose airiness yearns to 
escape the gross body for company more like itself—like seeking like. Caves 
counteract this process. By excluding both sun and air, they snuff out the 
temptation of spirits to ﬂ ee, and in this way they hold off death. Even history 
supports this principle, since in the past some men, such as anchorites, were 
very long-lived, “and these men generally spent their lives in caves” (12:273). 
To be sure, Bacon does not consider cave life practicable, except perhaps in 
the special circumstances of the New Atlantis.  16  Since “the duties of life are 
more important than life pure and simple,” he cannot advocate remedies that 
involve “abandoning the ofﬁ ces of life” (12:241). Yet the regimens he does 
recommend for prolonging life—for instance, bathing the body in fat or 
oysters or egg yolks or blood—seem driven less by practice than by theory: 
the desiderata of closing the pores and cooling the overheated spirits in the 
blood. When speculating on ways to frustrate death, Bacon often succumbs 
to one of his own Idols of the Cave, where “men fall in love with par-
ticular sciences and reﬂ ections either because they fancy that they are their 
authors and discoverers, or because they have invested a great deal of work 
and become entirely steeped in them” (11:89). 
 One theory especially stimulates Bacon. As he ponders ways to delay 
or even reverse the natural journey toward death, he fastens on the strange 
resemblance of matter to living things. Both are informed by spirits, and both 
strive for a state of equilibrium or rest. Hence the two entwine like quar-
relsome, grappling lovers, fatally coupled yet longing to part. Aging human 
bodies, Bacon says, “begin to suffer the torment devised by Mezentius,  that 
the living perish in the embrace of the dead .”  17  This striking image suggests the 
intimacy as well as the antagonism of the two kinds of spirit. It might even be 
possible to wonder whether inanimate rather than vital spirits represent “the 
living” that want to escape the embrace of the dying body. Guido Giglioni, 
who argues that for Bacon “matter is alive,” explores the paradox: “The life 
of animate beings (living spirits) seems to be, in fact, death; the inanimate 
beings’ tendency to rest, which only for reasons of convenience we call death, 
is, in fact, life (the persistence of the lifeless spirits), or, if not life, at least a 
‘caricature or shadow of immortality itself.’ ”  18  At any rate, the permeable 
boundaries of life and death encourage efforts to ﬁ nd tangible, material 
things that might draw bodies in transit back from the brink. Bacon coaxes 
the quarreling lovers to put up with each other and mend a happy home. 
 By modern standards, however, Bacon’s wildest leap is a confusion of 
realms: inanimate spirits can turn into living creatures. Sometimes generation 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    97
occurs without reproduction or seed. Since nonliving spirits, unlike the liv-
ing, are bound to no cell or organ, they often intermingle with grosser matter, 
“as air is intermixed in snow or froth” (12:351). Hence they may cross over, 
or move up the chain of being. Spirits typically feed on matter, dissolving it 
into spirit that escapes (we know this because the object loses weight, as when 
metal rusts). But when the spirit comes across “obedient” parts that do not 
escape but follow its lead, “then indeed follows shaping into an organic body, 
the fashioning of members and other vital actions both in vegetable bodies 
as in animals” (11:349–51). In this way inanimate matter gives birth to life, 
as when maggots are spawned out of putrefaction. Technically this effect 
should probably not be called “spontaneous generation” (a nineteenth-
century theory) but “equivocal generation” (the Aristotelian theory that 
life may be produced from things unlike itself; a theory that almost every-
one in Bacon’s time accepted).  19  At any rate Bacon—that father of modern 
science—believes in spirits that pass from lifeless to living things. 
 What is the evidence for such theories of life? Conjectures, anecdotes, 
and occult traditions. These grounds for belief depart so far from any logical 
inductive method that Graham Rees, the leading authority on Bacon’s studies 
of life and death, once declared that he “fathered not one but two philoso-
phies”: the ﬁ rst, the utilitarian program for which he is famous; the second, 
the  speculative philosophy that tries to sweep all phenomena into one theo-
retical net.  20  That division seems overstated. Though Bacon himself candidly 
admits, “I have not tested some of the points I shall make by experiment (for 
my way of life does not allow for that), but they are only derived with (as I 
judge) very good reason, from my principles and presuppositions” (12:241), 
he justiﬁ es this rush to print through “the exceptional utility of the mat-
ter,” which is nothing less than “prolonging and renewing the life of man” 
(12:143). Everyone has an urgent interest in staying alive, and provisional 
knowledge is better than none at all; the future will sort out the truth of these 
speculations. In the meantime, the advancement of learning must cope with 
folk remedies and invisible spirits. Bacon’s understanding of life and death is 
bounded by what he ﬁ nds possible to imagine. 
 The Soul and the Body 
 What were the principal ways of imagining life in the time of Shakespeare and 
Bacon? A full answer would require a study not only of early modern medi-
cine and literature but of the chemical and biological theories, going back 
to the ancients, that the world of learning continued to revolve and debate. 
Yet almost everyone accepted one tried and true deﬁ nition: “Union and 
co-operation of soul with body.”  21  In orthodox terms, that union constitutes 

98    WHAT GALILEO SAW
life. Philosophically, theologically, and medically, at least until the nineteenth 
century, it is neither the soul alone nor the body alone that deﬁ nes living 
beings, according to doctors as well as priests, but rather the “subtle knot” or 
“vital chain” that holds them together. And similarly, death represents a part-
ing, the moment when the knot snaps, and the soul takes leave of the body.  22  
Despite the originality of Bacon’s analysis of life and death, he too surveys 
two contrary forces knitted together, the soul and its mortal covering, and 
speculates on ways to keep them joined. Each living creature thus depends on 
a difﬁ cult and treacherous balance. Soul and body reconcile their differences, 
in life, and manage to hang together—for a brief time. 
 Yet the tension between them strained the imagination. Materialists were 
always tempted to reduce life to physical processes, and spiritualists were 
tempted to minimize death as a mere incident in the immortal journey of 
the soul. Nor could some thinkers help veering back and forth between 
the two poles. In his  Liber de Longa Vita  (1526?), Paracelsus conﬁ dently pro-
claims, “Life, by Hercules, is nothing else than a balsamite mumia, preserving 
the mortal body from mortal worms and from dead ﬂ esh, together with the 
infused addition of the liquor of salts.” Yet elsewhere he no less conﬁ dently 
informs us that “the life of things is none other than a spiritual essence, an 
invisible and impalpable thing, a spirit and a spiritual thing.”  23  To charge 
Paracelsus with inconsistency in these matters would only project on him 
the discords of his own and later eras. In his own mind any ﬁ rm distinction 
between the corporeal and the spiritual betrayed a limited and superﬁ cial 
understanding of the true nature of the world; a good physician was always 
also a priest. However much the fusion of incompatible things might defy 
all logic, it was also, according to sages, the secret of life.  24  
 Some sages tried to unravel the knot by expanding the reach of the soul. 
To the animist and the vitalist, there was no such thing as pure body: spirits 
inhabited and controlled all of nature. In that case a wholly inanimate mat-
ter would be a contradiction in terms. “There is nothing corporeal that has 
not a ‘spiritual thing’ hidden in itself,” according to Walter Pagel; “hence to 
Paracelsus all things are alive—there is nothing that has no life hidden within 
itself.”  25  Bacon, as we have seen, conceded that spirits in nonliving mat-
ter might generate life, and other theorists went much further and peopled 
the cosmos. In the Scholastic version of the celestial orbs that culminated 
in Dante’s vision of Paradise, angelic orders moved the spheres, with a liv-
ing intelligence derived from God. In Shakespeare’s time Giordano Bruno 
refused to allow any boundaries to the presence and sentience of divine 
spirits: he perceived an inﬁ nite universe in which heavenly bodies were liv-
ing beings with souls that guided them through space.  26  And even Kepler, 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    99
less heterodox, sometimes believed that intelligent spirits steered the planets. 
William Gilbert, the most famous natural philosopher in England, insisted 
that the loadstone had a soul: “As for us, we deem the whole world animate, 
and all globes, all stars, and this glorious earth, too, we hold to be from the 
beginning by their own destinate souls governed and from them also to have 
the impulse of self-preservation.”  27  Such philosophic animism lent a color of 
truth to the popular superstitions, endowing dead things with life, that Bacon 
resisted yet sometimes seemed to endorse. Yet the refusal to recognize death 
had an obvious blind spot: it had to discount the nature of living creatures, 
whose bodies unmistakably decayed and perished. Gilbert’s devotion to the 
soul of the loadstone leads him to look down on mere human beings, whose 
senses and organs condemn them to illness and error. Nevertheless, terrestrial 
creatures still felt attached to their bodies; they could not help imagining that 
death represented a fatal parting of spirit and ﬂ esh. 
 Finding ways to adjust the relations of body and soul preoccupied seventeenth-
century thinkers.  28  Most natural philosophers began with Aristotle’s distinction 
among three orders of soul: vegetative, sensitive, and rational.  29  For Christians, 
this threefold division explained not only what human beings shared with other 
creatures—plants had the same ability to grow, and animals had the same senses—
but also what raised mankind above other creatures: the third, immortal soul. 
According to Bacon, “The spirit is the instrument of the rational soul which is 
incorporeal and divine” (12:377). Yet materialism always threatened such expla-
nations. If the vegetative and sensitive souls were mortal—a mere “potential of 
matter,” to use one common formula—then the third soul might be mortal too, 
or else so radically different that it had nothing to do with any physical process, 
not even with breath or spirit. During the seventeenth century, philosophers 
gradually lost belief in the ﬁ rst two orders of soul, the “natural” souls, and sought 
to replace them with bodily functions. 
 Pursuing this line of thought, Descartes proposed the most drastic solu-
tion: not only was the human mind or soul “in its nature entirely inde-
pendent of body,” but animals, having no mind or soul, were nothing but 
machines: “It is nature which acts in them according to the disposition of 
their organs. In the same way a clock, consisting only of wheels and springs, 
can count the hours and measure time more accurately than we can with all 
our wisdom.”  30  This notorious argument has often been accused of reducing 
animals to insentient things, thus excusing their brutal treatment by smugly 
superior humans.  31  Yet Descartes’s contemporaries were more troubled by 
the possibility that people also might be no more than machines.  32  “Life is 
but a motion of Limbs,” Hobbes cheerfully argued, preparing the way for 
his Artiﬁ cial Man.  33  It was such implications that Descartes sought to refute. 

100    WHAT GALILEO SAW
In order to champion the immortality of the human soul, he needed to 
exorcise or disenchant the natural world. Paradoxically, to the dualist most 
living beings only imitate life, like automata, while human beings, eternally 
thinking, remain alive after death. 
 In that case, however, the rational soul alone becomes the principle of life; 
it casts off its mortal rags like so many lendings. Even before Descartes, the 
mutual antagonism of spirit and ﬂ esh preoccupied not only theologians but 
also physicians. The sober medical advice of Bacon’s  History of Life and Death 
incorporates a sort of classic comic plot, in which restless rebellious spirits strive 
to escape from the house of their aging warder, until his defenses crumble and 
let in fresh air. Contempt for the threadbare patchwork of life was surely not 
Bacon’s intention. Yet a slight shift of emphasis might transform death from a 
calamity to a release. The forced union of soul and body could seem absurd, to 
true believers, as if the essential person had been held for a lifetime in shackles. 
Andrew Marvell’s “Dialogue between the Soul and Body” (ca. 1650) begins 
with the soul’s complaint about the stranger to which it is tethered: “O who 
shall, from this Dungeon, raise / A Soul inslav’d so many wayes? / With bolts 
of Bones, that fetter’d stands / In Feet; and manacled in Hands.” Similarly, the 
last words attributed to Descartes remained sublimely true to his convictions: 
“So, my soul, for a long time you have been captive; here is the hour when 
you ought to come out of prison and quit this body’s burden.”  34  The corpo-
real prison seems more than a metaphor, from such a perspective; it expresses 
precisely the state of a rational soul in this world. 
 Any number of poems and sermons contend that life itself is the prison. 
“Vex not his ghost, O let him passe,” Kent pleads as Lear escapes; “he hates 
him, / That would upon the wracke of this tough world / Stretch him out 
longer” (5.3.288–89). In retrospect, existence has been a torture chamber 
for Lear and Gloucester, an ordeal from which they long to be delivered. Yet 
no Christian afterlife beckons; a ghost is not a soul.  35  As critics have always 
recognized, the play evokes a primitive, anthropomorphic state of mind in 
which not only the blasphemous Edmund but also the superstitious king 
acknowledge the rule of Nature. Lear takes the storm personally, as a direct 
reprisal by the “great Gods” for violation of the natural order. Even his oaths 
are pagan: “By all the operation of the Orbes, / From whom we do exist, and 
cease to be, / Heere I disclaime all my Paternal care” (1.1.109–11); and later, 
“Life and death!” (1.4.259). A pious audience might hear a phantom god 
tucked into that oath (“’s life and ’s death!”). But life and death themselves 
seem the ultimate bounds of Lear’s imagination. When his world falls apart, 
he can think of nothing more extreme than the terms imposed by nature on 
human beings—breathing and ceasing to breathe, the womb and the grave. 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    101
 Nevertheless, his attitudes toward life and death are not consistent. At the 
beginning of the play, when Lear speaks casually if pompously about his will 
“to shake all cares and business from our age, / . . . while we / Unburthen’d 
crawl toward death” (1.1.37–39), the royal “we” protects him from the sense 
of physical decay and helplessness in “crawl.” The reality of what it means 
to die has not yet struck him. On the heath, as his wits turn, his under-
standing improves. The sight of “Tom” conveys the bare facts of someone 
“unburthen’d” against his will. “Thou wert better in a grave than to answer 
with thy uncover’d body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than 
this?” (3.4.90–92). In the absence of any trappings, reduced to the state of “a 
poor, bare, forked animal,” a human being might as well be dead, according 
to Lear. Yet the downward spiral, as “we” shrinks to “I,” compels him also to 
wonder whether he might be something more than a body. Glimmers of a 
new consciousness shoot through the darkness. 
 The ﬁ rst result of this awakening is an overwhelming disgust. When Gon-
eril reveals her contempt for her father, he responds by imploring the “dear 
goddess” Nature to curse her womb with sterility or with a tormenting “child 
of spleen”; one break in the natural order calls forth another (1.4.237–52). 
Rage at his unnatural daughters swells into revulsion at nature itself. At the 
peak of his madness, Lear visualizes women’s sex as an embodied hell: “There 
is the sulphurous pit, burning, scalding, stench, consumption. Fie, ﬁ e, ﬁ e; pah, 
pah!” (4.5.121–23). But the disgust that preys on his mind extends to all bod-
ies, including his own. When Gloucester offers to kiss his hand, he recoils: 
“Let me wipe it ﬁ rst; it smells of mortality” (4.5.126). Kings are not ague-
proof, nor can they wipe off the foulness of ﬂ esh. In this revelation Lear com-
prehends that death is lurking inside him. It is that understanding that fuels 
his disgust.  36  More sensitive than he has ever been, and fastened to a dying 
animal,  37  he has become acutely aware that nature will always betray him. 
 Much of the power of the last acts of the play comes from its ﬂ uctuation 
between acknowledgment of the ﬁ nality of death, and intimations of a life 
outside the natural cycle. As Lear’s great rage is eased, he seems at once more 
frail and more indifferent to the world. His second awakening, in Corde-
lia’s presence, prepares him to imagine a life outside time and decay, attuned 
to “the mystery of things.” Lear’s newfound acquaintance with mortality 
implies that he yearns for another mode of existence. Now that he knows 
he is conﬁ ned in a body, he might be ready to envisage a soul. 
 The play itself turns here. Mortality had not been an issue in earlier ver-
sions of the story, in which both Lear and Cordelia survive their trials. But 
the shadow of death that infects Shakespeare’s language prepares a different, 
darker conclusion. The suspense that slowly builds to the end of  King Lear 

102    WHAT GALILEO SAW
involves not only whether the king and his daughter will die but also whether 
their deaths will have any meaning. Nor is the ﬁ nal question clearly resolved. 
The play allows radically different visions of soul and body, as different as the 
imaginations of G. Wilson Knight and Jan Kott.  38  It all depends on the lines 
and scenes one chooses to feature. Some critics elevate Lear to pure spirit, 
purged by sacriﬁ ces on which the gods themselves throw incense; others 
harp on images of an anguished and broken body. In the Christian readings 
that used to be gospel, death completes the work of redemption. Lear wakes 
to see Cordelia as a soul in bliss, and himself as a soul in purgatory or hell. 
These hallucinations transport him to another world. Even as they reﬂ ect 
his lingering madness, they also provide the ﬁ rst signs of his recovery, when 
he will be born again into a consciousness of grace and love, of blessing and 
forgiveness; he trembles on the brink of Christian faith. 
 In the profane and skeptical readings that counterbalance such pious opti-
mism, however, death represents the last absurdity. The wanton gods kill 
people for their sport, and even Lear’s death, according to William Empson, 
“is like a last trip-up as the clown leaves the stage,” an effect of “shock and 
senselessness.”  39  Kott’s dark refashioning of  King Lear , drawn equally from the 
Theater of the Absurd and from the bleak, atheistic totalitarianism of Eastern 
Europe, inﬂ uenced a generation of Shakespearean unbelievers. Peter Brook’s 
famous ﬁ lm (1971) drifts through a wasteland, where brute creatures struggle 
against each other and the elements as if the present were all that mattered, 
as if living and dying occurred without memory of the past or hope for the 
future. If life consists of nothing but physical substance and symptoms, as 
evanescent as breath, then a dog, a horse, a rat, prevail over Cordelia. The bare, 
forked animal caricatures a rational being; it cannot imagine a life outside 
the body. 
 Such readings tell us mainly, of course, about the minds and times that 
conceived them. Anxieties about the meaning or meaninglessness of life 
are problems that haunt modern critics. But they were also a problem in 
Shakespeare’s time. Sir John Davies, for instance, endlessly worries questions 
of spirit, body, and soul in  Nosce Teipsum  (1599). This popular poem sets out 
to prove by argument the immortality of the soul. But something keeps get-
ting in the way: the prevalence of spirits. Like Paracelsus, Bacon, or Thomas 
Browne, like virtually everyone who tried to imagine the processes of life, 
Davies assumes that various spirits drive the body, like wind in sails. Yet like 
the wind, those spirits sometimes sputter and die, which cannot be true of 
a perfect and incorruptible image of God. Soul “is a spirit, yet not like  aire , 
or  wind , / Nor like the  spirits  about the  heart  or  braine .” Instead it resembles 
angels, made of air but inﬁ nitely purer (“Some lovely glorious nothing,” in 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    103
Donne’s phrase).  40  Above all the soul is eternal. Among the many “great 
Clerks” with “litle wisedome” who have spun ridiculous theories, material-
ists agitate Davies the most: “These light and vicious persons  say , / Our  Soule 
is but a smoke, or aiery blast, / Which during life doth in our nosthrils play, / 
And when we die, doth turne to wind at last.”  41  Such heretics lie, because the 
soul is more than a spirit; it is a distillation of spirit, a spark of celestial ﬁ re, a 
light that never can fail; and death is its true birth. 
 Wind, Breath, Air, and Spirit 
 Yet language itself resisted the distinction. Etymologically, most words for 
life incorporate puffs of air.  42  Latin  spiritus  means “breath,” of course, and 
the ﬁ rst deﬁ nition of “spirit” in Johnson’s  Dictionary  is “Breath; wind in 
motion.” Even the book of Genesis conﬁ rmed this derivation: “The LORD 
God formed a man from the dust of the ground and breathed into his nos-
trils the breath of life; and man became a living soul” (2:7).  43  Living creatures 
become more than dust when they are “inspired” to breathe in the quicken-
ing spirit, and they die, or “expire,” when they at last breathe out. Similarly, 
animals are literally “breathers” (from  anima , originally “breath of air” and 
by extension “breath of life”).  44  Greek  pneuma shares with  spiritus  a dual 
possibility of wind and soul. Anaximenes and other pre-Socratics identiﬁ ed 
air with the soul (  psyche  is another Greek word that can signify breath or air 
as well as soul), and Plato, in the  Philebus , names breath as one of the four 
elements. Aristotle thought that  pneuma , a kind of airy vital heat associated 
with soul, might be analogous to the  aether , a ﬁ fth element or quintessence 
from which the cosmos and the stars were made.  45  Later, Galen attributed 
life to the respiration that distributes  pneumata through the body.  46  Hence 
 pneumaticks , in Bacon’s time, could mean either “a branch of mechanicks, 
which considers the doctrine of the air” as a physical substance, or “in the 
schools, the doctrine of spiritual substances, as God, angels and the souls of 
men.”  47  While theologians struggled with the metaphysics of these ethereal 
enigmas, natural philosophers sought some practical means to test them.  48  
Eventually Robert Boyle’s experiments on air would establish a “branch of 
mechanicks” that was almost entirely independent of occult explanations; yet 
he too referred to certain “supramechanical” gases as spirits and hoped to 
ﬁ nd an elixir to prolong life.  49  The soul itself must be an invisible substance, 
and thus akin to air. 
 Certainly the wind is alive in  King Lear . “Blow, winds, and crack your 
cheeks! Rage, blow!” Lear’s address to the wind, at ﬁ rst as a welcome destruc-
tive force that will crack nature’s molds, then as a servile minister that does 

104    WHAT GALILEO SAW
his daughters’ bidding, proclaims his gusting madness—“My wits begin to 
turn.” Yet the audience shares his vision. The storm on stage, presumably as 
thunderous and ﬂ ashy as the Globe’s wizards of special effects could contrive, 
assails both ears and eyes. But the wind has to be imagined. A presence that 
cannot be seen and rufﬂ es no clothes, it batters the head that conjures it up 
with words. No one can resist such personiﬁ cation; we all are assaulted; we 
shiver. But something more is also at stake. What the wind represents is a 
force that goes beyond nature. “Since I was man,” Kent says, “Such sheets of 
ﬁ re, such bursts of horrid thunder, / Such groans of roaring wind and rain I 
never / Remember to have heard. Man’s nature cannot carry / The afﬂ iction 
nor the fear” (3.2.44–48). Such winds exceed the petty trials of the earth; 
instead they undo creation. They recall the most ancient word for breath, the 
Sanskrit  Atman , which came to stand for the World Soul or  Spiritus Mundi 
from which all souls derive and to which they return. It is as if the injury 
done to Lear had infected the spirit that moves not only human beings but 
also being itself. 
 The uncanny relations among wind, air, breath, spirit, and soul preoc-
cupied early modern physicians and philosophers as well as poets. In the 
famous “Digression of the Ayre” in  The Anatomy of Melancholy , Robert Bur-
ton concludes that to cure melancholy, “the Rectiﬁ cation of aire is necessar-
ily required.” All over the world, experience conﬁ rms that “as the Aire is, so 
are the inhabitants, dull, heavy, witty, subtill, neat, cleanly, clownish, sicke, and 
sound.”  50  Diseases of every kind, and plague in particular, were commonly 
attributed to malignant spirits that lurked and attacked through the air. And 
within the body, the circulation of air was equally crucial. When William 
Harvey discovered the circulation of the blood, he enthroned the heart as the 
seat of the soul: “The Heart of creatures is the foundation of life, the Prince 
of all, the Sun of their Microcosm, on which all vegetation does depend, 
from whence all vigour and strength does ﬂ ow.”  51  Later he would insist that 
blood itself was a more basic cause and locus of life, “the generative part, 
the fountain of life, the ﬁ rst to live, the last to die, and the primary seat of 
the soul.”  52  Yet even then both spirits and air played a vital role; like Aristotle, 
Harvey identiﬁ ed the soul in the blood with the elemental substance of the 
stars. Robert Fludd, the hermetic philosopher and physician, welcomed 
the ﬁ ndings of Harvey, his colleague and friend, and used them to support his 
own extravagant associations of blood, as the vehicle of the spirit of life, with 
the ethereal spirit or cosmic Quintessence.  53  Air and blood shared a secret 
virtue to bring about long-distance healing. The material of the organic soul 
had been identiﬁ ed by Bernardino Telesio (1586) “with  spiritus , the vapour 
reﬁ ned from blood that was thought to ﬁ ll the arteries and the nerves,”  54  and 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    105
such spirits might circulate through macrocosm and microcosm, through 
space as well as the body. Harvey himself, though skeptical about “incorpo-
real Spirits” outside the blood, associated the vivifying spirits dispensed by 
the heart with the evaporation and tempests generated by the sun.  55  
 Bacon also thought that life could be prolonged by freshening the spirits 
in the blood. But for him the crucial element was always air: “The heart 
receives the most help and harm from the air we breathe, from vapours, and 
from our feelings” (12:301). The unknown powers of wind and air seem to 
fascinate Bacon, if not to obsess him. He began his “Natural and Experi-
mental History” with a  History of the Winds  (1622), proposing a set of inves-
tigations to fathom and harness their might, and exploring their kinds, their 
causes, effects, and use in forecasting the weather. “The winds lend wings 
to the human race” by wafting ships, and like brooms they sweep the earth 
clean (12:19). In another work,  On Principles and Origins , he concurs with 
Anaximenes, who “took Air to be the one principle of things. For if mass 
is to be taken into account in establishing the principles of things, air seems 
to occupy by far the greatest space in the universe” (6:213–15). Like other 
experimentalists, Bacon also devoted himself to weighing bodies, in order to 
measure the changes when spirit escaped. Later, the Royal Society set off a 
craze of weighing; Charles II, their patron, weighed himself frequently every 
day, “in order to observe the several emanations of his body.” It was always 
tempting to go one step further and try to catch the soul in its passing or 
measure its wonderfully weightless ascent.  56  
 One group of thinkers, in fact, devoted themselves to just such a project. 
The interplay of chemical and spiritual substances, and the liberation of the 
soul from the bodily shroud that concealed it, inspired the art of the magus. 
In his laboratory, base matter would be purged, and the pure gold of spirit 
would shine forth. Hence life and death often changed places; when bodies 
perished, souls came into their own.  57  The end of  King Lear  has been read as 
a gloss on this hermetic tradition. According to Charles Nicholl, Lear dies 
joyfully, “seeing Cordelia’s breath. Breath and spirit are one and the same, so 
his last words are a vision of Cordelia’s spirit issuing from her. . . . Nature, says 
Paracelsus, ‘is not visible, though it operates visibly; for it is simply a volatile 
spirit, fulﬁ lling its ofﬁ ce in bodies.’ Its ofﬁ ce completed, itself revealed, it has 
no further need of the body. Cordelia’s death is indeed ‘the promised end’: it 
makes the occult spirit manifest.” And we who look on ought to share Lear’s 
joy. “ ‘Let us now rejoice together,’ says the alchemist, ‘for the reign of death 
is ﬁ nished.’ ”  58  
 The “mystical optimism” of this reading is far from persuasive, however; 
it assumes that not only Lear but the playwright and audience were bound 

106    WHAT GALILEO SAW
to respond like hermetic devotees. To the contrary, “the promis’d end,” 
for Edgar, is “that horror,” a devastating Last Judgment. The First Quarto 
excludes any possibility of joy; instead of Lear’s repetitions of “look,” it offers 
no more than “O, O, O, O”; and a moment later Lear’s last words are “Break, 
heart, I prithee, break” (words that the First Folio assigns to Kent). Paracelsus 
himself might ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to rejoice at this conclusion. And even if one 
were to argue that the Quarto and the Folio record quite different plays, the 
Folio also closes on a series of heartbroken notes: “Our present business / Is 
general woe.” Both versions deny the least hint of a happy ending. Nor can 
anyone who is not deluded “see” Cordelia’s breath or spirit. Lear’s momen-
tary happiness—if that is what it is—increases the pathos of his end, still 
gripped by self-deception. At the same time the play maintains a scrupulous 
detachment from any ﬁ xed opinion about what happens at the moment of 
death, let alone from any occult consolations. All that it shows is the futility 
of imagining that the process might be subject to human hopes and desires. 
Life comes and goes, mysteriously as the wind. 
 Imagining Death 
 Indeed, not knowing such things—not knowing when one is dead, and when 
one lives—marks an essential, repeated effect of  King Lear . Death might 
be unimaginable, from the point of view of a creature immersed in life, 
but from another point of view, in which life itself resembles a dream, the 
mystery of death might be another sort of dream, or a simulacrum of life. 
When Gloucester falls from what he thinks is Dover cliff, he crosses into the 
“conceit” or imagination of death; and Edgar fears that the illusion might kill 
him: “I know not how conceit may rob / The Treasury of life” (4.5.42–43). 
When Lear awakes to see Cordelia, he knows that he comes from the grave, 
and “you are a spirit I know, where did you dye?” (4.6.42) These false, pro-
leptic deaths prepare the limbo of the ﬁ nal scene. That Lear does not know 
whether or not Cordelia breathes, that we do not know just what Lear sees, 
temporarily holds the opposition of life and death in timeless suspense. This 
is the soul of the play. 
 The crucial difference made by such unknowing stands out when the 
ﬁ nal scene of  King Lear  is placed against one in another death-haunted play, 
Webster’s  White Devil . In some respects the episodes seem mirror images. 
Cornelia’s wicked son Flamineo murders his virtuous brother Marcello, and 
the grief-stricken mother, a queen of denial, refuses to accept the ﬁ nality of 
death. “Fetch a looking-glasse, see if his breath will not staine it; or pull out 
some feathers from my pillow, and lay them to his lippes—will you loose him 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    107
for a little paines-taking?”  59  Her wits and heart have cracked like Lear’s; and 
Webster was surely remembering Shakespeare. 
 Yet in practice the effects of the two scenes are not at all alike. For one 
thing, the audience knows for certain that Marcello is dead; he has just been 
run through on stage. Perhaps even more conclusively, he has been given 
some parting words, in which he remembers that his evil brother, when an 
infant, broke off a piece of his father’s cruciﬁ x; and Marcello goes on care-
fully to explain the moral: “This it is to rise / By all dishonest meanes. Let 
all men know / That tree shall long time keepe a steddy foote / Whose 
branches spread no [wider] than the roote” (5.2.23–26). The terminal rhym-
ing couplet announces, far better than any stage direction, the moment of 
death. Hence Cornelia’s denial seems perverse as well as pathetic. In her 
hysteria, she ﬁ rst threatens to stab the murderer, then lies to protect him. 
Nor will a corpse stay buried in this wasteland; her famous mad song raises 
the undead: “ But keepe the wolfe far thence, that’s foe to men, / For with his nailes 
hee’l dig them up agen .” What fascinates Webster is not the line between life 
and death but the persistence of death in life, which corrupts all it touches. 
The White Devil herself embodies this image. She breathes it out, as one of 
her assassins claims before he strikes: “O thou glorious strumpet, / Could 
I devide thy breath from this pure aire / When’t leaves thy body, I would 
sucke it up / And breath’t upon some dunghill” (5.6.207–10). Some bodily 
spirits were devils, according to medical experts. Those are the spirits that 
Webster knows best. 
 But Shakespeare seems much less knowing; the audience must draw its 
own conclusions about what it sees. This suspension of certainty even bears 
on what is often called the “moral” of  King Lear : “Men must endure / Their 
going hence, even as their comming hither, / Ripenesse is all” (5.2.9–11). 
However profound, Edgar’s maxim involves a classic ought / is ambiguity: 
“must endure” can mean either “ought to bear with patience” or “have to suf-
fer.” Perhaps old men  ought  to go hence stoically, but babies do not come hither 
that way; they have no choice in what they must endure.  60  Indeed, they have 
good grounds for crying. The earlier, companion passage in which Lear coun-
sels the blinded Gloucester to be patient clearly takes the side of the babies: 
 LEAR. Thou must be patient. We came crying hither. 
 
Thou know’st the ﬁ rst time that we smell the air 
 
We waul and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark. 
 GLOUCESTER. Alack, alack the day! 
 LEAR. When we are born, we cry that we are come 
 
To this great stage of fools. (4.5.168–73) 

108    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Though Gloucester grieves at Lear’s madness, the little sermon makes its 
point about the hardship and folly of life. “Wauling” and crying are perfectly 
apt responses to the world in which these characters suffer. In this context, 
the advice to be patient suggests little more than a death wish. Gloucester 
 must endure till his troubles are over, as helplessly as a newborn child; the pain 
of coming hither will ﬁ nd relief only in going hence. And death, like birth, 
will happen, ready or not. 
 Is Lear ready to die, in fact, at the end of the play? Many critics have said 
so—none more strongly than Freud, in his brilliant essay “The Theme of 
the Three Caskets.” “Let us now recall the moving ﬁ nal scene, one of the 
culminating points of tragedy in modern drama. Lear carries Cordelia’s dead 
body on to the stage. Cordelia is death. . . . Eternal wisdom, clothed in the 
primaeval myth, bids the old man renounce love, choose death and make 
friends with the necessity of dying.”  61  Yet Lear does none of those things: 
he embraces love, rejects death, and dies while engaged with life. Evidently 
eternal wisdom is disobeyed. Nor does Lear, according to stage directions, 
carry Cordelia’s “dead body”; Quarto and Folio agree on “ Enter  LEAR  with 
 CORDELIA  in his arms .” The old man does not yet know the truth, and neither 
does any audience or reader who has not seen this before. Freud counsels 
an understanding of death, renunciation, and patience, and doubtless that is 
wise. But both Lear and the play expire on another note, an overwhelming 
exhaustion. 
 Meanwhile the lessons of life and death remain inscrutable. Notoriously, 
as Tolstoy bitterly complained, the play offers no ﬁ nal instructions or sav-
ing grace, nothing at all like Nahum Tate’s ringing conclusion “That Truth 
and Vertue shall at last succeed.”  62  Instead it lingers on the sheer duration of 
Lear’s ordeal. Both Kent and Edgar follow the same train of thought: “The 
wonder is he hath endured so long. / He but usurped his life”; “The old-
est hath borne most; we that are young / Shall never see so much nor live 
so long.” The repetition of “so long” reminds us that this has been a very 
long play about a very long life. It is as if Lear had been absorbed into the 
age of the patriarchs, enduring and experiencing more than any younger 
character—or member of the audience—could ever comprehend. In this 
respect he is indeed ready to die, if only because he has passed beyond the 
normal span of human endurance.  63  Yet the immediate cause of his death 
remains obscure. Earlier in the scene the report of Gloucester’s death ﬁ xed on 
his “ﬂ aw’d heart, / Alack, too weak the conﬂ ict to support,” which “’twixt 
two extremes of passion, joy and grief, / Burst smilingly” (5.3.187–90); and 
perhaps a similar passionate conﬂ ict of joy and grief overcomes Lear. But we 
cannot be certain about his feelings at that last moment; even the Quarto 

“LOOK THERE, LOOK THERE!”    109
and Folio disagree. Nor can we see his last breath. As the audience watches, 
it becomes a double of Lear himself, hanging on imperceptible signs. Souls 
are passing, the end is approaching, but the meaning of this long journey, like 
the meaning of life, is left unresolved. 
 Yet the play converts that problem to a solution. In the ﬁ nal scene, theatri-
cal and metaphysical knots are tied together. Theatrically, dying tends to be 
awkward, because the audience cannot be sure what it is seeing; a rigid actor 
might always rise up for one last swan song. Metaphysically, we cannot see 
or know when the soul leaves the body. Hence a tragedy asks us to look for 
what cannot be seen. Even the simplest, most undeniable fact in the world, 
the gulf between living and dying, turns out to bafﬂ e the senses. But it is just 
that invisible line—not knowing when one is dead and when one lives—on 
which the play ﬁ nally turns.  King Lear  exposes, in the end, the idols of the 
theater, the illusions that cover the depths of what is unknown. Life hangs in 
the balance, as all of us imagine what death might be; and not a breath stirs. 

110
  Chapter 6 
 The Dream of Descartes 
 The Book of Nature and the Inﬁ nite I AM 
 This Science that plays in the mythology of modern 
times a role as majestic and as formidable as Progress 
itself, this Science that promised everything and denied 
everything, that raised above all things the absolute 
independence, the divine  aseity of the human mind, . . . 
is not the true science, science such as it exists and is 
brought about by scientists, science submissive to things 
and to extra-mental reality. It is the Mid-Autumnal 
Night’s Dream conjured up by a mischievous genius in 
a philosopher’s brain—it is  the Dream of Descartes . 
 —Jacques Maritain 
 A Message Arrives 
 On the evening of November 10, 1619, in a stove-heated room in a provin-
cial German village, something extraordinary passed through the mind of 
René Descartes. Almost everything about that episode is contested. Whether 
the crucial experience consisted of a rational process of thought or rather 
of three rambling dreams, whether that thought or those dreams contained 
the germ of all Descartes’s future work, whether his ideas or dreams were 
empty or full of meaning, and whether the results of that day have proved to 
be a boon or disaster for Europe and the world have been debated for ages 
and never resolved.  1  Yet the search for what happened—so fugitive, yet so 
momentous—continues to fascinate scholars. It might hold a key to the ori-
gins of modern philosophy and science as well as the world they have made. 
Was Descartes dreaming, or was he supremely conscious? 
 The answer depends on which of two texts is favored. Descartes himself 
put great weight on the later text, the ﬁ rst book that he published. Not only 
did he write it in French, to address a wide audience, but he also gave it a 
title that expressed his ambition to conquer the world with logic:  Discourse 
on the Method of rightly conducting one’s reason and seeking the truth in the sciences 
(1637); and in the same volume he showed the fruits of his method in three 
scientiﬁ c essays, on optics, meteorology, and geometry. That method evolved, 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    111
he insists, through rigorous, deliberate introspection. At twenty-three, he had 
already exhausted what books and travel could teach when “I resolved one 
day to undertake studies within myself too and to use all the powers of my 
mind in choosing the paths I should follow.” His whole career would stem 
from that decision, according to part 2 of the  Discourse . “At that time I was 
in Germany, where I had been called by the wars that are not yet ended there. 
While I was returning to the army from the coronation of the Emperor, the 
onset of winter detained me in quarters where, ﬁ nding no conversation to 
divert me and fortunately having no cares or passions to trouble me, I stayed 
all day shut up alone in a stove-heated room, where I was completely free 
to converse with myself about my own thoughts.”  2  It occurred to him ﬁ rst 
that the sciences contained in books, “compounded and amassed little by 
little from the opinions of many different persons, [never come] so close to 
the truth as the simple reasoning which a man of good sense naturally makes 
concerning whatever he comes across” ( PW 1:117). And so he set out, “like 
a man who walks alone in the dark,” to move from point to point with sure 
and simple steps until he found the way to certain knowledge. The method 
would take him there. From the thoughts he conceived in that room, ﬁ rm 
principles grew, and “since beginning to use this method I had felt such 
extreme contentment that I did not think one could enjoy any sweeter or 
purer one in this life” (1:124). All of Descartes’s achievements built on that 
ﬁ rst exercise of pure mind. As an intellectual autobiography, the  Discourse 
identiﬁ es the story of the author's life with his discovery of the method. 
 Yet an earlier text tells a very different story. According to Adrien Bail-
let, who published the ﬁ rst major biography of Descartes (1691), the young 
philosopher kept a little notebook in Latin in one part of which, entitled 
 Olympica , he recorded his dreams on that evening of November 10. Unfor-
tunately the notebook has not survived, though it was cataloged as Item C in 
the inventory of papers Hector-Pierre Chanut compiled in Stockholm after 
Descartes’s death (1650).  3  But Baillet offered a detailed French paraphrase 
of the dream entries, and some of his details are conﬁ rmed by notes taken 
by Leibniz in 1676.  4  Other evidence also argues for the reliability of these 
transcriptions. Abbé Baillet is known primarily as a patient, unimaginative 
compiler; he would have had no motive to invent Cartesian whimsies.  5  Most 
of all, the dreams that are rendered exhibit the features of actual dreams, not 
coherent, invented stories. They are propelled by peculiar associations, irra-
tional anxieties, oddly intense perceptions, and sudden shifts of focus.  6  No 
one can verify their “accuracy,” of course; at best we can hope for a faithful 
report of what the young dreamer remembered. Yet even in its sketchy form 
the  Olympica , written in the heat of the experiences of which it gives tidings, 

112    WHAT GALILEO SAW
brings us closer to the ﬂ edgling philosophy of Descartes than do his later, 
mature recollections of method. 
 What do those dreams reveal? The ﬁ rst point, which must always be kept 
in view, is that Descartes was in a state of mind when everything, even his 
dreams, seemed charged with meaning. In Baillet’s account, the contempla-
tive reasoning claimed by the  Discourse  yields to a feverish agitation that 
“weighed on his mind, already depressed, so that it put him in a state to 
receive the impressions of dreams & of visions.” Stripped of received opin-
ions, he awaited the advent of truth; and a sign came. “He tells us that on the 
tenth of November sixteen hundred nineteen, having gone to bed  completely 
ﬁ lled by this enthusiasm , & completely occupied by the thought  of having found 
that very day the foundations of the wonderful science  [ la science admirable ], he had 
three consecutive dreams in a single night, which he imagined could only 
have come from on high.”  7  Whatever that wonderful science might be, the 
sense of discovery thrills him and makes him tremble with premonitions. 
How could his dreams  not have meaning? Interpretation is in the air; “the 
Genius that had excited in him the enthusiasm with which he had felt his 
brain seething for several days had predicted these dreams to him before he 
put himself to bed.” Before, between, and after the dreams, therefore, he ﬁ nds 
ways to explain them. Indeed, while still asleep, he states, he already began 
to interpret the last dream, and on waking calmly continued the same train 
of thought; consciousness and dreaming share a single inspiration.  8  “The 
Spirit of Truth,” or God himself, had sent him these divinations. A rage of 
interpretation possesses Descartes. 
 That rage has also possessed Descartes’s readers. Few have resisted the 
temptation to read the dreams as if they opened a window into the mind—
or the subconscious. Even Freud, who cautiously declined to interpret the 
dreams on the grounds that he could not recover Descartes’s own associa-
tions, could not help explaining two “symbols” in the ﬁ rst dream: the left side 
of the dreamer (“wrong or sin”) and the melon (“a sexual fantasy”).  9  Other 
analysts have proved far less cautious. In addition to a plethora of conﬁ dent 
psychoanalytic readings, the dreams have been interpreted determinedly as 
mystic allegories and covert metaphysics.  10  From another perspective, some 
critics and philosophers ﬁ nd all the elements of mature Cartesian thought 
already present in the visions of that night.  11  At least three interesting books 
devote themselves entirely to solving the mystery. Gregor Sebba’s  Dream of 
Descartes  construes the dream scenarios as a series of physical experiences and 
images that preﬁ gure Descartes’s most important ideas: the whirlwind fore-
shadows the vortex; the existential doubt of the dreamer, which culminates 
in a certainty that includes both his sleeping and waking states, predicts the 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    113
triumph over doubt in  cogito ergo sum .  12  John Cole’s  Olympian Dreams and 
Youthful Rebellion of René Descartes , a thorough and plausible study, accounts 
for the dreams in terms of particular biographical associations: Descartes’s 
guilt at rejecting his father’s career, the law, and his joy at embracing the 
search for truth, encouraged by his friend Isaac Beeckman, that would guide 
the course of the rest of his life. Sophie Jama’s  La nuit de songes de René Des-
cartes , an ethnological tour de force, traces the sources of the dreams to the 
popular traditions that surround Saint Martin’s Eve, to Descartes’s immersion 
in occult texts by ancients and moderns, and above all to the Pythagorean Y 
that John Dee and the Rosicrucians had proposed as the key to understand-
ing the secrets of life.  13  What characterizes all these interpretations is a pow-
erful impulse to crack the dream code, a message sent from the depths—or 
from on high—to be deciphered by the discerning expert. That impulse has 
always driven the study of dreams. Without it, Descartes himself would never 
have felt the urge to remember and write down his fragments of vision. 
 Yet the very strength of this need for interpretation might raise doubts 
about what it pries out. However tentative at ﬁ rst, each analyst eventually 
succumbs to his own theory. Descartes’s initial puzzlement and zeal conclude 
in calm satisfaction when “the application of all these things turned out 
so well to his taste.” Only one image, “the little portraits in copper-plate,” 
remains to be accounted for, and “he looked for no further explanation 
after the visit that an Italian Painter paid him early the following day.” Like 
fortune-tellers’ cards, dream elements arrange the world around one person’s 
destiny, and every item falls into place; if the painter had not visited, the 
head of a copper coin might well have sufﬁ ced. A skeptic might object that 
young Descartes was subscribing to a very primitive and superstitious theory 
of dreams. That would be true, of course.  14  But even modern interpretations 
of dreams seem enthralled by the appeal of  making sense . As Wittgenstein 
observed in relation to Freud, there is an irresistible attraction to the notion 
that one’s life has a pattern; and after analysis, “the dream appears so very 
logical.”  15  A message always arrives at its destination. 
 Out of the Shadow of Dreams 
 In one respect, however, Descartes’s rage for interpretation surely throws 
light on what happened that evening of November 10. Whether or not the 
dreams themselves make sense, the dreamer ﬁ nds in them a reﬂ ection of who 
he is, and what he sees are images of his desire to break through. The book 
of poems that magically appears on his table is a portent of “Revelation & 
Enthusiasm, by which he did not despair of seeing himself favored.” Many 

114    WHAT GALILEO SAW
commentators suggest that Descartes did not understand his own dreams. 
That raises the question of whether, before his interpretation, something 
already existed, some prior meaning, for someone to understand. Perhaps a 
dreamer owns the rights to his dreams. In any case, Descartes saw clearly that 
his last dream had revealed the future, “& it was only what ought to happen 
to him in the rest of his life.” One might call this a self-fulﬁ lling prophecy; 
divine sanction of the path he has chosen to follow not only conﬁ rms his 
way but also commands him to hold his course. But this external validation 
only reinforces the message conveyed alike by the dreams and interpretations, 
the wonderful news that all the universe is centered on himself. The amazing 
presumption that readers of Descartes have always criticized or admired, the 
self-absorption that founds the principles of philosophy on one man think-
ing, already ﬂ owers in that small stove-heated room, where “the treasures of 
all the sciences” lie open to him. Such conﬁ dence might be regarded rightly 
as divine. When, eighteen years later, the author of the  Discourse  brought back 
to mind the dawn of his new life, that turn into the self was probably what 
he remembered. 
 Nevertheless, the young Descartes’s interpretations of his dreams can 
hardly be attributed to method. Despite or because of his conviction that 
he understands the true meaning of every symbol, he often draws on arbi-
trary or private associations. No one else would be likely to guess that the 
dream melon, for instance, signiﬁ ed “the charms of solitude.”  16  When Baillet 
reports one ﬁ nal interpretation, “the clap of thunder he heard was the signal 
of the Spirit of truth descending on him to possess him,” he adds that “this 
last imagination surely owes something to Enthusiasm; & it might incline us 
readily to believe that M. Descartes had been drinking that evening before 
going to bed.”  17  In this case the interpretation strikes the biographer as even 
more fantastic or extravagant than the dream. Baillet quickly assures us that 
Descartes was in fact quite sober. But enthusiasm, as well as drink, confounds 
sober logic.  18  When the older Descartes pondered dreams in the  Discourse , he 
argued: “After all, whether we are awake or asleep, we ought never to let our-
selves be convinced except by the evidence of our reason. It will be observed 
that I say ‘our reason,’ not ‘our imagination’ or ‘our senses’ ” ( PW 1:131). Yet 
the young Descartes’s interpretations of dreams are inspired by imagination. 
 One passage in particular marks this difference. At the moment at the end 
of his third dream when, still asleep, the dreamer already begins to interpret 
what he has seen, he decides that “the Collection of Poems entitled the  Cor-
pus Poetarum  marked . . . Philosophy & Wisdom joined together.” This insight 
leads to reﬂ ections—reported also in Leibniz’s notes—on the superiority of 
the precepts of poets to those of philosophers. “He attributed this marvel 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    115
to the divinity of Enthusiasm, & to the force of Imagination, which brings 
forth the seeds of wisdom (which are present in the mind of all men like 
sparks of ﬁ re in ﬂ ints) with much more readiness & much more brilliance 
too, than Reason could bring about in Philosophers.” This passage has been 
ignored by many critics. Taken to heart, it would seem to preclude one major 
strand—perhaps  the major strand—of Descartes’s philosophical and scientiﬁ c 
achievements: his effort to explain all laws of nature, from cosmology to the 
workings of the human body, through the application of mathematical and 
mechanical principles. Imagination has no place there—at least in theory.  19  
To some extent the Scientiﬁ c Revolution itself might be understood as a 
vast and sustained polemic against the dangerous prevalence of imagina-
tion. All the idols decried by Francis Bacon spring from that idol-making 
faculty, which deludes the mind into preferring subjective wishful thinking 
to objective truth. And Descartes’s own project might be read as a similar 
breaking of idols. 
 The retreat from imagination culminates in the sixth of the  Meditations 
on First Philosophy  (1641). In a famous passage, Descartes maintains that 
pure understanding does not require the aid of imagination, and “besides 
this, I consider that this power of imagining which is in me, differing as it 
does from the power of understanding, is not a necessary constituent of my 
own essence, that is, of the essence of my mind. For if I lacked it, I should 
undoubtedly remain the same individual as I now am; from which it seems 
to follow that it depends on something distinct from myself.” To  be is to 
think, not at all to imagine. In understanding, he goes on to explain, the mind 
“turns towards itself and inspects one of the ideas which are within it; but 
when it imagines, it turns towards the body and looks at something in the 
body which conforms to an idea understood by the mind or perceived by 
the senses” ( PW 2:51). The decisive Cartesian split between mind and body, a 
distinction that may have been conceived as early as 1623, grounds imagina-
tion in the body, along with the senses.  20  Nor can imagination  prove  that the 
body exists, as thinking proves the existence of the self. Hence a philosopher 
needs to resist the power of imagining, a faculty whose illusions will tempt 
him to false ideas not only of his own nature but also of the world. 
 Much of Descartes’s mature philosophy derives from a similar struggle: an 
effort to answer the doubts raised by dreaming. Both the  Discourse  and the 
 Meditations  contend with one principal reason for doubt: our “inability to 
distinguish between being asleep and being awake.” Imagination can rule the 
senses; perceptions in dreams and hallucinations are fully as strong as those in 
everyday waking life. Young Descartes was sure that the Spirit of Truth had 
inspired his dreams, but the older Descartes is less trusting; perhaps a demon 

116    WHAT GALILEO SAW
inspired them. Hence the vision that once provided certainty now provokes 
dark suspicions. In the  cogito  the philosopher reaches rock bottom: spectacular 
doubts are assuaged by spectacular faith in the ego. Yet many contemporaries 
were less impressed by the proofs on which Descartes built his system than 
by his rejection of all previous systems. Ironically, the thinker who regarded 
himself as the protector of certain and absolute belief was widely attacked 
as a skeptic.  21  
 At the end of the  Meditations , he tries to dismiss his former, exaggerated 
doubts. Now he notices a vast difference between sleeping and waking, 
 in that dreams are never linked by memory with all the other actions 
of life as waking experiences are. If, while I am awake, anyone were 
suddenly to appear to me and then disappear immediately, as happens 
in sleep, so that I could not see where he had come from or where he 
had gone to, it would not be unreasonable for me to judge that he was 
a ghost, or a vision created in my brain, rather than a real man. But 
when I distinctly see where things come from and where and when 
they come to me, and when I can connect my perceptions of them 
with the whole of the rest of my life without a break, then I am quite 
certain that when I encounter these things I am not asleep but awake. 
( PW 2:61–62)  22  
 The senses, memory, and intellect all conﬁ rm that these things are real; and 
God is not a deceiver. At this moment Descartes has fully emerged from the 
shadow of dreams.  23  
 Yet imagination was not so easy to dismiss; for the rest of his life Des-
cartes kept returning to it. His last philosophical work,  The Passions of the Soul 
(1649), distinguishes two sorts of “imaginings,” one formed by the soul, the 
other involuntarily by the body: “Such are the illusions of our dreams and 
also the day-dreams we often have when we are awake and our mind wan-
ders idly without applying itself to anything of its own accord” ( PW 1:336). 
This distinction allows the possibility of fully conscious, willed imaginings, 
directed by the soul. On that possibility, Descartes’s whole enterprise of 
natural philosophy depended. In chapter 6 of  The World , the most ambi-
tious description of his system, he invites his readers to join him in a cos-
mic thought experiment: “For a while, then, allow your thought to wander 
beyond this world to view another, wholly new, world, which I call forth in 
imaginary spaces before it.”  24  That imagined new world is the cosmos itself, 
as conceived by Descartes. 
 One might consider this formulation merely strategic. After the trial of 
Galileo, Descartes was keenly aware that his explanations of phenomena, 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    117
which often seemed to contradict the “truth” of scripture, must be presented 
only as hypotheses, devoid of truth claims. Hence his purpose, unlike that 
of overly subtle “Philosophers,” “is not to explain the things that are in fact 
in the actual world, but only to make up as I please a world in which there 
is nothing that the dullest minds cannot conceive”  25  —a world imagined 
distinctly, with no contradictions. In this respect imagination can function 
didactically, as a means for teaching principles that might be used to fash-
ion better tools; for instance, lenses or prostheses. In  Principles of Philosophy 
(1644), designed to replace Aristotle in the curriculum, Descartes spells out 
his purpose: 
 Just as for an understanding of the nature of plants or men it is bet-
ter by far to consider how they can gradually grow from seeds than 
how they were created [entire] by God in the very beginning of  
 the world; so, if we can devise some principles which are very simple  
 and easy to know and by which we can demonstrate that the stars 
and the Earth, and indeed everything which we perceive in this  
 visible world, could have sprung forth as if from certain seeds (even 
though we know that things did not happen that way); we shall in 
that way explain their nature much better than if we were merely to 
describe them as they are now, {or as we believe them to have been 
created}.  26  
 God’s creation must be left untouched. But Descartes presides over his own 
world, his own imaginative creation. Moreover, his thought experiment 
mimics one view of the Logos, the word or idea made ﬂ esh. In the Platonic 
tradition adopted by many Christian divines, God the demiurge formed the 
world, like an artist, bringing ideas to life and shaping man in his image. The 
creative imagination copies that process, as human artists strive to form a sec-
ondary world.  27  Of course they cannot make the word ﬂ esh; their thoughts 
exist only as thoughts. Yet such imaginings bring them as close to the Spirit 
of Truth, in Descartes’s terms, as humans can come.  The World  represents that 
ideal. 
 Nor are those imaginings only a way of sheltering science from scripture. 
As scholars have repeatedly observed, Descartes’s hypotheses about the fabric 
of the world, its reduction to certain effects of matter and motion, are radi-
cally metaphorical. The all-important vortex, for instance, can scarcely be 
conceived without referring to bodies that ﬂ oat on water, to currents and 
ﬂ uids and eddies and boats. Chapter 9 of  The World  includes a ﬁ gure of two 
intersecting rivers, and asks the reader to keep that image in mind in order to 
understand the course of planets and comets, aﬂ oat on celestial matter. This 

118    WHAT GALILEO SAW
picture is more than an aid to thinking; it represents the conception itself 
(see   ﬁ g. 5  ).  28  The image of the solar system as boats whirled about by water 
proved so irresistible, in fact, that good Cartesians held on to it for more than 
seventy years after Newton’s rebuttal.  29  Unlike the impalpable law of grav-
ity, ﬂ uid vortices appealed to the senses; everyone has seen water in motion. 
Moreover, to visualize the earth buoyed up by a cosmic current was not only 
easy but also profoundly comforting, a stay against the free fall of bodies 
through space. The Cartesian plenum sustains us on ﬁ rm supports, unlike the 
Newtonian vacuum. Thus Cartesian science lends itself to popular, graphic 
models based on things seen every day. Descartes is masterful at ﬁ nding analo-
gies to illustrate his theories, as in his comparison of the action of light with 
the pressure of wine in a vat: our perceptions of light do not result from any 
inherent quality it has, but rather from the push of celestial matter against 
the eye.  30  What we experience as light, therefore, is something we make for 
ourselves. To object to such hypotheses on the grounds that they are based on 
images rather than facts would only reinforce Descartes’s point: the world in 
its purest form, a world reduced by intellect to matter and motion alone, is not 
at all the rich and varied world we apprehend. What we see, what we sense, 
what we know, is a world we construct, a secondary, internal fabrication.  31  
 Figure 5 . Descartes’s diagram of two intersecting rivers, illustrating the course of planets and 
comets aﬂ oat on celestial matter, from chapter 9 of  The World . 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    119
 The persistence of images in Descartes’s mature scientiﬁ c thought has 
often been regarded as a puzzle if not a scandal. For anti-Cartesians such 
as Jacques Maritain, those teeming images expose the sleep of reason, a 
demonic nightmare in which the spiritual life, suppressed by cold intel-
lectualism, returns in distorted form to take its revenge on the unbeliever. 
In recent years some scholars have suggested that such attacks are based on 
a misunderstanding or a refusal to take account of the full range of imagi-
nation, its different types and meanings. No brief summary can do justice 
to the complexity of Descartes’s views of what may be imagined or of his 
own imaginings.  32  Over the course of his career he kept reﬁ ning his ideas, 
as his early embrace of  phantasia —composite images or apparitions, like 
those seen in dreams—yielded to a deﬁ nition of imagination as a mode of 
understanding or cognition that makes use of ﬁ gures, and eventually to the 
distinction between imaginings that arise from the body (“corporeal imagi-
nation”) and those willed by the soul (“intellectual imagination”). In these 
terms “images” could be useful, but only up to a point: they could not help 
the mind to comprehend the inﬁ nite, God, or the soul, and they were often 
prey to illusions and errors. But ideas conceived by the mind alone, with-
out the crutch of images, might reach perfection. When Thomas Hobbes 
accused Descartes of having no idea or image of God, he was contemptu-
ously dismissed: 
 Here my critic wants the term “idea” to refer simply to the images 
of material things which are depicted in the corporeal imagination 
[ phantasia ]; and, if this is granted, it is easy for him to prove that 
there can be no proper idea of an angel or of God. But I make it 
quite clear in several places throughout the book, and in this passage 
in particular, that I am taking the word “idea” to refer to whatever 
is immediately perceived by the mind. . . . I think I did give a full 
enough explanation of the idea of God to satisfy those who are 
prepared to attend to my meaning; I cannot possibly satisfy those 
who prefer to attribute a different sense to my words than the one I 
intended. ( PW 2:127–28) 
 At its best and most active, Descartes’s imagination hopes to break the chains 
of the body and dwell among pure ideas. 
 The Eye of the Mind 
 Nevertheless, analysis cannot resolve the perplexities of Descartes’s scien-
tiﬁ c worldview, at once opposed to imagination and yet highly imaginative. 

120    WHAT GALILEO SAW
At times his practice contradicts his theory; at times he changes his mind. Is 
thinking always tied to images? He strongly denies it, yet images materialize 
in his prose as regularly as dreams come in the night. There are many ways of 
accounting for such problems. Historically, the inﬂ uence of Aristotle, who  did 
consider thought to be impossible without the aid of mental images, continued 
to govern psychological and rhetorical views of imagination, even for thinkers 
who rebelled against him.  33  Similarly, traces of the long-established threefold 
division of life into vegetative, sensitive (or “animal”), and rational “souls” still 
linger in Descartes’s anatomies of the body. Despite his explicit refusal to posit 
a vegetative or animal soul, he relies on “animal spirits”—“a certain very ﬁ ne 
wind, or rather a very lively and very pure ﬂ ame,” produced in the brain—to 
run the human machine. And that “machine” itself is a vital image. The expla-
nation of its movements depends on an extraordinary, prolonged compari-
son with “the grottoes and fountains in the royal gardens” in which external 
objects, for instance, “are like strangers who on entering the grottoes of these 
fountains unwittingly cause the movements that take place before their eyes.”  34  
Descartes cannot resist analogies that bring inanimate matter to life. Nor did 
he ever wholly lose the quasi-mystical sense of inspiration—the conviction 
that a divine Spirit of Truth had sent him images to guide his life—that marks 
his interpretation of the dreams of November 10.  35  
 The ultimate knot in Descartes’s scientiﬁ c system, however, is bundled 
into his most famous insight, the division of mind and body. That rupture 
has never healed. By separating the realm of dead matter—the whole natural 
world—from the immortal and immaterial “thinking thing” ( res cogitans ), 
Descartes was able to construct both a universe and a body that functioned 
like clockwork. To be sure, he hoped eventually to put soul and body together 
again, perhaps with the help of the pineal gland: “Finally I must show you 
how those two natures would have to be joined and united so as to constitute 
men resembling us.”  36  But he never ﬁ nished that part of the “Treatise on 
Man.” Nor have all the generations since then completed the work of uniting 
the ghost and machine. Refutations of the mind/body split are legion; they 
began as soon as the doctrine appeared, when “Objections” from various 
hands were published, along with replies, in the ﬁ rst edition of the  Medita-
tions  (1641). From Spinoza’s time to ours, whole schools of philosophy have 
been founded to answer Descartes, and any number of scholarly and popular 
books have proved, to their own satisfaction, where he went wrong.  37  Yet the 
problem, so often declared nonexistent, keeps coming back in new guises. 
The question of whether the operations of the mind or consciousness, for 
instance, are identical with particular physical states or events in the brain still 
stirs endless arguments, forever unresolved.  38  Whether or not the man in the 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    121
street is Cartesian, as Gilbert Ryle complained, the relation of mind to body 
seems one of the few current philosophical issues that haunt philosophers 
and laypeople alike. 
 The problem is rooted, of course, in language. When Descartes insisted 
that he took the word “idea” to refer not to images but to “whatever is con-
ceived directly by the mind” ( tout ce qui est conçu immédiatement par l’esprit ), 
he could not help using a term that associates thought with a pregnant body, 
nor could he avoid construing the mind as a sort of spirit or person or agent. 
Our words for consciousness or inner states of mind unavoidably draw on 
embodied representations, like “inner” and “outer.” For Hobbes, who was 
sure that “a man can have no thought, representing any thing, not subject 
to sense,”  39  an idea inaccessible to the senses must be at best incomprehen-
sible, like God, or literally nonsense. Later, etymologists such as Horne Tooke 
argued that every word, including particles, derived from a concrete material 
cause or sensory impression.  40  Descartes himself may have contributed to 
that oversimpliﬁ cation with his emphasis on clear and distinct ideas, adapted 
by Locke to  sensible ideas; could any idea be clear and distinct if it could not 
be pictured?  41  In any event, consistent dualism puts language under enor-
mous strain. Describing what happens in the mind, the philosopher resorts 
to abstractions that always threaten to branch or break into images. 
 Descartes attributes such problems to intellectual laziness, since so many 
people “never raise their minds above things which can be perceived by the 
senses: they are so used to thinking of things only by imagining them (a way 
of thinking specially suited to material things) that whatever is unimaginable 
seems to them unintelligible” ( PW 1:129). But higher thoughts prove them 
mistaken. Descartes’s own view of language, as Chomsky maintained in  Car-
tesian Linguistics , tends to equate the power of speech with an innate faculty, 
or with the rational soul itself. Unlike magpies and parrots, who utter words 
but “cannot show that they are thinking what they are saying” ( PW 1:140), 
human beings form utterances in order to make their thoughts understood. 
Thus language mirrors the soul, and though it may refer to the body, the body 
cannot bind it. Even if this is so, however, the soul still requires some practical 
means of expressing itself; it depends on material words or images that clothe 
pure thought and allow it to pass into the sensory world and eventually into 
the thoughts of another mind. During that passage, contamination routinely 
occurs. As thought is transmuted to words and back into thought, the medium 
of language turns into the message, or specious images lure the mind into mis-
understandings. “Oh! why hath not the Mind / Some element to stamp her 
image on / In nature somewhat nearer to her own?” Wordsworth lamented.  42  
And even in that lament, the mind becomes identiﬁ ed with an image. 

122    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 One possible escape from such linguistic contamination might be the 
purity of mathematics. Descartes’s  Geometry  (1637), the cornerstone of his 
scientiﬁ c studies, sets out to provide a basis for explaining all natural phenom-
ena with the certainty of a mathematical demonstration. As early as March 
1619, he had used mechanical compasses to develop a new tool of analysis, a 
series of well-deﬁ ned plane curves that corresponded to well-deﬁ ned alge-
braic equations. This discovery, which came to be known as analytic geom-
etry, enabled him to think about mathematics in a new way, freeing number 
from spatial intuitions and conceiving algebra in terms of abstract entities.  43  
Theoretically, such conceptions would represent pure intellect, unadulterated 
by the material objects of nature or the mixed modes of language. The idea 
that an inﬁ nity of points might be posited between any two other points 
plotted on the same curve, for instance, could never be visualized or reduced 
to an image, yet it stimulated further ideas in Newton and Leibniz, who 
invented the calculus. In this way mathematics could constitute a world of 
its own. But problems arose when Descartes turned to a mathematical phys-
ics, a set of ideas supposed to account for the world as it is. Now images 
must come back into play. To some extent the relation of abstract ideas to 
the world could be made comprehensible by assimilating algebra to geom-
etry; that is, by representing numerical values as two-dimensional shapes, in 
a universe reduced to nothing but spatial extension. Imagination, working 
through the senses, would then convert these symbolic shapes into corporeal 
images, the world as we perceive (or misperceive) it. In Cartesian science, 
pure intellect can use hypotheses and symbols to elucidate material nature. 
Yet the process itself could never be pure; transmitting ideas, the mind even-
tually reverts to things grasped by the senses. 
 For many readers, in fact, Descartes’s account of the world seemed true 
exactly because it inspired such persuasive pictures.  44  How does a magnet 
work? According to  Principles of Philosophy , the earth itself is a giant magnet.  45  
From the North and the South Poles, grooved particles of the ﬁ rst element 
(extremely tiny “subtle matter”) whirl through and around the earth in 
“a kind of vortex.” These particles, “twisted like the thread of a screw” in 
opposite directions, ﬂ ow through “pores” in the earth or loadstone, hollowed 
out to admit one sort of thread and to bar the other. Hence the seeming 
attraction of iron to a magnet is actually the effect of matter tightly com-
pressed, as “the grooved particles which emerge from both the magnet and 
the piece of iron expel the air between the two bodies.”  46  No one can  see this, 
of course, but Descartes provides diagrams in which the invisible threads and 
motions of subtle matter become clear and distinct (see   ﬁ g. 6  ). In practice, 
such explanations depend on visual aids, not only as a means of persuasion 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    123
 Figure 6 . Descartes’s diagram of magnetism, from  Principles of Philosophy  (1644). University of 
Chicago Library. 
but as the main evidence for the theory itself; the idea and picture are one. 
Despite his suspicion of images, Descartes pursued science above all with his 
mind’s eye, with farsighted visions of how things might be. In a peculiar way 
Cartesian science might even be called literal-minded, unable to credit theo-
ries it cannot visualize. Thus magnets do not “attract” iron, since attraction 
suggests some impalpable force that could span empty space; instead one kind 
of matter (grooved particles) replaces another (air), allowing no void or blank 
in the picture. Intellectually and visually, the Cartesian world is a plenum. 
 Cyrano’s Make-Believe 
 When Descartes turns his mind to nature, therefore, he views it in terms of 
art as well as science.  47  A philosophy that captured the public would have to 
appeal to the senses, and illustrations were often remembered far better than 
the principles they set forth. As both a philosopher and a maker of pictures,  48  
Descartes led a double life; ideas and pictures might always conﬂ ict and cause 

124    WHAT GALILEO SAW
trouble. Indeed, a few pictures almost cost the hero his life in Cyrano de 
Bergerac’s  Voyage to the Sun  (1662). Suspected of heresy, “Dyrcona” (Cyrano) 
is seized by a mob of ignorant peasants, who leaf through his copy of Des-
cartes’s  Physics  ( Principles of Philosophy ). “When they perceived all the circles 
through which this philosopher has marked the movement of each planet, 
with one voice they howled that these were the rings that I traced to summon 
Beelzebub” (see   ﬁ g. 7  ). In terror someone drops the book, which falls open 
to the page depicting the magnet, “where the little bodies that part from the 
mass to hitch on to the iron are represented as arms.” Immediately one yokel 
swears that “that was the toad found in the trough of his cousin Fiacre’s sta-
ble, when his horses died.”  49  All shrink from the book in dread, and Dyrcona 
is hauled off to jail (from which he eventually escapes to the sun). Cyrano 
mocks superstition, of course; science and sorcery are alike to the rabble. But 
 Figure 7 . Descartes’s diagram of the solar system, from  Principles of Philosophy  (1644). Univer-
sity of Chicago Library. 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    125
the trouble begins with pictures, where ﬁ ne ideas descend to the realm of the 
senses, and stupid spectators impose their own illusions on things. 
 Yet intelligent readers also respond to the lure of imagination. Descartes 
is clearly one of Cyrano’s idols, not so much for his philosophical and math-
ematical insights as for his ingenious images and machines. At the end of 
 Voyage to the Sun  the soul of Descartes arrives at a sort of solar Elysian 
Fields reserved for philosophers, the purest and ﬁ nest of spirits.  50  Corporeal 
images as light as a breath ﬂ y straight to the soul, in that happy place, since 
“the mind is no longer entangled in a body formed of gross matter.” Thus 
minds can perceive distant things and events;  dreams become real , and imagi-
nation is “what your soul can see as surely as your eyes on a day when it 
shines.” Cyrano plays with Cartesian themes, recombining bits of the  Physics 
to make a new pattern.  51  In this whimsical science, Descartes functions as 
an enabler of fancies, or a sage who provides fresh ways of perceiving the 
world. Though Dyrcona does not mistake the picture of a magnet for a 
toad, his description does replace particles and screws with little bodies and 
arms; they make a better story. A hundred pages later the magnet returns, in 
an extended fantasy that mixes cosmology and physics with Ovidian meta-
morphoses. Now the bodies and arms belong to ﬁ erce lovers, like Pylades 
and Orestes: “The amorous ardor with which they couple is so sudden and 
so impatient that, after they have embraced all over, you would say that there 
is no grain of loadstone that does not want to kiss a grain of iron, nor any 
grain of iron that does not want to unite with a grain of loadstone” (1:295). 
In this punning image the loadstone or magnet ( aimant ) is literally loving 
( aimant ). Such iconophilia has come a long way from Descartes. But perhaps 
his pictures had licensed a make-believe model of science, a world of ideas 
not yet explored and hypotheses not yet tested.  52  
 Where Descartes reimagined the natural world as a set of machines, more-
over, his disciple Cyrano liked to imagine contraptions.  53  Dyrcona is an 
inveterate inventor. He ascends to the sun in a box propelled by a transparent 
crystal icosahedron; when converging rays of light produce a vacuum in it, 
air rushes to ﬁ ll the void, so that a tremendous wind from below lifts the box 
up. The outmoded principle here, that “nature abhors a vacuum,” can hardly 
be attributed to Descartes, who argued that vacuums cannot and do not in 
fact exist (since the extension of space is the same as the extension of body 
or matter).  54  Yet Dyrcona, we know, has been reading Descartes’s  Physics , 
whose rules of motion and pictures of magnets might well have inspired his 
design. Later, when he lands on “one of those little worlds that ﬂ y around 
the sun (which mathematicians call spots)” (1:216), he draws on another pas-
sage from the same text, which had associated sunspots with the formation 

126    WHAT GALILEO SAW
of planets.  55  For Cyrano, Descartes’s theories do not offer conclusions so 
much as points of departure. Thus the notorious Cartesian equation of 
animals with machines, lacking reason and soul, provokes a running series 
of jokes and reversals in which intelligent beasts—as well as some trees—
on the moon and sun debate whether humans have souls. On the sun, the 
anthropocentric hierarchy turns upside down. After a parliament of birds 
has sentenced Dyrcona to death for the crime of being a man, a talkative 
parrot—Descartes’s own example of a mindless mimic of words—saves the 
life of the condemned by remembering how often he used to maintain that 
birds can reason. The satire cuts deep: it subverts not only the beast-machine 
theory but also the implicit Cartesian pride that places humanity outside the 
natural order. It is precisely because human beings deny that they are like 
other creatures, in fact, that the sunbirds despise and revile them. By getting 
things exactly wrong, Descartes makes Cyrano’s point. 
 At the same time, however, Descartes is a hero. One might say that Cyrano 
gloriﬁ es him for all the wrong reasons, converting him into an atomist, a skep-
tic, an Epicurean, and a freethinker—all positions that the philosopher himself 
explicitly repudiated. Yet still the image of a hero lingered, the type of a soli-
tary explorer who voyaged bravely into the unknown. Once Descartes’s mind 
had leapt into the cosmos, the moon and sun seemed much closer. Nor was 
this heroic impression at all far-fetched; it grew out of the author’s own way of 
making ideas his own. The working title of the  Discourse on Method  was  A His-
tory of My Mind .  56  Hence, for many later writers, the  Discourse  and the  Medita-
tions  represented a new kind of ﬁ rst-person narrative: a prolonged soliloquy 
employing “the self-assured inner voice” in a quest that did not seek personal 
salvation so much as epistemological foundations.  57  Philosophy had joined 
with autobiography, refashioning a series of thoughts as a story. That narrative 
proved highly adaptable. Dressed in the proper style, it could accommodate 
Cyrano’s adventures in science ﬁ ction, Scudéry’s ﬂ orid prose romances, the 
heroic tragedies of Corneille and Racine, and eventually the  récit or logbook 
of Valéry’s Monsieur Teste (Mr. Head).  58  In this regard Descartes’s method and 
ﬁ ndings mattered less than his self-absorption. The thinking thing would live 
on as a hero, irrespective of what it had thought. 
 God’s Book and Descartes’s 
 Yet Descartes himself had dreamed of something far grander. Despite his turn 
from images to reason, he never abandoned the vaulting ambition expressed 
in the ﬁ nal dream of November 10. Two books had appeared unaccount-
ably on his table: a  Dictionary , which carried him away “with hope that it 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    127
might be very useful to him,” and “a collection of Poems by various Authors, 
entitled  Corpus Poetarum etc.” Each book leaves something to be desired. The 
dictionary vanishes and reappears, but “he found that this  Dictionary  was no 
longer so complete as when he had seen it the ﬁ rst time”; and though familiar 
with the anthology, he cannot ﬁ nd some poems he is looking for, because 
“it was not the same edition as the one he knew.”  59  Nevertheless these books 
bring him great satisfaction. Not yet awake, he begins to interpret the dream 
and “judged that the  Dictionary  could not be called anything else than all 
the Sciences gathered together; & that the Collection of Poems entitled the 
 Corpus Poetarum  marked in particular & in a more distinct way Philosophy & 
Wisdom joined together.” This train of thought continues when he awakes, 
and “seeing that the application of all these things turned out so well to his 
taste, he was bold enough to persuade himself, that it was the Spirit of Truth 
which had wanted to open to him the treasures of all the sciences by this 
dream.” Presumably even the incompleteness of the books reﬂ ects divine 
encouragement, since he has been assigned the task of making them perfect. 
If the dream did predict the future, and showed him “only what ought to 
happen to him in the rest of his life,” what it predicted must be the books he 
would write—the books that set out to contain and control all the world. 
 Nor did he awake from that dream. No matter how much Descartes 
might shift from poetry to mathematics as the source of wisdom, or from 
enthusiasm and imagination to reason, he held to his purpose of universal 
knowledge. Slowly and deliberately, he would ﬁ nd the principles from which 
a creator could build the sum of things, both microcosm and macrocosm, a 
plenum with every element in its place. From the beginning this urge for 
completeness drove him. He could not stand the insinuation that anything 
might be missing in his system. When his earliest scientiﬁ c friend, Isaac 
Beeckman, suggested in 1630 that he had taught Descartes something, the 
claim provoked an eruption of rage; it would have been like learning from 
ants and worms.  60  And four years later, when Beeckman disputed the theory 
that light “instantaneously arrives at the eye from the body which emits it,” 
Descartes insisted that anything short of instantaneous transmission would 
mean that his entire philosophy would be “completely overturned”; he was 
so sure his theory was right that he could never agree on an experiment 
to test it.  61  From a scientiﬁ c point of view, such conﬁ dence, or arrogance, 
exposes a fatal ﬂ aw in Descartes’s introspective method. Yet his strength as 
a thinker demanded that total commitment. For those who believed in the 
Great Chain of Being, a single gap might destroy the whole fabric: “From 
Nature’s chain whatever link you strike, / Ten or ten thousandth, breaks the 
chain alike.”  62  Descartes’s lifework, his own great chain of nature and mind, 

128    WHAT GALILEO SAW
obeyed a similar logic. In principle, each part of the world he had built was 
forever linked to the others. 
 Two complementary visions of wholeness meet in Descartes’s ideal. The 
ﬁ rst is the well-established concept or metaphor of the Book of Nature.  63  
During the Middle Ages, theologians regularly viewed creation as God’s 
book, a companion volume to the Bible; the earth, the ﬁ rmament, and living 
things all furnished models and lessons for scholars to read. Later, writers 
like Paracelsus often opposed this study of the world to mere book learning. 
A similar line of thought provides the climax to Descartes’s account of his 
youth in the  Discourse : “As soon as I was old enough to emerge from the 
control of my teachers, I entirely abandoned the study of letters. Resolving to 
seek no other knowledge than that which could be found in myself or else in 
the great book of the world, I spent the rest of my youth travelling, . . . and at 
all times reﬂ ecting upon whatever came my way so as to derive some proﬁ t 
from it” ( PW 1:115). Experience is the great teacher; but more than that, true 
knowledge consists of reading the signs of nature. Words can deceive, and so 
can sensations, but the reﬂ ective mind can strike through appearances to the 
design of creation. The metaphor of the Book of Nature assures Descartes 
that the world is intelligible. Though no one but the Author can compre-
hend the whole, since only the Author is perfect, devoted reading should 
always have its reward, ﬁ lling in one more piece of the puzzle. Perhaps that 
effort constitutes the truest worship of God, and explains why the human 
mind was created—for whom else could the book have been written? In any 
case it justiﬁ es a life dedicated to thought, a life spent in translating the world 
back into the simple ideas that made it. 
 If the world is a book, however, a book might also put a world together. 
Both the  Dictionary and the  Corpus Poetarum  represent worlds  in nuce : the ﬁ rst, 
“all the Sciences gathered together”; the second, “Philosophy & Wisdom 
joined together.” These texts advise the dreaming Descartes to follow their 
way. The  Dictionary kindles hope that it is designed to help him; the anthology 
reminds him of the Pythagorean choice between “Yes and No” ( Est & Non 
[It is and it is not]), which he understands as Truth and Falsity. All the words, 
all the worlds, lie on his table, ready to be rearranged. Hence he conceives an 
ultimate book, a foundational text that will someday replace Aristotle. Under 
the inﬂ uence of Neoplatonic ideas, some Renaissance theorists had embraced 
the metaphor of the poem as heterocosm or “second nature.” The poet, a 
creator or maker of worlds, thus “produces another nature altogether, . . . and 
in this process even makes himself almost into another god.”  64  Polemically 
the metaphor serves to exalt the poet. All other activities are bound to Nature 
as it is, as Sir Philip Sidney observes: “the natural philosopher thereon has his 

THE DREAM OF DESCARTES    129
name” and mirrors a brazen world, while “the poets only deliver a golden.”  65  
But Descartes refuses to let phenomena bind him. Incorporating the poet’s 
power of creation,  The World  invites its readers to lose themselves in “the 
guise of a fable” or second nature, a wholly new, imaginary world. This new 
world will have its own laws of nature and even its own original myth or 
account of Creation.  Principles of Philosophy  elaborates that project. Although 
it concedes that what it has deduced, “the fabric of the entire World,” may 
be uncertain, “compared to the absolute power of God,” it ends by counting 
its reasonings among the number of “absolutely certain things.” Indeed, “it 
will scarcely seem possible” for its demonstrations concerning material things 
“to be understood otherwise than as I have explained them.”  66  Descartes is 
the god of his world; and what he has made is a book. 
 Yet the Book of Nature radically differs from the book that calls forth 
a new world. Above all, God’s book is complete. Consisting of all creation, 
it offers unlimited vistas for the student to read, from the stars to what 
is beyond the stars, from the atom to that from which the atom is made; 
and whatever we see there has always already been written. But Descartes’s 
book— The World , and the principles that explain it—can never be ﬁ nished. 
He does not know enough, nor does he know what he has yet to learn. To 
patch the holes, therefore, he needs hypotheses. No one has ever been readier 
to provide them, or to create a whole hypothetical world. It was just this 
facility, in fact, that so enraged his successor Isaac Newton. There was noth-
ing that Descartes could not explain, piecemeal, and sometimes in several 
contradictory plausible ways. His philosophy thus amounted to “nothing 
else than a system of Hypotheses,” according to Newton, and “what cer-
tainty can there be in Philosophy which consists in as many Hypotheses as 
there are Phænomena to be explained.”  67  In the  Principia  that overthrew Des-
cartes’s  Principia , Newton famously declared, “Hypotheses non ﬁ ngo” (I do 
not feign [or fabricate] hypotheses).  68  Nor did he pretend that his own great 
book, concluding with  The System of the World , was anything like complete. 
To ﬁ x it would require not only his own revisions but also those of count-
less scientists in the unforeseeable future. The world of his book was only a 
chapter in God’s great creation, the Book of Nature. To presume more would 
lead one to whirl in a vortex, the dream of Descartes. 
 Thus the dream circled back on itself. In the long run, the two versions 
of what occurred on November 10 came to seem analogues, not opposites: 
two visions of imaginary systems. Whether enthusiasm or method had pro-
duced the world of Descartes, it did not account for the world perceived 
and calculated by Newton. Of course Descartes had brought forth amazing 
insights, and he was a giant on whose shoulders Newton and others would 

130    WHAT GALILEO SAW
stand. But his book, like the ﬂ ickering books in his dream, did not contain 
the certain knowledge it promised. Instead it survived as a work of imagi-
nation, a series of brilliant thought experiments. Even the crucial distinc-
tion between corporeal and intellectual imagination was vulnerable; to many 
thinkers, beginning with Hobbes, it seemed a way of begging the question 
of the mind/body problem, a way of assuming what had yet to be proved. 
Yet still the dream did not die. For Descartes, more than anyone else, had 
put the world in the custody of science. Henceforth the  Dictionary  and the 
 Corpus Poetarum  would yield their authority to a new kind of book, which, 
explaining everything through natural philosophy, could be mistaken for the 
Book of Nature itself. 
 In chapter 13 of  Biographia Literaria , “ On the imagination, or esemplastic power ,” 
Samuel Taylor Coleridge draws a famous—and famously difﬁ cult—
distinction between the “primary” and “secondary” imagination. The pri-
mary imagination is held to be “the living Power and prime Agent of all 
human Perception, and as a repetition in the ﬁ nite mind of the eternal act 
of creation in the inﬁ nite I  AM” ; the secondary, “an echo of the former, . . . 
dissolves, diffuses, dissipates, in order to re-create; or where this process 
is rendered impossible, yet still at all events it struggles to idealize and to 
unify.”  69  This passage is usually glossed as a tribute to the creative imagina-
tion of great poets, and especially Wordsworth. Yet the chapter begins with 
another example: “ DES CARTES , speaking as a naturalist, and in imitation of 
Archimedes, said, give me matter and motion and I will construct you the 
universe. We must of course understand him to have meant; I will render the 
construction of the universe intelligible.”  70  Coleridge prefers a less mate-
rialistic philosophy, and goes on to praise the philosophic genius of Kant. 
But Descartes’s name comes ﬁ rst; he had taken the lead. It was he whose 
ﬁ nite mind had glimpsed the eternal act of creation; it was he who had dis-
solved the world in order to recreate it. Philosophers and poets share that 
ambition. According to Coleridge, the creative imagination unites them. 
Yet the initiative had long since passed to those who shut the books of poets 
and searched instead the inﬁ nite I  AM . And all of that had begun with the 
dream of Descartes. 

131
  Chapter 7 
 A History of Error 
 Robert Fludd, Thomas Browne, and the Harrow of Truth 
 Doctor Fludd’s Answer 
 Robert Fludd did not doubt in the least that he knew the meaning of truth. 
Whether he was arguing with some of the best minds in Europe—Johannes 
Kepler, Marin Mersenne, Pierre Gassendi—or with an obscure country par-
son, whether he was surveying the structure of the cosmos or the essence 
of a grain of wheat, his conﬁ dence in the rightness of his views remained 
unshakable and absolute. Whoever disagreed with his wisdom would cavil 
in vain: “It is not I, but the Spirit of truth, that assureth you thus much.”  1  
Ultimately such assurance stemmed from the authority of Christ, who had 
anticipated Pilate’s question “What is truth?” simply by being himself, the 
Word revealed in body as well as in spirit: “My task is to bear witness to the 
truth. For this was I born” (John 18:37–38). Fludd bears witness to a similar 
fusion of matter and spirit, body and soul. When he wields “Truths goulden 
Harrow” against “thos gross clodds of Errour” thrown up by a skeptic who 
held that the alchemical elixir or Philosopher’s Stone should be regarded 
only as a philosophical allegory, not as a physical substance, he parallels the 
sublimated elixir, material and earthly yet immortal and incorruptible, to 
the stones that became a pillow and house of God for Jacob and a source of 
water for Moses. Those stones existed equally in real and spiritual worlds, 
on earth and in heaven, like the resurrected souls whom Jesus had harrowed 

132    WHAT GALILEO SAW
from hell.  2  To doubt that such transubstantiations are matters of fact would 
be to doubt divine wisdom or creation itself. 
 The weapon-salve was one truth that Fludd made his own. In  Doctor Fludds 
Answer unto M. Foster, or, The Squesing of Parson Fosters Sponge, ordained by him 
for the wiping away of the Weapon-Salve  (1631), “the sharpe vineger of Truth” 
decisively extinguishes William Foster’s inﬂ ammatory attack,  Hiplocrisma-
spongus: or, A Sponge to Wipe Away the Weapon-Salve  (1631)—at least to Fludd’s 
satisfaction. A controversy had already swirled around the salve. Attributed 
to Paracelsus, this magical cure involved an ointment that, when mixed 
with the blood of someone who had been wounded, and smeared on the 
weapon that had caused the wound, brought about a quick and sure heal-
ing, no matter what distance might separate the weapon from its victim. 
Such action-at-a-distance had been debated by many prominent physicians 
and chemical philosophers, including Andreas Libavius and Jean Baptiste 
van Helmont.  3  Fludd was especially devoted to theories of sympathetic 
attraction, which he associated with William Gilbert’s famous treatise on 
the loadstone,  De Magnete  (1600). Hence an irresistible logic disposed him 
to embrace the weapon-salve. Although he claimed not to have used it in 
his own medical practice, he ﬁ ercely defended its efﬁ cacy, which had passed 
every test of truth. 
 How did Fludd distinguish truth from error? His tireless, embattled writ-
ings employ all the time-honored tests of his age. First, he invokes reliable wit-
nesses who testiﬁ ed that the weapon-salve worked. An unimpeachable source, 
his own brother-in-law Sir Nicholas Gilbourne, “a man iudicious, religious 
and learned,” had personally observed and administered several cures. In one 
instance Sir Nicholas had even proved the effect through a little experiment. 
A servant “was cut with his axe into the instep, so deepe as it could passe, 
and not cut it off.” The next morning, by dressing that axe with the salve, Sir 
Nicholas put him at ease. But then he secretly struck off the ointment, and 
soon received a message that the servant had suddenly been wracked with 
pain. So the axe was anointed once more; immediately the pain ceased, and 
within seven days the man was perfectly well.  4  Another cure worked like a 
charm at a distance of twenty miles. And a thousand more were reported. If 
surgeons denied these wonders, the reason must be that such simple and pain-
less healing had cost their trade a great deal of money. Only the right sort of 
witness could be trusted to tell the difference between truth and error. 
 The quality of witnesses is all-important to Fludd. He validates the testi-
mony on which he relies through the rank and standing of those who provide 
it: “a Noble Personage in this kingdom of no mean descent, title and rank, 
among the English nobility,” “a great Lord,” “a Noble man of worth,” an Earl, 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    133
a Cardinal, a Captain, a Knight, and among authors Bishop Anselm, “canon-
ized a Saint.” As evidence for the virtue of “the Sympatheticall oyntment,” 
Lady Ralegh relates “that her late husband, Sir Walter Ralegh, would suddenly 
stop the bleeding of any person (albeit hee were farre and remote from the 
party) if he had a handkirchers, or some other piece of linnen dipped in some 
of the blood of the party sent unto him” (131). Such stories would matter far 
less in the absence of the great name that certiﬁ es them. Nor should they be 
mistaken for mere ﬂ ummery, an empty show of name-dropping intended to 
impose on hoi polloi. In the time and milieu in which Fludd took up his case, 
authority and proof were near allied. Modern ideas of probability did not 
yet exist, according to Ian Hacking; all evidence was demonstrative, based on 
testimony rather than on inductive logic supported by hard facts and statistics. 
Hence “probability” then referred to whatever seemed worthy of approba-
tion, whatever had the weight of authority behind it.  5  The luminaries who 
vouched for the weapon-salve personiﬁ ed truth; the doubting Thomases in 
thrall to circumstantial evidence had lashed themselves to error. 
 Moreover, Fludd demands respect for his own high position. The patrons 
of his work, he reminds his critic, include “our late King  Iames of blessed 
memorie, and next three of the Reverend Bishops of the Land” (22). Much 
of the answer to Foster contrasts the credibility of the ignoble parson with 
that of the noble doctor, one a “self-conceited” nobody, the other the son of 
a knight. Defending his choice to present himself ﬁ rst as an Esquire instead 
of a Doctor, Fludd explains that “a Gentleman of Antiquitie is to be pre-
ferred before any one of the ﬁ rst Head or Degree.” Foster may “snarle at 
my gentilitie,” but a noble soul is far above such insults. “Would he thinke 
it decent in mee to revile him for his lownesse of birth or ignobilitie? For 
I know what he is: God forbid such an absurditie should come from my 
pen, much lesse to upbraid him with his gentilitie, if hee were a Gentleman 
indeed” (7).  6  Here the man of honor, while ostensibly refusing to stoop, 
grinds his opponent under his heel. A thinly disguised contempt for the low 
“Sponge-bearer” runs through the whole of Fludd’s onslaught. He will not 
even concede that Foster is capable of manufacturing arguments of his own: 
“Hee talkes with  Mersennus the Fryer his tongue, and therefore is but  Mersen-
nus  his Parrat” (7). Marin Mersenne, the prominent French mechanist and 
self-styled “Christian philosopher,” had already exchanged bitter words with 
Fludd, who considered him “a rayling Satyricall Babler” (18). But Foster was 
still more vulgar; he babbled in English rather than Latin. Even the language 
of  Doctor Fludds Answer , demotic English, personal, blunt, and racy, reveals the 
author’s scorn for his ill-bred foe. Bad taste alone would convict the parson 
of error; the dignity of Latin would be wasted on him. 

134    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 In all these ways Fludd’s argument reﬂ ects the view of truth and error that 
Steven Shapin formulates, the link between credibility and social standing. 
“In early modern culture the deﬁ nition of gentility implied a conception of 
truth, just as the location of truth in that culture might invoke a notion of 
gentility.”  7  Mersenne and Foster must be wrong, according to Fludd, not only 
because they reason badly but, still more, because they are not  civil . No gen-
tleman would roar and brag in such a fashion. In contrast, Fludd takes care to 
address his work to the “Courteous Reader.” Yet more ingeniously, he proves 
his point by enlisting Mersenne’s own friend, the great Pierre Gassendi, as an 
ally. Gassendi too had disagreed with Fludd in print, rebuking his devotion 
to alchemical mystiﬁ cations. But these disputes had been within the pale of 
civil behavior. “As for  Peter Gassendus  I ﬁ nde him a good Philosopher, and 
an honest and well conditioned Gentleman, just aswell unto his Adversary 
as friend, not passing beyond the bounds of Christian modestie” (18–19). It 
was all the more telling, therefore, that this good man had chided Mersenne 
for his extravagant vituperation. Fludd shows triumphantly “how this my 
honest dealing and morall forren Adversarie doth checke his uncivill friend, 
whose part he undergoeth, for his immodestie and small discretion: and next 
doth teach my home-bred Adversarie a great deale of manners or behaviour 
in writing against an Adversarie, namely, not to contend with foule and scan-
dalous language” (16). Gassendi’s civility exempliﬁ es a proper attitude toward 
truth, which gentle hearts and good manners protect. 
 If authority provides one test of truth for Fludd, and gentility provides 
another, a third seems still more powerful: what he called  harmony , or what is 
now called the coherence theory of truth, in which each belief is reinforced 
by being consistent with others. Fludd knows not only that the weapon-salve 
works but also  why it works and, on “infallible grounds,” its relation to every-
thing else in the universe. There is nothing, it seems, that he does not know.  8  
His philosophical key begins with the reciprocity of the Macrocosm—the 
World or Cosmos infused by the Holy Spirit—and the Microcosm—the 
little world of man, which is moved by the very same divine and incor-
ruptible Spirit. Each element of this miniature universe, the human being, 
corresponds to some aspect of the greater world, as the beating of the heart, 
for instance, accords with the “proper macrocosmicall Sunne in Systole, and 
Diastole” (66). Hence true understanding depends on making connections 
and seeing the larger picture (Fludd’s books are crammed with illustrations 
of his ideas).  9  Enormous conﬁ dence stems from this grasp of the whole, the 
 pansophia  of universal knowledge. Kepler, Mersenne, and Foster and other 
doubters may calculate odds or latch on to some puzzling detail, but that only 
proves how superﬁ cial they are, Fludd says again and again; only someone 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    135
acquainted with the Quintessence can comprehend the occult and hidden 
causes of things. 
 The causes of the weapon-salve exemplify this understanding. Fludd traces 
the sources of the cure back to the Spirit of the Creator. In human beings that 
soul or vital spirit is seated in the blood, from which all ﬂ esh and bones are 
made (Fludd draws his evidence from the Bible, especially Leviticus 3 and 17). 
The wound, an “unnatural action,” violates this effusion of blood, so that 
the spirit withdraws. But the salve retrieves “the living fountaine of blood 
in the wounded” and thus refreshes the spirit. “And with what distance can 
his activity be limited, being that it is the spirit of the winds, and the soule of 
the lightnings, and the essence of the Sunne and starres of heaven?” (91–92). 
QED. From such an exalted perspective, the wonder of the salve can hardly 
be questioned. To be sure, an earthbound mortal such as Mersenne might 
ﬁ nd that this appeal to the sun and the stars had gone too far, perhaps as far 
as lunacy. But as a physician Fludd did not lack evidence. He was drawing, in 
fact, on one of the great discoveries of his time, the circulation of the blood, 
unveiled by his “esteemed compatriot” William Harvey. In  De Motu Cordis 
(1628) Harvey had supported his thesis in terms very much like Fludd’s: “So 
the heart is the beginning of life, the Sun of the Microcosm, as proportion-
ably the Sun deserves to be call’d the heart of the world, by whose vertue 
and pulsation, the blood is mov’d, perfected, made vegetable, and is defended 
from corruption.”  10  Fludd had witnessed Harvey’s investigations, arranged 
the publication of his book, and endorsed his ideas in a book of his own on 
the pulse.  11  In this regard he was far more advanced than Mersenne and Gas-
sendi, who refused to accept the circulation of the blood. 
 Yet Fludd also perverts the new theory. Harvey had dealt a deathblow 
to the Galenic division of arterial and venous blood, and ultimately to the 
dominant system of humors, the four bodily ﬂ uids whose proportions were 
supposed to determine the temperaments and health of human beings. But 
Fludd’s Pythagorean cosmic vision, as well as his Galenic medical practice 
(which resorted to frequent bloodletting), found those divisions useful. Arte-
rial blood carried the vital blood or quintessence, unlike the grosser venous 
blood; and the mystic, holy number four, expressed by the Tetragramma-
ton, composed a universal harmony, four elements and four humors, the 
Macrocosm and Microcosm in glorious concord. Thus Fludd takes from 
Harvey only what his own system can build on. The harmony and coher-
ence of truth override any petty objections and always favor the theory that 
can absorb and account for everything that exists or might be imagined. 
Ultimately the weapon-salve is veriﬁ ed by its participation in the music of 
the spheres. Just as the chords of two lutes vibrate together in unison, so the 

136    WHAT GALILEO SAW
ointment and the spirit of the wounded man “evibrate & quaver forth one 
mutuall consent of simpatheticall harmony” (98). This is no metaphor for 
Fludd; it represents in miniature the Universal Monochord or God Himself, 
to which all things return. No truth could be more comprehensive. 
 Through all these tests of truth and error,  Doctor Fludds Answer  preserves 
a certain equanimity or even smugness. Nothing shakes the author’s hearty 
conviction that he is always right. But much more seems to be at stake in 
another arena where he wars with Foster: the charge that the devil has inspired 
the weapon-salve. On this issue Fludd’s rage boils over; he resorts not only to 
arguments but to threats. “And therefore I must tell this my English calumni-
atour, that there is a Starre-chamber to punish such abuses, and consequently, 
he may perchance heare of mee sooner than he doth expect, unlesse hee 
bridleth his slanderous tongue the better hereafter” (146). Foster’s accusation 
touches Fludd where he lives, his assurance that his ideas harmonize with the 
Spirit of God, and he must stiﬂ e the damage before it spreads. Such repercus-
sions are far more important to him than the question of whether or not the 
weapon-salve works. Foster himself had conceded the possibility, and Fludd 
understands that the efﬁ cacy of the cure can hardly outweigh the bane of 
sorcery. “The maine scope of the whole businesse is contained in this Ques-
tion, which he proposeth thus:  Question. Whether the curing of wounds by the 
 Weapon-Salve , bee Witchcraft, and unlawfull to be used? ” (26). Hence the burden 
of  Doctor Fludds Answer  (and presumably the reason why it had to be written) 
gives the lie to imputations of diabolical magic.  12  Fludd does not deny his 
attraction to hermetic mysteries, to “the verity in both the true Magick and 
Astrology” that “hath been falsely contaminated and abused by superstitious 
worldlings” (134). But he insists on the virtue of mysteries grounded in God 
and Nature, the white, divine magic.  13  Such magic is lawful, and it absolves 
him of the one error to which there could be no defense: the error of  heresy . 
 All Fludd’s passion goes into refuting that charge. He insists that the 
sages whose wisdom he shares, from cabalists and Neoplatonists to Para-
celsus and the Rosicrucians, had done the work of God and spited the 
devil. He claims that his greatest adversary, the Jesuit Father Mersenne, had 
accused him of heresy in order to frighten him into deserting his faith and 
joining the Catholic Church. Above all, he identiﬁ es the miraculous effect 
of the weapon-salve with the miracles vouched for in scripture. Reversing 
the guilt by association with which Foster had smeared him, Fludd pleads a 
kind of innocence by association: the prophets, the apostles, and the Savior 
are all on his side. It would be blasphemy to impugn such heavenly cham-
pions. From this point of view, the real unbelievers are those who lack the 
insight to perceive the hand of God in every part of nature, in “all Acts 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    137
and operations, as well occult and mysticall, as those which are manifest 
and apparent unto sense: and therefore all Acts are instituted by God” (28). 
No error could be more fundamental than setting limits to God’s power. 
Fludd never makes that mistake. In the ﬁ nal analysis the weapon-salve 
rewards a faith in providence, and the true believer who pays it respect is 
not engaging in heresy but revering the Lord. That is the truth on which 
Fludd rests his case. 
 Dark Woods and Open Daylight 
 This same  Truth , is a Naked, and Open day light. . . . Yet 
 Truth , which onely doth judge it selfe, teacheth, that 
the Inquirie of  Truth , which is the Love-making, or 
Wooing of it; The knowledge of  Truth , which is the 
Presence of it; and the Beleefe of  Truth , which is the 
Enjoying of it; is the Soveraigne Good of humane 
Nature. 
 —Francis Bacon, “Of Truth” 
 Yet Fludd’s belief in the weapon-salve was an error, according to some people 
at the time, and many more later. Evidently his four tests of truth were 
becoming vulnerable in the light of new discoveries and changing atti-
tudes. Authority no longer intimidated savants such as Galileo, Bacon, and 
Descartes, who fearlessly set out to disable the grip of Aristotle and other 
oracles. A decade after Fludd ﬂ aunted his own gentility and the patronage 
of James I, doubts that the new king, Charles I, could be trusted to tell the 
truth would bring him crashing down. Reliance on harmony in the mac-
rocosm and microcosm was trembling in the incoherent world conjured up 
by John Donne, a world of new stars and medicines that were out of tune 
with Fludd’s great cosmic diapason. And although, in the same year as  Doc-
tor Fludd ’ s Answer , the Inquisition summoned Galileo to answer the charge 
of heresy for which it would condemn him, expert judges in other parts of 
Europe were not persuaded that he had been in error. Error itself, apparently, 
might be regarded differently in different times and places. It was subject to 
history; and its nature kept changing. 
 Moreover, the current of history seemed to run counter to Fludd. During 
the seventeenth century an obsession with error took hold of natural phi-
losophy and natural history, and his kind of magic came under attack. The 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution might be imagined as a campaign against delusions like 
the weapon-salve. Long before Max Weber spoke about the disenchantment 
or demagicking ( Entzauberung ) of the world, enlightened Europeans had 
congratulated themselves on dispelling the phantoms that once had haunted 
science. Animism yielded to mechanistic explanations of nature; hermeticism 

138    WHAT GALILEO SAW
yielded to experiments and demonstrations. According to Keith Thomas, 
“the refutation of Robert Fludd’s magical animism by Marin Mersenne and 
Pierre Gassendi” foreshadowed the dissolution of the union of magic and 
science.  14  Though common people might cling to their superstitions, an 
increasing number of educated people took pride in casting them off. Many 
scholars still agree with Basil Willey’s conclusion that “the main intellectual 
problem of the seventeenth century” was “the separation of the ‘true’ from 
the ‘false’,” the great project in which Thomas Browne joined Francis Bacon 
“to clear away the vast deposit of pseudo-science and fantastic lore left over 
from the unscientiﬁ c centuries.”  15  
 At the same time, the deﬁ nitions of “true” and “false” went through 
radical alterations. Like the word “error” itself, which etymologically derives 
from “straying,” the history of error turned away from the direction that it 
had steered through many centuries in Europe. Mistakes and blunders, the 
slips of the tongue and pen that intrude on any effort to set things straight, 
have been predictably constant, of course, so long as human beings have 
kept records; and scholarship historically involves the perpetuation as well 
as the rectiﬁ cation of such errata.  16  But these are relatively innocent lapses. 
Other kinds of straying once seemed so unforgivable that their consequences 
proved fatal. Long before Fludd, one might argue, the dominant form of 
error in the West was neither falsity nor ignorance but  heresy , the charge that 
had preyed on his mind. For more than a millennium that accusation carried 
all before it. No mortal peril attended distortions of facts or ideas, but many 
people paid with their lives for swerving from creeds and dogmas. 
 Dante’s great  Commedia , from this point of view, might be regarded as 
an encyclopedic guide to error. The dark wood through which the pilgrim 
wanders in the ﬁ rst steps of canto 1 represents the savage world in which 
he is trying to live, and to escape he must ﬁ nd again “the straight way.”  17  
But the error that has led him astray is not so much lack of knowledge as a 
sinful disposition, embodied by the beasts that block his path. The straight 
way ought to be simple, to one of true faith and pure heart, yet dense and 
twisted byways detour the worldly traveler and lure him with false choices. 
Dante’s journey represents a perpetual comedy of misunderstandings; again 
and again, throughout the poem, the wayfarer fails to comprehend what he 
sees and must be set straight. The pathetic ignorance of earthlings, so far 
removed from grace, drives both the plot and its lessons. Despite the poet’s 
wonderful ability to comprehend all the varieties of human nature, he does 
not hesitate to render ﬁ nal, unsparing judgments about who must be damned 
or saved. At times he seems almost gleeful—or proud—about the blindness 
of his fellow creatures, as in the notorious elevation of the little-known pagan 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    139
Ripheus to a place among the saints of justice: “Who in the erring world 
down there would believe / that in this circle Trojan Ripheus / was the ﬁ fth 
of the holy lights?”  18  Dante mounts above the drifts of humankind. Released, 
however brieﬂ y, from that erring world, he submits to the higher power of a 
knowledge that sees the true state of things immediately, without any need 
for the circumlocutions of words. At the end of the  Paradiso , when the clari-
ﬁ ed vision of the poet looks directly into the Eternal Light, he comprehends 
its mystery through love and faith, not reason. Error perpetually wanders, like 
endlessly forking heretical doctrines, but truth is one and the straight way 
leads the penitent home. 
 The dark wood returns at the opening of Spenser’s  Faerie Queene  (1590), 
where the errant knight Redcrosse and his companions “wander too and 
fro in wayes unknowne,” bewildered by “So many pathes, so many turnings 
seene,” until they take a beaten path to “Errours den.” A primal combat 
ensues. The “ugly monster,” half serpent, half woman, swallows her brood 
of “a thousand yong ones, . . . / eachone / Of sundry shapes, yet all ill 
favored,” and wraps her “endlesse traine” around the knight. But adding 
faith to force, he strangles her so that “she spewd out of her ﬁ lthy maw / 
A ﬂ oud of poyson horrible and blacke, / . . . Her vomit full of bookes and 
papers was.” Belched forth, her spawn join the attack, “Deformed mon-
sters, fowle, and blacke as inke,” but they are harmless as gnats; and after the 
knight cuts off Errour’s head, they lap up her blood until their bellies burst.  19  
And so this fulsome allegory concludes; but what is its point? Doubtless 
Spenser takes aim at Satan and Catholicism, his usual paired targets. Yet the 
essence of Errour seems rather to consist of what she disgorges; she is so 
very proliﬁ c. The black poison she spews, the upchucked books and papers, 
the offspring black as ink, all mark disgust at the unrestrained, incontinent 
written—and printed—word. Una, Redcrosse’s lady, is Truth because she 
is One; but Errour, containing multitudes, allows any black thing to have 
life. Signiﬁ cantly it is faith more than force, and certainly not sweet reason, 
that empowers the knight to choke her and exterminate her heresies. In 
fairyland no argument is required. One stanza compares the ﬁ lthy spew 
of Errour to the monstrous creatures generated from the “fertile slime” of 
the Nile; later scholars might consider this image itself a perfect example of 
error.  20  But that sort of error, an innocent matter of fact, does not concern 
Spenser at all. Myths are his stock-in-trade and cause no harm, but the den 
of unclean beliefs cannot be tolerated, and any departure from the one true 
faith requires an urgent and ruthless response. 
 During the seventeenth century that equation of error with heresy is 
supposed to have changed forever—though Galileo might have thought 

140    WHAT GALILEO SAW
otherwise. Both Dante and Spenser had subscribed to one true faith, but 
the churches that deﬁ ned their faith had broken in pieces and accused one 
another of multiple heresies. Una and Duessa were not always easy to tell 
apart. Who now represented the Truth? In the age of the printing press, it 
seemed that anyone who could read might have an opinion. Spenser was 
not the only writer who worried about the books and papers spewed by 
the monster Errour. An intense anxiety about the spread of print and heresy 
consumed the sixteenth-century guardians of dogma.  21  In 1527, when Rob-
ert Ridley, chaplain to the bishop of London, condemned William Tyndale’s 
“common & vulgare translation of the new testament in to englishe,” he 
hardly needed to pick out particular errors. The book itself was an error, 
precisely because it subjected the word of God to inﬁ rm minds, unﬁ t to gaze 
directly at the sun. “Ye shal not neede to accuse this translation, it is accused & 
damned by the consent of the prelates & learned men, and comanded to 
be brynt both heir and beyonde the see, wher is many hundreth of theym 
brynt.”  22  Nine years later Tyndale himself would be burned. Yet repression 
could not put an end to the lust for reading that print and Luther had started. 
At best, authorities might steer the common people to a Book of Common 
Prayer, or later to an English Bible sanctioned by the king. Eventually the 
prerogative of interpreting scripture in personal terms came to seem an En-
glishman’s birthright. 
 Meanwhile new worlds were opening. Discoveries on earth and in the 
heavens, along with a new readiness (in Browne’s words) “to stand alone 
against the strength of opinion; and to meet the Goliah and Gyant of 
Authority”  23  with the trust of a reasoning being in his own powers, made 
heresy less fearsome than illusion and untruth, the “idols” and “fallacies” 
identiﬁ ed by Bacon and Browne. Bacon sees error everywhere, and most of 
all in the mind: “Doth any man doubt, that if there were taken out of Mens 
Mindes, Vaine Opinions, Flattering Hopes, False valuations, Imaginations as 
one would, and the like; but it would leave the Mindes, of a Number of 
Men, poore shrunken Things?”  24  One kind of error especially troubles him: 
“the corruption of philosophy arising from  Superstition , and admixture of 
theology.” “This unhealthy mixture of things divine and human” debases 
both religion and science, and it leads to “the  Apotheosis  of error.” Worse 
yet, it is “exceptionally gifted and exalted individuals,” conﬁ dent in their 
powers, who are most susceptible to the vanity of thinking that they can 
build a natural philosophy from sacred writings, “ seeking the living among the 
dead .”  25  Bacon’s prime examples of such hubris are Pythagoras and Plato. 
But he also seems to be aiming at one of their modern disciples, his own 
contemporary and acquaintance Robert Fludd.  26  Fludd more than any had 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    141
drawn philosophy from scripture and from dark hermetic texts; he served as 
an ambassador of error. 
 Generations to come have acquiesced in that verdict. Whether or not the 
Royal Society was actually dedicated to carrying out Bacon’s program, its 
engines of publicity declared that his attacks on superstition and authority 
had shown the way for its own experimental philosophy.  27  Joseph Glanvill 
took the title and inspiration of his encomium to the Society from Bacon: 
 Plus Ultra: Or, the Progress and Advancement of Knowledge Since the Days of 
Aristotle (1668).  New Atlantis  had “ desired , and form’d a SOCIETY of  Experi-
menters  in a  Romantick Model ” for later improvements of learning, and its 
author himself was transformed into a mighty romantic model, the great 
progenitor of the great instauration.  28  “ Bacon , like  Moses , led us forth at last,” 
according to Abraham Cowley;  29  the seas of error had parted for him. Such 
writers are among the champions who star in the epic of modern times—
heroic, inspiring. One story about the advancement of learning might sketch 
a steady progress, beginning perhaps with Bacon and marching forward in 
triumph for 400 years and beyond, with ignorance yielding more to truth at 
every successive stage. Or less imperiously, one might at least trace an edge of 
objectivity (in Charles Gillispie’s phrase) through which reason and science, 
by the skin of their teeth, keep one step ahead of nonsense.  30  
 Yet perhaps that heroic picture is too good to be true. Error is wonderfully 
resilient, and it endures and thrives. A generation after Fludd was “refuted,” 
the weapon-salve came back to life, revived in powdered form by Sir Kenelm 
Digby, who pretended to have introduced it to “this Quarter of the World,” 
and his book went through twenty-nine editions.  31  Nor have Fludd’s ideas 
wholly lost their charm even today. Although the weapon-salve has gone 
out of favor, Frances Yates and other distinguished scholars have taken up the 
cause of “the Rosicrucian Enlightenment” and the contribution of occult 
and magical ways of thinking to the development of modern science. From 
this perspective an emphasis on particular errors can hardly detract from the 
undeniable power of hermetic philosophers, whose theories are spectacularly 
 coherent . Their sweeping vision offers an opportunity to combine ancient 
wisdom with intuitions of a cosmic harmony, “a process which would return 
society to the idyllic unity lost in the remote past.”  32  Thus the great quantum 
physicist Wolfgang Pauli seems personally drawn to Fludd. “Even though 
at the cost of consciousness of the quantitative side of nature and its laws, 
Fludd’s ‘hieroglyphic’ ﬁ gures do try to preserve a  unity of the inner experi-
ence of the ‘observer’ (as we should say today) and the external processes 
of nature, and thus a  wholeness  in its contemplation—a wholeness formerly 
contained in the idea of the analogy between microcosm and macrocosm but 

142    WHAT GALILEO SAW
apparently already lacking in Kepler and lost in the world view of classical 
natural science.”  33  Although Fludd could not cure bodily wounds, perhaps he 
could help to heal the psychic wounds of modern scientists like Pauli, whose 
rationality had blinded them to spiritual truths. 
 Nor does any simple distinction between truth and error account for 
the achievements of Bacon and Browne. A closer look at those pioneers of 
science tends to complicate what they stand for. What changed in natural 
philosophy between the sixteenth and seventeenth century was not so much a 
movement from the “false” to the “true,” many scholars now agree, as a shift 
from contemplation of causes to a practical stress on results—in Peter Dear’s 
terms, from knowing  why to knowing  how .  34  Even Fludd, despite his fascina-
tion with the  why , put some impressive know-how into practice, as in patent-
ing a method to produce a better and cheaper steel or in devising a functional 
memory system.  35  Bacon’s polemic against the  why went further. Traditional 
studies of “abstract forms” or “ﬁ nal and ﬁ rst causes,” he argued, ignore the 
intermediate causes that alone can stimulate useful work. Worst of all, the 
search for primary qualities and occult properties in the end reduces all nature 
to atoms, “ideas which however true they may be, can do little for the good of 
mankind.”  36  Only experience can guard against the recklessness with which 
philosophies perpetuate illusions of the mind. Hence unaided reason can 
never separate truth from error; all must be put to the test. Similarly, Browne 
sets aside “discursive enquiry and rationall conjecture” in order to explore 
instead “delightful Truths, conﬁ rmable by sense and ocular Observation, 
which seems to me the surest path, to trace the Labyrinth of Truth.”  37  Within 
this labyrinth, error can often masquerade as a guardian spirit forever moving 
forward. Thus the open daylight of truth would have to contend with endless 
trials and shadows. In Browne the advancement of learning detours through 
byways where truth and error keep uneasy company together. 
 Doctor Browne’s Deuteroscopy 
 Some truths seem almost falshoods, and some 
falshoods almost truths; wherein falshood and truth 
seem almost æquilibriously stated, and but a few 
grains of distinction to bear down the balance. 
 —Thomas Browne,  Christian Morals 
 Thomas Browne was not at all sure that he knew the meaning of truth. 
Despite his enormous and sedulous learning, he understood that he had 
grasped only a tiny portion of the world and that a sense of the whole 
would always escape him. Hence the certainties of writers like Robert Fludd 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    143
or the legendary “Hermes Trismegistus” (Fludd’s favorite guide) provoke 
a wry response: “To begin or continue our works like Trismegistus of old, 
‘verum certè verum atque verissimum est’ [it is true, certainly true, and most 
supremely true], would sound arrogantly unto present ears in this strict 
enquiring age.”  38  Yet Browne did know a great deal about error, to which he 
devoted much of his life. The ﬁ rst large folio of  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  was 
published in 1646, before he turned forty-one; revised and expanded editions 
appeared in 1650, 1658, 1669, and ﬁ nally 1672, ten years before his death. 
Error kept coming back, and it was popular; the book “ﬁ lled the kingdom 
with copies,” according to Samuel Johnson.  39  Here readers could lose them-
selves in a wealth of bizarre and intriguing bits of information. Moreover, 
the miscellaneous organization, with brief entries or essays on any number 
of different topics—the loadstone, the elephant, mermaids, the age of the 
world, the blackness of Negroes, and whether or not the fruit that Eve and 
Adam ate was an apple—perfectly suited Browne’s gifts. He was at home 
with error; he loved to wander through thickets of learning and follow his 
quarry through winding paths of digression. 
 A keen eye for oddities keeps Browne’s restless mind in motion. With the 
zeal of a naturalist and archaeologist, over the years he collected a hoard of 
curios, ancient coins and medals and urns as well as plants and animals, alive 
or dead, including an eagle, whales’ heads, and an ostrich. John Evelyn called 
Browne’s house and garden in Norwich “a Paradise & Cabinet of rarities, & 
that of the best collection,” and it is tempting to think of the  Pseudodoxia 
too as a cabinet of curiosities, a private museum or portfolio of showpieces 
that invites us to rummage through his obsessions.  40  But curiosity cannot 
provide a test of truth or a principle for distinguishing harmless freaks of 
nature from dangerous false beliefs. Does the  Pseudodoxia  instruct its audi-
ence or merely divert it? That question hovers over Browne’s hydra-headed 
and often whimsical investigations. Although he made his living as a physi-
cian, he offers very little medical advice, let alone prescriptions for curing 
the epidemic of popular errors. Indeed, he sometimes suggests that certain 
fallacies might be ineradicable, as with the superstition that those who pull 
up a mandrake root are doomed to die soon after; however ridiculous such 
a fear may be, “prepossessed heads will ever doubt it, and timorous beliefes 
will never dare to try it” ( PE 1:146).  Pseudodoxia  has neither the will nor the 
power to straighten out the labyrinth it explores. Like error itself, it wanders, 
and the game it pursues does not resolve into any one unequivocal truth.  41  
 Yet Browne was quite ready to cope with mysteries or enigmatic com-
pounds of truth and error. That was his nature as well as the nature of all his 
kind: “Thus is man that great and true  Amphibium , whose nature is disposed 

144    WHAT GALILEO SAW
to live not onely like other creatures in divers elements, but in divided and 
distinguished worlds.”  42  Browne imagines himself as that  amphibium . He 
associates the word not only with creatures like frogs who move between 
water and land but also with the passage from primal chaos to vital form—
the principle of epigenesis, which according to William Harvey had gener-
ated the cosmos as well as human beings: “ Epigenesis , in which an order is 
observed according to the dignity, and worth, and use of the  Parts ; where 
ﬁ rst a small foundation is laid, which at the same time while it doth increase, 
grows distinct, and formed, and so attains all its parts by degrees, according 
to their proper order, which are supergenerated, and born to it.”  43  Here indi-
viduals reenact creation, from the moment of conception in the womb to 
the fully formed being to the unknown hereafter. It is as if for Browne the 
little world or microcosm of the self encompassed all possible forms of life, 
“not onely of the world, but of the Universe.” The embryo or  amphibium  pro-
gresses from a “rude masse” without sense or reason through vegetable and 
animal states to “the life of men, and at last the life of spirits.”  44  Browne rel-
ishes that perpetual transmigration. It marks his precarious balance between 
a number of worlds, to each of which he is drawn but in which he cannot 
permanently settle. He is poised between the ancients and moderns, between 
mysticism and science, between the active and contemplative life, between 
poetic appreciation of wonders and the new experimental methods. Even 
his celebrated prose style hovers between English and Latin, whose syntax 
and vocabulary he imports into a rich vernacular brocade (with stitches of 
Greek and Hebrew).  45  The  amphibium  dwells in the wide world as well as in 
England, in the past as well as the present. 
 In context, however, the image refers to one particular in-between situ-
ation of human beings, who consist of both body and soul: “We are onely 
that amphibious piece betweene a corporall and spirituall essence, that mid-
dle forme that linkes those two together, and makes good the method of 
God and nature, that jumps not from extreames, but unites the incompat-
ible distances by some middle and participating natures.”  46  Characteristically, 
Browne regards this middling position not with revulsion, as Hamlet and 
so many others do, but as a delight.  47  Participating in every possible state of 
existence, from the barely animate to the divine, the curious human being 
can ﬁ nd a piece of himself wherever he looks. The potential to view his life 
from more than one perspective doubles Browne’s pleasure; the visible world 
engages his senses; the invisible world entices his reason and spirit.  Religio 
Medici  (1642), the work that made him famous, circulates happily among 
his roles as physician and man of faith, a reader of the book of God and the 
book of Nature, a lover of mysteries and matters of fact. Inhabiting so many 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    145
alternate selves, he is content to allow other people to differ from him. Char-
ity is Browne’s favorite virtue. “I cannot fall out or contemne a man for an 
errour, or conceive why a difference in opinion should divide an affection: 
for controversies, disputes, and argumentations, both in Philosophy, and in 
Divinity, . . . doe not infringe the Lawes of Charity” ( RM 59). 
 Nevertheless, one sort of error does exasperate Browne: he cannot abide a 
narrow literal mind. Precisely because he imagines himself an  amphibium  in 
an amphibious world, caught “betweene a corporall and spirituall essence,” 
he scorns those landlocked creatures, only half-human, who understand 
everything merely through their senses. Such creatures include the great 
majority of mankind. “If there be any among those common objects of 
hatred I doe contemne and laugh at, it is that great enemy of reason, vertue 
and religion, the multitude, that numerous piece of monstrosity . . .; it is no 
breach of Charity to call these fooles.”  48  Much of the  Pseudodoxia  campaigns 
against one-sided views that overlook the invisible meanings of things. In this 
respect the book sets an example of how to read; it provides continual lessons 
for “attaining the deuteroscopy.” Deuteroscopy, or the art of the “second 
look,” is the heart of Browne’s method. As a mode of biblical interpretation, 
it pursues the “second intention of the words,” directing the reader to the 
spirit behind the letter of the text.  49  But Browne extends his method beyond 
“the Lecture of holy Scripture” to error in general. Whether the object of 
his scrutiny is a biblical passage, the picture of a grasshopper, or the bad luck 
foretold when salt is spilled, there ought to be more than one way to interpret 
its meaning.  50  
 The need to take a second look accounts not only for Browne’s principles 
of interpretation but also for much of his moral passion. Original sin itself, 
like Eve’s fatal misunderstanding of Satan’s words, began when “ænigmatical 
deliveries” were misconstrued by literal minds: “Your eyes shall be opened,” 
Eve heard, without the subtext, to “discovery of your shame and proper 
confusion” ( PE 1:24). Fallacies of one-sided reading lie at the root of “vulgar 
and senselesse heresies” as well as popular errors. Browne fears and loathes 
such tunnel vision. Historically, in modern England as well as ancient Israel, 
the scourge of  idolatry haunts him, “men converting the symbolicall use of 
Idols into their proper worship, and receiving the representation of things as 
the substance and thing it selfe,” so that the credulous multitude “may be 
made believe that any thing is God; and may be made believe there is no God 
at all” ( PE 1:26, 29). Book 5 of the  Pseudodoxia , “Of many things question-
able as they are commonly described in Pictures,” confronts such misreadings 
directly. Looking closely, looking twice, Browne uses his own literal mind 
and eye to correct the illusions of art; dolphins, for instance, are crooked in 

146    WHAT GALILEO SAW
paintings, but “in their naturall ﬁ gure they are straight” ( PE 1:370). Ulti-
mately, however, his quarrel is with pictures themselves, insofar as they tend 
to make invisible essences into visible icons.  51  “The picture of the Creator, or 
God the Father in the shape of an old Man, is a dangerous piece, and in this 
fecundity of sects may revive the Anthropomorphites” ( PE 1:429). When 
vulgar eyes regard such inventions as literal truths, they misplace their faith 
into factions that threaten both church and state. Corporeal idols stupidly 
shroud the spirit that cannot be seen. 
 The inability to comprehend more than one side is not only the source 
of most vulgar and common errors, according to Browne, but also the dis-
tinguishing mark of vulgar and common people. Such viewers will always 
be in error; though by chance they might stumble across some truth, ﬁ rst 
and last “they are incompetent judges” ( PE 1:15). Even the title of the book 
suggests the writer’s doubts about his readers.  Enquiries into Vulgar and Com-
mon Errors  served as the running head of editions in Browne’s own time, and 
it also provided a subtitle in the Stationers’ Register of the ﬁ rst edition. But 
it never appeared on a title page during Browne’s life.  52  The original title 
page presents something else:  Pseudodoxia Epidemica: or, Enquiries into Very 
many received Tenents, And commonly presumed Truths .  53  The Greek phrase itself 
would discourage vulgar and common people from coming too close to the 
text, or from hoping that their ignorance might be cured. “The people” are 
not the audience imagined by Browne, nor are they the source of the tenets 
he wants to correct. In fact he speciﬁ cally writes for the “ingenuous Gentry” 
( PE 1:2; “ingenuous,” as Johnson’s  Dictionary deﬁ nes it, means “noble” or 
“freeborn,” and the “gentry” are a “Class . . . above the vulgar”).  54  Browne 
is an unapologetic elitist: “Nor have wee addressed our penne or stile unto 
the people, (whom Bookes doe not redresse, and are this way incapable of 
reduction) but unto the knowing and leading part of Learning.” Even the 
errors of hoi polloi are derivative, he assumes, like weeds that will wither 
“except they be watered from higher regions” ( PE 1:3). Without such help 
from above, apparently the people would lack the wherewithal to generate 
their own mistakes. 
 This contempt for vulgar and common minds emerges from Browne’s 
conception of truth. “For the assured truth of things is derived from the 
principles of knowledge, and causes, which determine their verities; whereof 
their uncultivated understandings, scarce holding any theory, they are but bad 
discerners of verity, and in the numerous tract of error, but casually do hit 
the point and unity of truth” ( PE 1:15). The learned discover truth through 
proper theories, approximating the perfect Ideas of things in the mind of 
God. By contrast the common, illiterate people are slaves to their senses, 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    147
forever corrupted by appearances and original sin. “Thus the greater part of 
mankinde having but one eye of sence and reason, conceive the earth farre 
bigger than the Sun, the ﬁ xed Stars lesser then the Moone, their ﬁ gures plaine, 
and their spaces from earth equidistant. For thus their sence enformeth them, 
and herein their reason cannot rectiﬁ e them, and therefore hopelesly con-
tinuing in mistakes, they live and dye in their absurdities” ( PE 1:15). To see 
the sky correctly, one needs an encompassing theory. 
 The example is interesting here because, thanks to theory, Browne still 
saw the heavens largely through Ptolemy’s eyes. “To make a revolution every 
day is the nature of the Sun, because that necessary course which God hath 
ordained it, from which it cannot swerve, but by a faculty from that voyce 
which ﬁ rst did give it motion” ( RM 15–16). As Johnson points out, with 
post-Newtonian severity, “he never mentions the motion of the earth but 
with contempt and ridicule, though the opinion, which admits it, was then 
growing popular.”  55  In many respects Browne was no advanced thinker. The 
basilisk and the unicorn revive in his pages. Moreover, his theory of error 
reserves a prominent place for Satan, who exerts himself everywhere to pro-
mote false opinions and who remains a powerful, living force in the world. 
Browne keeps his eye on the devil. A devout believer in witches, in 1662 he 
testiﬁ ed as an expert witness that three girls had been bewitched; and two 
women accused of bewitching them were hanged.  56  
 Against this background, a reading of  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  throws plenty 
of doubt on Willey’s argument that its “real drift” is to clear away the “fan-
tastic lore” of the Middle Ages. Browne immerses himself in that lore. Did 
Adam and Eve have navels? Do Jews stink naturally with “an evil savour”? 
Will women, on Judgment Day, arise desexed?  57  Like Robert Burton, whose 
 Anatomy of Melancholy  (1621) kept growing like the  Pseudodoxia  in edition 
after edition, Browne seems arrested by every odd fact or idea. A fascina-
tion with arcana, and a fondness for many of the illusions he seeks to dispel, 
account for much of the charm as well as the bulk of the book. Nor have 
the wanderings of error decreased, for him or Burton, in modern times. 
The epidemic of false opinions that Browne diagnoses refers not only to 
some benighted past but also to a continuing plague, the corruptions brought 
about by skeptics and know-nothings—especially those pamphleteers whose 
“fruitlesse Rhapsodies” have done “not onely open injury unto learning” but 
“a secret treachery upon truth” ( PE 1:53). In these new days, when instru-
ments like the telescope and microscope have shaken Ptolemy’s stars and rid-
dled the stable surfaces of things, the wisdom of the ages must be defended. 
Despite his skepticism about received tenets, Browne clings to “the setled and 
determined order of the world” made by God. His earth does not move.  58  

148    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Browne is by no means dogmatic. A sturdy common sense, as well as 
prodigious learning, informs his demolitions of folly (no, Jews do not stink, 
though of course they are nasty). Cutting “the great Climacterical year, 
that is, Sixty three” down to size, he demonstrates conclusively that its sup-
posed effects depend on “arbitrary calculations.”  59  In addition to all his book 
learning, moreover, he is willing to test theories through experiments and 
observations, in Bacon’s spirit. As soon as he moves from the general causes 
of error, in book 1, to particular instances, in book 2, a long essay refutes the 
common opinion “that Crystall is nothing else, but Ice or Snow concreted” 
( PE 1:74). Good authors and good reasons argue against that opinion, but 
Browne goes further: among other trials, he covers glasses of water with an 
inch of oil in order to show that ice will not “concrete” without air.  60  Grand 
theories interest him less than attention to details. When he considers the 
weapon-salve ( Unguentum Armarium ), the “mighty principles” vouched for 
by advocates like Fludd impress him less than the practical virtue of keeping 
the wound clean: “It might be worth the experiment to try, whether the 
same will not ensue upon the same method of cure, by ordinary Balsams, 
or common vulnerary plasters” ( PE 1:115). Browne stocks a clearinghouse 
of current, useful information. At times he seems carried away by the new 
world of knowledge, the burgeoning truth that will make posterity happy. 
Two fellow English physicians, Gilbert and Harvey, have brought eternal 
glory to the nation. In Gilbert’s studies of terrestrial magnetism, “England 
produced the Father Philosopher, and discovered more in it, then Columbus 
or Americus did ever by it”; and Harvey, who discovered “the new and noble 
doctrine of the circulation of the blood,” shines as “that ocular Philosopher, 
and singular discloser of truth.”  61  Browne honors their explorations of the 
unknown. 
 Yet he also feels a deep sense of loss about what is passing. The war between 
ancients and moderns that would explode at the end of the seventeenth cen-
tury brought to consciousness an anxiety about the nature of truth that already 
had troubled Browne. On the one hand, the seeker of truth could see its 
horizons expand every day. On the other, the purest truth reposed in scripture 
and the wise ancients, and most of the dicta that had accumulated through 
the centuries had covered that light with pseudodoxia—at least until recent 
times.  62  When Browne considers the delicate, controversial issue of whether 
both sexes pass their seed on to the embryo, as Lucretius had argued, or whether 
men alone supply the active principle of generation, as Aristotle maintained, 
he resorts to Genesis, not Harvey’s ovist theory, to settle the case. Satan himself 
had inspired the Aristotelian or animalculist party: “For hereby he disparageth 
the fruit of the Virgin, frustrateth the fundamentall Prophesie, nor can the 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    149
seed of the woman then breake the head of the Serpent.”  63  Error began with 
the Fall; “an invisible Agent,” the devil, “playes in the darke upon us,” and 
our own frailty tempts us to false speculations ( PE  1:58). Hence, in the search 
for truth, discovery and recovery ought to be one. “The world, which took 
but six days to make, is like to take six thousand to make out: mean while old 
truths voted down begin to resume their places, and new ones arise upon us.”  64  
 Old truths would not surrender quietly. At the height of the war, Sir William 
Temple would famously argue that the ancients excelled the moderns even 
in science (though unfortunately the key works had been lost), and his sec-
retary, Jonathan Swift, would satirize all modern religious sects (in  Tale of 
a Tub ) as blots and riders on the Father’s Last Testament.  65  Such views may 
seem extreme, but they had long been orthodox in some ﬁ elds of learning. 
The origins of scholarship itself are closely linked to textual editing, the 
effort of philologists to bring back the primal, uncorrupted written word, 
or perhaps even the thought or utterance that preceded writing—Homer 
and Socrates disentangled from scribes and Plato.  66  Similarly, etymologists 
tend to privilege the root of a word, as if the history of language mani-
fested a falling away from authentic, original meaning.  67  In any case Browne 
is torn; false etymologies disturb him as much as foolish superstitions. If 
the recognition of error, from one point of view, conﬁ rms the progressive 
unveiling of truth, like the sun bursting forth from clouds, another per-
spective might show the encroachment of error on seasoned wisdom, like 
creepers strangling a tree. 
 The Rise of the Vulgar and Common 
 Meanwhile deﬁ nitions of truth and error were shifting their grounds. The 
process by which  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  came to be known as  Enquiries into 
Vulgar and Common Errors  reﬂ ects a fundamental change in the organization 
of knowledge. Above all, authors began to take a new interest in what vulgar 
and common people actually thought. Browne, we have seen, was unper-
suaded that they thought at all; “stuffed with errors,” the multitude always 
threatened to drag their superiors down to their own blunt absence of mind. 
Nor was it easy for him to ﬁ nd evidence of what “people” believed. Though 
the  Pseudodoxia  records any number of errors that are “common conceits,” 
it never once descends to any common person’s opinions (I like to imagine 
Browne asking a servant whether Adam and Eve had navels). Written sources 
provide all the fodder, and illiterates by deﬁ nition do not write. Yet in the 
course of the seventeenth century, as more and more people learned to read, 
print culture increasingly found room for vulgar and common opinions. 

150    WHAT GALILEO SAW
The vigorous pamphlet wars of the 1640s, at which Browne glances in his 
disdain for “the line of vulgaritie, and Democraticall enemies of truth” ( PE 
1:21), encouraged the barely literate to participate in the exciting and often 
subversive pursuit of reading. “Thomas Hobbes and Samuel Parker believed 
the Great Rebellion to have been ‘chieﬂ y hatched in the shops of trades-
men’ ”  68  —booksellers most of all. This hunger for print affected the learned 
and unlearned alike. Moreover, not only readers but writers came from the 
ranks that Browne had considered outside the circle of knowledge. In 1682, 
the year that Browne died, John Bunyan, the meagerly educated son of a tin-
ker, was by far the most popular author in England. The vulgar and common 
had mastered the art of passing along their vulgar and common opinions. 
 Hence a new kind of evidence opened vistas into the minds of “the peo-
ple.” Beginning with broadsides, some kinds of popular writing had always 
attempted to guess or calculate how plebeian audiences would respond. 
When Shakespeare wrote for the groundlings, he had to imagine not only 
the ways that rude characters would speak and act on the stage but also the 
ways they would be recognized by a rude public. Stephano and Trinculo 
outnumbered Prospero in the pit. Good playwrights knew the people for 
whom they wrote (if the Earl of Oxford did write the plays, at times he must 
have had to consult some lowly person like Shakespeare). And jest books had 
to know what made people laugh. But the rise of ﬂ ourishing booksellers—
“the trade”—in late seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Britain increased 
the stakes of catering to the public. A writer or businessman who could 
anticipate the wants of vulgar and common people could make a fortune. 
However much the learned might scorn a best seller like  Pilgrim’s Progress , it 
touched the lives of many who previously had not seen their own thoughts 
reﬂ ected in books.  69  At the same time, moreover, it gave erudite readers a 
chance to see—or think they saw—the beliefs of people with whom they 
might never have spoken. If Browne had been born a generation later, he 
might have been less ready to think that the vulgar had no minds at all. 
 The cause of the people was taken up with peerless energy by the ﬁ rst 
 philosophe , the father of the Enlightenment, Pierre Bayle.  70  In the work that 
launched his career,  Pensées diverses sur la comète  (1683), Bayle aims at the very 
audience that Browne had rejected. “It is necessary to consider that here is 
one of those books written for the people and for those who do not make 
study their profession. It is known that persons of this order, not ordinarily 
reading much, are seeing for the ﬁ rst time, when they take the trouble to read 
a book, the most well-worn studies of which this book makes mention.”  71  
All works of the learned are grist for Bayle’s mill, and his voracious reading 
consumes both ancient and modern accounts and opinions on comets. But 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    151
as a citizen of “the republic of letters” (a phrase he popularized) he com-
ments on errors of every sort, on vulgar superstitions and scholarly blunders 
alike, and serves as a surrogate reader for those who lack the means to read or 
think for themselves. These reﬂ ections are full of mischief. When Browne 
touches brieﬂ y on comets, his gingerly remarks—“Whether Comets or blaz-
ing Starres be generally of such terrible effects, as elder times have conceived 
them, . . . is not absurd to doubt”  72  —remind us that some portents have 
biblical authority, and are not to be questioned. But Bayle is not afraid to 
question anything. According to him, God so detests idolatry that he can-
not possibly have “made new stars glimmer in the sky from time to time in 
order to intimidate all the peoples of the earth and thereby to bring them 
without fail to all the acts of idolatry that each regarded as most appropriate 
to expiate their crimes.” Superstition and fear, not comets, incite a credulous, 
frenzied mob “to sacriﬁ ce men in great quantities.”  73  Readers who took such 
glances at idolatry, miracles, and persecution as a code for the militant arm of 
the Catholic Church were probably not mistaken; Bayle, a French Protestant 
refugee, was writing from the sanctuary of Rotterdam. But his skepticism 
about authority extends far beyond any settled position or sect. In his pursuit 
of error, learning itself goes on trial. 
 That pursuit culminated in the great  Historical and Critical Dictionary  ( Dic-
tionnaire historique et critique , 1696), a massive series of biographical essays. 
Here a thin line of information and narrative marches across the top of 
the page, while bulky footnotes below offer a perpetual commentary, both 
bibliographical and analytic, on the accumulated learned traditions that have 
encrusted knowledge with such heavy barnacles of folly.  74  Descartes had 
taught Bayle to doubt any dicta or dogma he could not prove for him-
self. Yet the pupil extended his master’s suspicion of authority much further 
into the past, questioning historical accounts like so many contradictory and 
unreliable witnesses to be interrogated and broken down. In Bayle’s pages 
truth is elusive, and even an honest witness is likely to be tainted by error; 
human incapacity seems still more damaging than original sin. Thus the 
epidemic of pseudodoxia, from an enlightened point of view, has descended 
through history, and makes no distinction between learned and common 
people.  75  Bayle’s republic of letters was always already infected by fallacies, 
whether produced by erudite self-interest or by vulgar unconscious bias. In 
this respect, what a historian needed to explain was not how error had wan-
dered away from truth but how any truth might be found. 
 Philosophy also was changing. The empiricist mode that began with 
Hobbes and Gassendi was grounded on efforts to comprehend cognition—
the way that minds actually work. Thus knowledge itself depended less on 

152    WHAT GALILEO SAW
the status of facts, their absolute truth or falsehood, than on the sense impres-
sions and memories that processed them. Even errors could prove highly 
instructive, because they revealed the peculiar inner workings of memory, its 
twists and deceptions. This put a new weight on vulgar and common ideas. 
The train of thought culminated in Locke. From one point of view, Tristram 
Shandy surely hit the nail on the head when he described  An Essay concerning 
Human Understanding  (1689) as “a history-book . . . of what passes in a man’s 
own mind,” and went on to attribute the confusion of human beings to “dull 
organs, . . . slight and transient impressions, . . . [and] a memory like unto a 
sieve.”  76  Had Tristram reﬂ ected on his own disastrous life and opinions, he 
might have gone a step further and called Locke’s  Essay  a history of the  errors 
that pass in a man’s mind. Locke ends his book, in fact, by descending from 
understanding to error. “ Errour ,” he claims, “is not a Fault of our Knowledge, 
but a Mistake of our Judgment giving Assent to that, which is not true.”  77  
Thus ignorance results from the tendency of the mind to cling to opinions 
against all probability, either through mistakes of reasoning or, far more fre-
quently, through “ giving up our Assent to the common received Opinions ” learned 
in childhood and reinforced by passions or interests. Indeed, most of man-
kind, Locke says, “have no Thought, no Opinion at all,” but merely stick to 
a party.  78  In this respect human understanding is not so much ﬂ awed as rare. 
 Thus error came into its own, in the wake of Locke’s  Essay . To guard 
against assent to false beliefs required new principles of education, as in  Some 
Thoughts concerning Education  (1693), and new ways to cultivate reason, as in 
Locke’s last work,  Of the Conduct of the Understanding  (1706). Above all, the 
psychological sources of error—its logic, so to speak—began to make sense. 
Faults of knowledge were less important than the models and practices that 
guided thought. If people misconceived what they saw in the sky at night, 
for instance, the reason was not their slavery to sense impressions (as Browne 
had said) but rather their adherence to a false mental picture or episteme or 
gestalt. Therefore a teacher who wished to correct the error ﬁ rst needed 
to deduce the model on which it was based. The principle holds today. As 
studies repeatedly show, the majority of Americans do not know what causes 
winter and summer; they assent to the vulgar and common error that the 
earth is closer to the sun in the summer (except, apparently, in Australia). This 
is idiotic, of course, but it does have a kind of logic: a picture in the mind. 
And to correct it, as studies repeatedly show, simply stating the real cause will 
not be sufﬁ cient (a few weeks later, almost everyone will have forgotten that 
cause). Instead the model in the mind itself must be corrected. Locke knew 
that, as does every good teacher. But nothing is harder, as Locke knew and 
every good teacher knows. 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    153
 Eighteenth-century thinkers also had trouble devising methods to straighten 
out errors. The problem was not so much tracking down the causes of vulgar 
mistakes as offering some means to avoid them. Locke is far more persuasive 
in showing how errors arise in the mind than in showing how reason can 
shield us; in view of the inﬁ nite wanderings of ideas and associations, his reli-
ance on reason frequently seems pathetic.  79  Signiﬁ cantly, when Locke reaches 
for an example of a probability so great that no mind can resist it, the best he 
can do is the intelligent design of a Creator. Is it probable “that a blind for-
tuitous concourse of Atoms, not guided by an understanding Agent, should 
frequently constitute the Bodies of any Species of Animals”? “In these and 
the like Cases, I think, no Body that considers them, can be one jot at a stand 
which side to take, nor at all waver in his Assent.”  80  But atomists did not agree, 
of course, and eventually Hume would expose the fragility of any unwavering 
assent to the Argument from Design.  81  Here faith masquerades as reason. Nor 
did later thinkers discover a better shield for the mind. By the time of  Tris-
tram Shandy (1759), errors—not only vulgar and common but also learned—
seemed no aberration but rather the way of the world. Or as another work, 
published in the same year as  Tristram Shandy , put the matter, “Perhaps, if we 
speak with rigorous exactness, no human mind is in its right state.”  82  
 Samuel Johnson’s Truth 
 Samuel Johnson inherited and combined the perspectives of Browne and 
Locke. The learned traditions on which Browne drew inﬂ uenced John-
son’s fascination with scholarly quarrels as well as his prose, and Locke’s 
psychological turn impressed him with the need to trace errors into the 
treacherous moonscape of the mind.  83  This combination was odd, in some 
respects. Browne’s learning had made him disdain the foolishness of vulgar 
and common minds, while Johnson put his learning at the disposal of com-
mon readers; and the defects of understanding against which Locke had 
warned became the common coin of the minds that Johnson addressed. 
In Johnson’s vision, as in Bayle’s, pseudodoxia are far too prevalent to be an 
epidemic of any one time. Rather, they are the natural consequences of the 
way that all minds work, the product of that hunger of imagination which 
ﬁ lls vacuity with misconceived atoms and shadows of meaning.  84  Hence 
Browne’s eccentric and grand collection of errors is dumped, like so much 
bric-a-brac, on Locke’s tabula rasa. In this regard Johnson’s lifework might 
be deﬁ ned as enquiries into vulgar and common errors. But the questions 
he pursues are not whether Adam and Eve had navels or whether Jews smell. 
Instead he keeps asking what you, dear reader, are thinking. 

154    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 The  Pseudodoxia  was a work close to Johnson’s heart. He quoted it fre-
quently in the  Dictionary  (1755), and to some extent the  Dictionary  itself 
might be considered a supplement to Browne, since it “both displays vast 
stores of false opinion and seeks to explode them.”  85  At one time he even 
thought about bringing the  Pseudodoxia  up to date, incorporating “B OYLE ’s 
and N EWTON ’s philosophy.”  86  The foundations of knowledge required per-
petual maintenance, to scrape away rust and rot. No one cared more than 
Johnson about rooting out error. Everyone who knew him remarked his 
devotion to “strict and scrupulous veracity”;  87  a fanatic for truth, he will 
not concede that any untruth might be harmless. “No fraud is innocent,” he 
wrote in his life of Browne, “for the conﬁ dence which makes the happiness 
of society, is in some degree diminished by every man, whose practice is at 
variance with his words” ( CM  8). Hence readers need to be trained, not only 
to sniff out prevarications but also to guard against their own cast of mind 
when they color the truth. 
 Consider, for instance, the method of Johnson’s short life of Browne.  88  A 
brief account of facts and dates provides a thread of narrative, and in accord 
with Johnson’s principle that only those who knew a man intimately can 
mark the “minute peculiarities” that truly deﬁ ne him,  89  he quotes almost all 
the “minutes” by Browne’s friend John Whitefoot. But most of the life con-
sists of a subtle inquisition, anticipating—and usually disappointing—what 
readers will expect. Thus the opening paragraph tells us that the life has 
been written because “it was thought necessary to attempt the gratiﬁ cation 
of that curiosity which naturally inquires, by what peculiarities of nature or 
fortune eminent men have been distinguished, how uncommon attainments 
have been gained, and what inﬂ uence learning has had on its possessors, or 
virtue on its teachers” ( CM  3). Potentially this is already the stuff of satire. 
Although Johnson is hardly ridiculing Browne or the reader, his emphasis 
on curiosity about “peculiarities of nature,” “uncommon attainments,” and 
the virtue of teachers of virtue prepares us for many deﬂ ations, in which our 
curiosity will remain unsatisﬁ ed and our expectations of something extraor-
dinary will come up against a man who is much like others. To presume that 
great authors lead wonderful lives may be quite natural, but such presump-
tions involve the reader in vulgar and common errors. 
 The urge to puncture wishful thinking runs through the life as a whole. 
When Browne claims that he never intended  Religio Medici  for the press, for 
instance, “having composed it only for his own exercise and entertainment,” 
Johnson is very suspicious. “There is, surely, some reason to doubt the truth 
of the complaint so frequently made of surreptitious editions. . . . This is a 
stratagem, by which an author panting for fame, and yet afraid of seeming 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    155
to challenge it, may at once gratify his vanity, and preserve the appearance of 
modesty; may enter the lists, and secure a retreat” ( CM  7–8); and such devices, 
Johnson concludes, are frauds that deceive the public. Similarly, the published 
debates between Browne and Sir Kenelm Digby, who ﬂ atter each other’s 
faces and stab each other’s backs, coauthor a fraud: “The reciprocal civility 
of authors is one of the most risible scenes in the farce of life.”  90  
 The passage that strikes Johnson most in Browne’s writings inspires a skep-
tical reaction: “What most awakens curiosity, is his solemn assertion, that ‘His 
life has been a miracle of thirty years; which to relate, were not history but 
a piece of poetry, and would sound like a fable’ ” ( CM  11–12). Remarkably 
Johnson’s quotation omits three crucial words: “would sound  to common eares 
like a fable.”  91  But “common eares” are exactly the issue; they must be pro-
tected from false inferences. Johnson, the champion of the common reader, 
cannot allow his readers to fall into error.  92  With ruthless literal-mindedness 
he challenges Browne’s self-gloriﬁ cation. “There is, undoubtedly, a sense, in 
which all life is miraculous; . . . but life, thus explained, whatever it may have 
of miracle, will have nothing of fable; and, therefore, the author undoubtedly 
had regard to something, by which he imagined himself distinguished from 
the rest of mankind” ( CM  12). What can that have been? Browne’s life in 
fact seems quite uneventful. 
 What it was, that would, if it was related, sound so poetical and fabu-
lous, we are left to guess; I believe, without hope of guessing rightly. 
The wonders probably were transacted in his own mind: self-love, co-
operating with an imagination vigorous and fertile as that of B ROWNE , 
will ﬁ nd or make objects of astonishment in every man’s life: and, 
perhaps, there is no human being, however hid in the crowd from the 
observation of his fellow-mortals, who, if he has leisure and disposi-
tion to recollect his own thoughts and actions, will not conclude his 
life in some sort a miracle, and imagine himself distinguished from all 
the rest of his species by many discriminations of nature or of fortune. 
( CM 12–13) 
 Browne, like the astronomer in  Rasselas  who fancied that the weather obeyed 
his commands, thought himself specially chosen.  93  So do the rest of us, when 
we are lost in our own minds. But that way lies madness. 
 When Browne wrote that the miracle of his life “would sound to com-
mon eares like a fable,” he was deliberately parting company with the mass of 
mankind. “The world that I regard is my selfe, it is the Microcosme of mine 
own frame, that I cast mine eye on”; and “Men that look upon my outside, 
perusing onely my condition, and fortunes, do erre in my altitude; for I am 

156    WHAT GALILEO SAW
above  Atlas  his shoulders” ( RM 70). Here deuteroscopy reaches its peak. 
Taking a second look at himself, the amphibious Browne perceives that his 
corporeal existence or “masse of ﬂ esh” cannot circumscribe “the heavenly 
and celestial part” within him. Exalted in spirit, the writer towers above the 
sublunary world where vulgar and common people live their lives and fall 
into their petty errors. But Johnson brings him abruptly down to earth, and 
insists on conﬂ ating Browne’s sense of revelation about his life with the fac-
tual record. To the literal-minded reader, the person who gazes into himself 
and the person seen by the world must ultimately be one. Browne himself 
might have thought such a reading a vulgar and common error. But Johnson 
will not permit imagination to set the terms of truth. Despite his admiration 
for Browne’s remarkable learning and singular eloquence, he insists on reduc-
ing him to human size, on naturalizing or normalizing whatever might seem 
exceptional in his career. The otherworldly and superhuman are suspect; they 
feed the pride of error.  94  
 Browne’s story, as Johnson tells it, has few surprises. It is instructive pre-
cisely because the great man shares the common lot. By running together 
the reader’s expectations about a miraculous life and the subject’s claim to 
have led a miraculous life, the biography erases distinctions between high 
and low fellow mortals. No one is exempt from error. If Browne’s life  had 
been a miracle, it might have discouraged readers, bowed in the shadow of 
Atlas. What counts most ﬁ nally, for Johnson and many others in his age, is 
not greatness but goodness. Browne was a good man, and a good Christian, 
and even if very few readers can aspire to his superabundant learning, every-
one can respond to his passionate faith. Whatever we might have expected 
from the life, in the end it brings us back to ourselves. All of us, common 
and learned alike, stray from the one straight way, and our stories and errors 
at last are the same. 
 Johnson’s domestication of error, his insistence that vulgar and learned fal-
lacies do not differ  in kind , represents only one historical moment. Soon error 
would veer off in other directions: for instance, the romantic creed, contra 
Johnson, that a man of genius like Shakespeare or Browne has power to trans-
form any seeming error into a higher truth. But that moment also passed. As 
the world expanded and Western scholars grew better acquainted with other 
religions and cultures, belief in one unalterable truth became increasingly 
difﬁ cult to sustain. A new relativism, supported by ﬁ ndings in anthropology 
and biology as well as by explorations of the mind, eroded ﬁ rm distinctions 
between what was universally valid and what might be right or wrong only 
in particular circumstances. Gradually the authority to judge truth and error 
in factual matters passed to natural history and natural philosophy, or what 

A HISTORY OF ERROR    157
now was called “science.” Yet such authority is far from unproblematic. 
Even those scientists who reject Karl Popper’s insight that falsiﬁ ability, not 
veriﬁ cation, is the criterion that differentiates science from pseudoscience 
tend to agree that theories keep changing and that the absolute truth about 
things may never be known.  95  Moreover, the burgeoning specialization of 
knowledge long ago sunk everyone, outside a few experts, in vulgar and 
common misunderstandings of science. Error is widely available, and truth 
must be sought in rare places, on a high hill or in a deep well, as the ancients 
said, where few people go. 
 Yet Johnson’s revision of Browne still has some currency; it marks a turn-
ing point in attitudes toward error. When vulgar and common people were 
admitted to the social order of those who distinguish truth from error, they 
changed the basis of that distinction. Henceforth the health and functioning 
of the community would be the crucial issue. Johnson insists on the social 
 necessity  of telling the truth. On more than one occasion he borrowed a 
dictum from the  Pseudodoxia : “The devils do not tell lies to one another; for 
truth is necessary to all societies; nor can the society of hell subsist without 
it.”  96  Browne emphasizes the malignity of Satan, who twists truth into evil. 
But the need for people to trust one another is Johnson’s essential point. In 
this respect the wanderings of error disastrously loosen the ties that bind 
society together. Mutual trust, though vulnerable to every liar and cheat, is all 
that safeguards each human being against a Hobbesian world of isolation and 
fear.  97  That is why Johnson cares so much about rooting out error. 
 Nevertheless, the harrow of truth has hardly retarded the fertile dissemi-
nation of error. Most people tend to believe what they want to believe; new 
classics of pseudodoxia, like  Protocols of the Elders of Zion , spring up wherever 
they serve the interests of some party. Nor have recent techniques of com-
munication succeeded in fostering trust. An optimist might point out that 
the amount of information has multiplied exponentially from each age to 
the next, but a pessimist, browsing the Web, might argue that the proportion 
of error to truth has remained more or less constant. Bacon’s ideal of open 
daylight still proves elusive. And even today, at this very moment of writing 
and reading and texting, all of us are contributing, no doubt, not only to the 
advancement of learning but also to new histories of error. The epidemic 
continues. Yet even in hell, as Browne and Johnson contend, some modicum 
of truth survives, preserving just enough trust to enable devils—or people—
to work together. Even a wanderer sometimes needs to come home. 

158
  Chapter 8 
 The Century of Genius (1) 
 Measuring Up 
 The Otherness of Newton 
 In the preface to his monumental biography of Isaac Newton,  Never at Rest , 
Richard S. Westfall deliberately stands apart not only from Newton but also 
from Samuel Johnson. A faithful narrative of any life can be useful, accord-
ing to  Rambler  60, because a common humanity unites us, so that we recog-
nize ourselves in other people. “We are all prompted by the same motives, 
all deceived by the same fallacies, all animated by hope, obstructed by danger, 
entangled by desire, and seduced by pleasure.”  1  Yet after more than twenty years 
of study Westfall can ﬁ nd no way to measure himself against Newton. “He 
has become for me wholly other, one of the tiny handful of supreme geniuses 
who have shaped the category of the human intellect, a man not ﬁ nally reduc-
ible to the criteria by which we comprehend our fellow beings, those parallel 
circumstances of Dr. Johnson.”  2  Newton seems more, or other, than human, a 
genius who at once deﬁ nes and goes beyond the bounds of intellect. 
 He is not like us, he belongs to another species. Westfall’s sense of Newton’s 
irreducible otherness repeats a view already well established in Newton’s own 
time. It was ﬁ xed forever by the Latin ode with which Edmond Halley intro-
duced the  Principia  in 1687: 
 Arise, ye mortals, put aside earthly cares; 
 And from this recognize the force of a heaven-born mind, 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    159
 From the life of the herd far and away removed. . . . 
 Nor can any mortal come closer to touching the gods.  3  
 Halley concedes that Newton is (  just barely) a mortal. But the imagery 
of his ode draws freely on Lucretius’ famous set of tributes to Epicurus in 
 De rerum natura , which insists that its hero must be considered a god whose 
genius “surpassed the human race” ( qui genus humanum ingenio superavit ); and 
the same Latin phrase was later used to underwrite Roubiliac’s heroic statue 
of Newton in the chapel of Trinity College, Cambridge.  4  Nor did other 
poets hesitate to call the great man “godlike.” In an age when an “insuper-
able line, / The nice barrier ’twixt human and divine,” barred mortals from 
rising higher in the Great Chain of Being, Newton alone ascended.  5  During 
his lifetime he was known as “the Genius of England,” and after his death 
in 1727 no eulogist failed to note that he had already made one with the 
immortals whom he now joined. His place was high above, on earth as in 
heaven. 
 That reverence has never entirely faded. To be sure, modern scholars 
understand that “faults Newton had in abundance,” not only as a person 
but as a thinker.  6  Westfall is not too intimidated to expose his demigod’s 
scientiﬁ c miscalculations as well as his petty grudges. But those are merely 
human faults, which qualify but do not shrink his superhuman stature. Most 
educated people, and also many with little education, still think of Newton 
as the type of an unsurpassed genius. In the words of a popular biography, 
he “discovered more of the essential core of human knowledge than anyone 
before or after. He was chief architect of the modern world.”  7  Even Einstein, 
his sole competitor in the pantheon of scientiﬁ c immortals, bowed down to 
his preeminence, perhaps with a touch of envy: “Fortunate Newton, happy 
childhood of science! . . . Nature to him was an open book, whose letters he 
could read without effort. . . . In one person he combined the experimenter, 
the theorist, the mechanic and, not least, the artist in exposition. He stands 
before us strong, certain, and alone.”  8  Long after Newton’s times and troubles 
have been forgotten, Einstein concludes, his great works remain. We can 
hardly imagine what the world might have been without him. 
 Einstein’s praise draws on his own authority. Unlike Westfall, he conveys 
fellow feeling with Newton, through the brotherhood of solitary geniuses, 
and his admiration reﬂ ects a particular way of thinking about the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution and the history of science. That history, from his perspective, 
charts a progressive series of discoveries, or readings of the Book of Nature, 
and it is driven by a handful of great minds whose works and names fur-
nish its chapters. Galileo, Descartes, and Newton, along with a select soci-
ety of perhaps a dozen more, are Einstein’s fathers and brothers. Moreover, 

160    WHAT GALILEO SAW
the public tends to share this point of view. Even a reader who does not 
understand what those great minds accomplished can grasp that their ideas 
changed the world. 
 Today, when many historians decisively reject historical narratives shaped 
around the lives of a few great men—“The lengthened shadow of a man / 
Is history, said Emerson”  9  —a similar narrative about the history of science 
might seem naive. But science, unlike most other human activities, can be 
regarded as a search for progressively better ideas or even for the true nature 
of things. “The history of science,” according to Georges Canguilhem, “is 
the explicit, theoretical recognition of the fact that the sciences are critical, 
progressive discourses for determining what aspects of experience must be 
taken as real”;  10  and it is not naive (though it may be mistaken) to credit 
some critical ideas to the particular minds that ﬁ rst conceived them, or to 
follow the development and modiﬁ cation of ideas through the relatively few 
minds that comprehended their implications and quarreled most deeply with 
them.  11  The calculus, which marks a period in the history of science, was ﬁ rst 
conﬁ ned to the private thoughts of Newton and Leibniz, each of whom later 
believed that the other must have read his mind—or more likely his notes.  12  
More positively, one might say, Einstein had to enter Newton’s mind in order 
to go beyond it. This version of history follows great leaps forward; a giant 
mounts the shoulders of other giants. 
 The essential role of genius is so engrained in the history of science that 
even historians who resist the tide of progress have usually organized their 
narratives around dramatic breakthroughs. Thus A. N. Whitehead, whose 
inﬂ uential  Science and the Modern World  (1925) warned that the triumphs 
of scientiﬁ c materialism might be undermining the values by which most 
human beings have lived, ﬁ nds the turning point in “the century of genius.” 
Ever since then the European races “have been living upon the accumulated 
capital of ideas provided for them by the genius of the seventeenth century. 
The men of this epoch inherited a ferment of ideas attendant upon the 
historical revolt of the sixteenth century, and they bequeathed formed sys-
tems of thought touching every aspect of human life. It is the one century 
which consistently, and throughout the whole range of human activities, 
provided intellectual genius adequate for the greatness of its occasions.”  13  
A dozen names stand for the era as a whole: Francis Bacon, Harvey, Kepler, 
Galileo, Descartes, Pascal, Huygens, Boyle, Newton, Locke, Spinoza, Leib-
niz. And though Whitehead knows that his list is not exhaustive, the story 
he tells depends on the agency of a chosen few, those natural philosophers 
whose insights forever changed conceptions of nature. For him the culminat-
ing ﬁ gure of the century is Newton, whose laws made possible the future 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    161
development of astronomy, engineering, and physics—indeed the modern 
world. His genius for abstract thought would succeed most of all in reducing 
nature to a version of his own mathematical schemes.  14  
 The power of this narrative draws strength from many sources. First, it 
is simple. Like other stories, the history of scientiﬁ c ideas comes alive when 
stocked with interesting characters, especially those we can look up to. The 
story of Newton and the apple—which he himself enjoyed telling—appeals 
to the imagination because it combines something ordinary, which anyone 
can recognize, with something extraordinary: a perception that no one had 
ever had before.  15  And even someone who, like most people, misses the point 
that Newton eventually grasped—not that apples fall, but that they obey 
the same law that holds the moon in place, since the mass of the earth 
attracts them and they reciprocally attract the earth—can appreciate the sud-
den shock of recognition. The identiﬁ cation of scientiﬁ c discoveries with 
speciﬁ c moments and persons oversimpliﬁ es but also humanizes the difﬁ cult 
operations of science. Moreover, it provides the history of science with a 
convenient principle of organization: the index. Histories may come and go, 
and vary with the assumptions and fashions and theories that shape them, 
but the great  Dictionary of Scientiﬁ c Biography , no matter how many editions 
it goes through, will always have a place for Isaac Newton. The number of 
pages devoted to him offers rough quantitative evidence of the size of his 
genius, and the narrative of his emergence from obscurity to fame and glory 
corroborates the importance of his work. In this way his life is a symbol: it 
represents the triumphant career of science itself. 
 The century of genius also affords the sense of an ending, with its mission 
accomplished. That is a second reason for centering history on Newton’s 
insights. The “Great Tradition” of the history of science invokes an irresist-
ible teleology, in which a series of geniuses, Galileo, Kepler, and Descartes 
( building on hints from Copernicus), formulate preliminary laws that even-
tually reach their ordained end in Newton’s cosmic synthesis.  16  Many of 
Newton’s own contemporaries subscribed to this view. As soon as the  Prin-
cipia  appeared, Halley’s ode announced that now we know “the immovable 
order of things / And the world concealed from former generations”; and 
when the great genius died in 1727, his mourners could rejoice that he had 
left “an universe complete!”  17  The monument erected near Newton’s grave 
in Westminster Abbey congratulates the human race for having produced 
him, and Alexander Pope designed a dazzling epitaph for it: “Nature, and 
Nature’s Laws lay hid in Night. / God said,  Let Newton be!  And All was 
 Light .”  18  Here the natural philosopher himself participates in the  ﬁ at lux , 
not only the primal light created by God but now an intellectual light as 

162    WHAT GALILEO SAW
well, thanks to the  Principia  and  Opticks . God manifests intelligent design by 
conceiving Newton, a secondary Word, born as it happened on Christmas 
Day 1642, who comprehends God’s plan. An iconoclast might point out 
that Newton’s own revolutionary analysis of the light of the sun—that it is 
a heterogeneous mixture of differently refrangible rays—suggests by analogy 
that scientiﬁ c illuminations result from the mingled insights of many minds, 
not from a single perfect source. Nor were Nature’s laws thoroughly dark 
in the time of Galileo, Kepler, and Descartes, before the coming of Newton. 
Yet Pope’s hyperbole expresses his conﬁ dence and satisfaction that nature has 
been shown to be intelligible, not only potentially but also by demonstration 
and veriﬁ cation. Future philosophers will merely ﬁ ll in the details. 
 Nationalism also contributes to the celebration of genius. Civic pride, or 
chauvinism, supplies a third motive for focusing on indigenous greatness. In 
death as in life, James Thomson contended, Newton was “Britain’s boast!,” 
uniquely suited to inspire her youth: “O’er thy dejected country chief pre-
side, / And be her Genius called!”  19  A tutelary deity, the spirit of the departed 
hero is appointed to watch over Britain, as Milton commissioned Lycidas 
to be “the Genius of the shore.” Yet another meaning of “Genius” colors 
the passage: Newton’s remarkable mind not only marks him as the ﬁ rst of 
Britons but also stands for the intellectual power of his nation when it is at 
its best—the envy of other nations. Although his discoveries now belong to 
the world, he lends special pride to the country he represents. “In Newton,” 
David Hume wrote, “this island may boast of having produced the greatest 
and rarest genius that ever rose for the ornament and instruction of the spe-
cies.”  20  Other nations did not acknowledge this supremacy so quickly, in fact. 
In France, Descartes would long remain the epitome of a natural philosopher, 
nor were the countrymen of Galileo and Huygens so ready to concede that 
the British genius came ﬁ rst (though Germans did not unite around Kepler 
and Leibniz).  21  Voltaire wryly observed that when he traveled from Paris to 
London, he found that “the very essence of things has totally changed”; for 
instance, in Paris “light exists in the air,” in London “it comes from the sun 
in six and a half minutes.”  22  In Italy, still haunted by the fate of Galileo, the 
sun continued to circle the earth, at least in print, though privately astrono-
mers knew better. Obviously some scientiﬁ c perspectives are fostered by 
speciﬁ c habitats or languages; when Galileo, Descartes, and Newton wrote 
accessible texts in the vernacular rather than Latin, they helped to bring the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution home. In any case the genius of such natural philoso-
phers proved able to ﬁ ll the role accorded in the past to warriors, rulers, and 
writers, as shining examples or myths of national greatness. Knowing that 
Newton was British increased, somehow, the patriot’s self-esteem. 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    163
 All the same, hardly anyone could understand him. Not only the general 
public but also good mathematicians confessed that Newton bafﬂ ed and out-
stripped them.  23  Obscurity on this scale shadowed forth a kind of grandeur. 
The profundity or even incomprehensibility of the  Principia , as later of Ein-
stein’s theories, conﬁ rmed that its genius occupied a separate sphere, outside 
the reach of groundlings. That is a fourth source of attraction to Newton’s 
story; it was a mystery as well as a revelation.  24  To some extent it even had to 
be taken on faith. John Locke, deﬁ cient in geometry, “asked Mr.  Huygens , 
whether all the mathematical  Propositions  in Sir  Isaac ’ s Principia  were true, and 
being told he might depend upon their Certainty; he took them for granted, 
and carefully examined the Reasonings and  Corollaries  drawn from them, 
became Master of all the Physicks, and was fully convinc’d of the great Dis-
coveries contain’d in that Book.”  25  That effort pleased Newton, who liked to 
think that his methods and principles could reach beyond mathematicians—a 
notion that Locke himself supported in  An Essay concerning Human Under-
standing  and  Some Thoughts concerning Education .  26  The two men became good 
friends and together pursued common interests in alchemy and theology.  27  
But those were dangerous, secret studies, closed to the public. Newton could 
not afford to reveal his Arian, anti-Trinitarian convictions, which would have 
disqualiﬁ ed him for his Cambridge fellowship and later his appointment as 
warden and then master of the Mint. It was safer for him to cultivate the 
image of a reclusive, awe-inspiring sage, a sort of benign Dr. Faustus, whose 
thoughts were unfathomable. During Newton’s long lifetime, it has been 
argued, the sense of wonder that had spurred inquiries into nature began to 
be replaced by an emphasis on the regularity and uniformity of natural laws.  28  
The rule, not the exception, became the favored object of investigation. Yet 
Newton’s mind itself proved a fresh source of wonder. Like the Revelation of 
John that so obsessed him, it seemed to hold a cryptic key to the future; and 
lesser minds could only struggle to follow his track to the stars.  29  
 These stories are very compelling. Yet even in their own terms, as narra-
tives or imaginative constructions, they raise doubts that are far from easy 
to quell. Two questions in particular demand attention. The ﬁ rst might be 
posed quite bluntly: even if Whitehead’s handful of geniuses had never lived, 
would not the Scientiﬁ c Revolution have happened in much the same way? 
Surely someone else would have discovered the moons of Jupiter, the ellipti-
cal orbits of the planets, the calculus, the law of gravity. All these discoveries 
were contested, in fact, by rival claimants, and the slow process by which the 
claims were sorted out might have proceeded more quickly without the egos 
and competitive instincts of great men. In any given age, ideas are in the air, 
not only in the minds of individuals. Whether one thinks that the Scientiﬁ c 

164    WHAT GALILEO SAW
Revolution (if such a thing ever existed) resulted from paradigm shifts in a dis-
ciplinary matrix—that is, ideas shared by a community of specialists—or from 
changing social practices that shaped new kinds and deﬁ nitions of knowledge, 
or from new philosophical, theological, and cultural issues and programs, or 
from expansion of the known world by chance discoveries (made possible 
by voyages and telescopes), or from any other set of circumstances, individual 
genius fades into the background. Perhaps it should stay there. The stories of 
exceptional men can be a distraction from the heterogeneous, collaborative 
activities out of which the history of science gradually emerges. 
 A second question challenges the very basis of such stories. Just what  is 
genius? The meaning of that word cannot be taken for granted; it has shifted 
again and again, responding to different deﬁ nitions of human nature. Over 
the course of Newton’s life (1642–1727) the denotations and connotations 
of “genius” dramatically changed. Originally the word, whose root is Latin 
 genere , “to beget,” had signiﬁ ed a god who presided over the birth of some 
potentially remarkable person. In this respect it seems external to that person, 
not part of his or her essence; for example, one might speak of the good or 
evil geniuses who struggle over someone’s soul. But more commonly, in the 
seventeenth century, “genius” referred to an inborn faculty or special tal-
ent.  30  Thus Newton  had a genius for mathematics. This phrasing still sug-
gests an accessory to the essential person, a gift bestowed. But eventually the 
word deﬁ ned the person himself: contemporaries declared that Newton  was 
a genius. Extraordinary mental power or pure intelligence was not a mere 
attribute of such a man, but his innermost self or birthright. By the mid-
eighteenth century, when Johnson adjudicated the meanings of words, that 
sense of “genius” prevailed. The  Dictionary (1755) includes the older deﬁ ni-
tions, but centers on “a man endowed with superiour faculties” or “mental 
power.” And elsewhere Johnson sets aside “that particular designation of mind, 
and propensity for some certain science or employment, which is commonly 
called Genius. The true Genius is a mind of large general powers, accidentally 
determined to some particular direction.”  31  To prove his point that a genius 
commands more mind than others, not simply a special aptitude, he chose an 
inevitable example: “I am persuaded that, had Sir Isaac Newton applied to 
poetry, he would have made a very ﬁ ne epick poem.”  32  In that event some 
other great man would have had to consummate the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. 
 More important, competing deﬁ nitions of “genius” upset the clear line 
of the story. Even Whitehead’s “century of genius” depends on an equivo-
cation: is its genius some presiding spirit of the age, the expression of ideas 
whose time has come, or does the distinction of the century stem from 
the presence of an unusual number of great individual minds? A good deal 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    165
hangs on the answer, since Whitehead’s narrative is fashioned as a tragedy in 
which the modern world succumbs to scientiﬁ c abstractions. Rhetorically 
his language often implies that “the genius of the epoch,” itself an abstrac-
tion, produces and disseminates abstractions in its own image. But at other 
times he recognizes that individual geniuses are not conﬁ ned to the common 
beliefs of their epochs, and that they might always depart from the general 
pattern he sees. In that case perhaps the modern world might still be saved 
from its fate through the efforts of great thinkers who resist the lure of sci-
ence, and who refuse to be absorbed by any abstract spirit of the age. The 
ﬁ nal paragraph of Whitehead’s book strives to rewrite the “tale” or “great 
adventure in the region of thought” that he has spun; he calls for “a renewed 
exercise of the creative imagination.” The power of imagination, combined 
with reason, might yet reshape the future. In the long run, tyrants and con-
querors are insigniﬁ cant, “compared to the entire transformation of human 
habits and human mentality produced by the long line of men of thought 
from Thales to the present day, men individually powerless, but ultimately 
the rulers of the world.”  33  For Whitehead, the only defense against the genius 
of the age is genius. 
 Yet the questions that counter the story of genius cannot be cast aside. 
Does the Scientiﬁ c Revolution really depend on individuals, the insights of 
a few great men? And what does genius mean? Too many histories of sci-
ence have built their narratives on facile answers to such questions, or on no 
answers at all. Perhaps that represents a failure of imagination. As soon as the 
questions are asked in earnest, they provoke quite other ways of imagining 
the revolution in thought, both as it appeared at the time and as it has been 
conceived ever since. It might prove worthwhile to take a fresh look at the 
stakes and the meanings of genius. 
 Challenging Genius: Copernicus, Tycho 
 In the beginning, Copernicus made the earth move. Whether or not the 
story of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution still rings true, the story of the Copernican 
Revolution seems ﬁ xed in its orbit. Before the publication of  De Revolutioni-
bus Orbium Cœlestium  in 1543, the sun, the planets, and the stars revolved 
around the earth, according to astronomers; afterward, in the course of a 
century of new calculations, our solar system was born, with the sun at its 
center; and ﬁ nally Newton’s universe conﬁ rmed the new astronomy. To be 
sure, one may question the phrase “Copernican Revolution.” The full title of 
Thomas Kuhn’s historic study,  The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy 
in the Development of Western Thought  (1957), anticipates the broader story that 

166    WHAT GALILEO SAW
he tells, encompassing three distinct meanings of the revolution: a reform 
in astronomical theory; some “radical alterations in man’s understanding 
of nature,” affecting many other sciences; and a focus on the “tremendous 
controversies in religion, in philosophy, and in social theory, which . . . set the 
tenor of the modern mind.”  34  Yet all these meanings originate in the work of 
one man, who gave the revolution, or revolutions, his name. 
 Does Copernicus really deserve to have so many meanings attached to his 
name? In some ways the designation seems very peculiar. The man himself 
could hardly have imagined his ﬁ ndings would reach so far. At the end of a 
life he had spent largely as a canon of the cathedral in Frombork (or Frauen-
burg), a city in northern Poland that he called “a very remote corner of 
the earth,”  35  he was prepared to die in obscurity, without exposing his work 
to public notice and charges of heresy. But decades earlier he had drafted a 
“Little Commentary” ( Commentariolus , 1514 [?]) postulating that the earth 
moved around the sun, and he had made a few handwritten copies.  36  Slowly 
word of his ideas spread. In 1539 an enthusiastic young German astronomer, 
Georg Joachim Rheticus, pursued Copernicus to Frombork, became his 
disciple, published  A First Account  of the Copernican system, pushed him to 
ﬁ nish his manuscript, and eventually brought  De Revolutionibus  to the press 
(1543). Even then caution prevailed. Copernicus himself supplied a defen-
sive preface to the pope in which he claimed that he was only doing his duty 
as a mathematician: the blunders of earlier mathematicians had forced him 
to devise a better, more orderly system of astronomy in order to correct the 
ecclesiastical calendar. Worse was to come. When the book was published, 
Andreas Osiander, a Lutheran theologian and amateur mathematician whom 
Rheticus had trusted to look after the printing, inserted an unsigned, sanc-
timonious introduction that advised the reader that the work need not be 
taken too seriously, since it consisted merely of hypotheses.  37  Thus the revo-
lution entered the world on tiptoe. In the event, its author did not have to 
fear its reception; he suffered a stroke and died as soon as the book appeared. 
 De Revolutionibus  did not create an immediate stir, nor was it easy to 
read. Nevertheless it circulated.  38  Copernicus was a respected astronomer, 
and other astronomers admired his mathematical techniques and careful cal-
culations. Although very few at ﬁ rst accepted the heliocentric thesis, they 
could not do without the astronomical tables he made possible.  39  He was “a 
second Ptolemy.” Yet even that praise suggests the limitations of his achieve-
ment. Aside from the idea of a moving earth—an idea, he assured the pope, 
that he had found in many ancient authorities—his work seems relatively 
traditional, much closer to Ptolemy than to Kepler. As a proud mathemati-
cian, he believed or hoped that he had reformed the blatant inaccuracies of 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    167
conventional earth-centered systems, which had put together a “monster.”  40  
But his own system adopted the uniform circular motions and harmonious 
celestial spheres of the Aristotelian cosmos. In almost every way, as Kuhn has 
shown,  De Revolutionibus  fails to imagine the consequences of its transﬁ gur-
ing thesis.  41  Copernicus did not belong to the revolution he founded. 
 Nor was he, by most standards, himself a genius. Undeniably he was 
learned, painstaking, and gifted; and he certainly had a genius for mathemat-
ics. But without the energy and encouragement of Rheticus, his one disciple, 
he would probably have forever remained a mere footnote in the history of 
science—“no Rheticus, no Copernicus.”  42  He did not foresee the challeng-
ing questions and answers that others would later extract from his work; he 
did not enlarge the universe or perceive that the sun was a star. Even his 
computations derive from Ptolemy’s faulty latitude theory of the planets, and 
they are no more accurate than Ptolemy’s in predicting planetary motions.  43  
Copernicus lacked vision. Unlike his great successors, he seems to have had 
almost no sense that mathematical astronomy might correspond to what 
actually went on in the heavens. Only in one respect might he be considered 
a genius: “The highest praise of genius is original invention.”  44  One great 
idea—not so much that the earth moved as that mathematics could  show  that 
it moved—brought Copernicus that high praise. Yet in general his power of 
invention was slight. One moral of his story might be that genius consists of 
what others make of it, in a collaborative, not an individual, effort. Another 
moral might be that genius depends on having the right disciple. 
 Each of those morals is tested by the next astronomer who is often labeled 
a genius, the stellar Tycho Brahe. In contrast to the retiring Copernicus, 
Tycho displayed all the trappings of greatness. A Danish aristocrat, he was 
brought up to serve his king and lead his country; and eventually, world 
renowned, he was treated with deference by an emperor as well as a king 
and rewarded with power such as no other astronomer had ever enjoyed. 
For more than twenty years, from 1576 to 1597, the land and people of the 
fabled island of Hven, near Copenhagen, belonged to him and his projects. 
When that dispensation soured, the Hapsburg emperor Rudolf II promised 
to underwrite his work and gave him a castle.  45  But Tycho’s greatness was 
not restricted to worldly honors. A coherent story of the astronomical revo-
lution might well be centered on him, displacing Copernicus. It was Tycho, 
for instance, who shattered forever the ancient crystalline spheres. His ﬁ rst 
book,  De Nova Stelle  (1573), demonstrated through observations of unprec-
edented accuracy that the bright light that had suddenly appeared in the 
heavens in November 1572 was both unmoving and incredibly distant—a 
new star ( nova ) in the realm of ﬁ xed stars, where supposedly nothing could 

168    WHAT GALILEO SAW
ever change and nothing new could happen. Later he proved that comets also 
went their own way in space beyond the moon, unimpeded by spheres. And 
ultimately the “Tychonic system” he invented, a forced wedding of Ptolemy 
and Copernicus in which the sun and moon circle the earth while the other 
planets circle the sun, discarded the spheres that Copernicus had accepted. 
 Most of all, Tycho looked at the heavens. Copernicus, like every other 
early astronomer, had based his calculations on very crude data, on rough 
approximations and charts only slightly improved since ancient times. Tycho 
refused to be content with such venerable inaccuracy. Uraniborg, the majes-
tic observatory he built on Hven, was packed with elegant, prodigious instru-
ments that he designed, the best the world had ever seen: a great mural 
quadrant ﬁ tted to a wall, a massive sextant, a giant celestial globe, a towering 
equatorial armillary positioned in an amphitheater, and many more.  46  But 
more important still, Tycho knew how to use them. Not only did he reﬁ ne 
and calibrate his instruments until they tracked the planets and the stars 
with unexampled precision; he also registered what he saw at different times, 
observing the ever-changing conﬁ gurations of the sky. The Atlas of the new 
astronomy, he bore the heavens on his shoulders.  47  Henceforth every cosmo-
logical theory would have to come to terms with his data. After he died in 
1601, those data took on a life of their own. Johannes Kepler, entrusted and 
burdened with carrying through his master’s project, would be their slave for 
more than twenty-ﬁ ve years, until the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  were ﬁ nally published 
in 1627; Tycho’s name headed the title page, which called him the phoenix 
from whose ashes the work had sprung.  48  His great naked eye, his genius for 
observation, had redrawn the map of the sky. 
 Yet the new astronomy did not bear Tycho’s name. Three circumstances 
beyond his control worked against the legacy he had hoped to leave. The 
ﬁ rst was the invention of the telescope. Eight years after Tycho’s death, when 
Galileo turned his new spyglass toward the sky, the days and nights of naked-
eye observation were suddenly numbered. The excellent data preserved by 
the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  would remain valuable long after the secrets of the heav-
ens began to yield to lenses more powerful than the eye; but even unskilled 
and impatient observers could now see a swarm of new moons and stars. 
By an irony of fate, the greatest of all designers of astronomical instruments, 
whose sightings had surpassed those of thousands of years, was soon himself 
eclipsed by relatively modest instruments. That was Tycho’s peculiar mis-
fortune. 
 Second, he turned out to have the wrong disciple. Rheticus had been 
so devoted to Copernicus and his system that he had made the world take 
notice. But Tycho and Kepler did not see eye to eye. Late in Tycho’s life, 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    169
when he realized that someone else would have to carry on his work, he 
recognized that the talents of Kepler, a recent acquaintance, far surpassed 
those of Longomontanus and other assistants he might have preferred as 
successors.  49  But Tycho, reluctant to share his precious data, did not treat 
the younger man as an equal, nor did he succeed in converting him to the 
Tychonic system. Kepler had many theories of his own, and he wanted his 
master’s data, not his ideas. When he reported the last words that Tycho kept 
addressing to him—“Let me not seem to have lived in vain”—he failed to 
offer any response, to acquiesce or console. Eight years later, in  Astronomia 
Nova , he notes that immediately after their ﬁ rst meeting “I begged the master 
to allow me to make use of the observations in my own manner,” but that 
Tycho put him off and “on his death bed asked me, whom he knew to be 
of the Copernican persuasion, that I demonstrate everything in his hypothe-
sis.”  50  In the event, the book mounts a devastating critique of that hypothesis; 
it ensures that Tycho, as a theorist, had indeed lived in vain. 
 The third, decisive reason why Tycho’s system did not supplant Coper-
nicus’s, of course, is that it turned out to be mistaken. In the short term, it 
proved quite adequate at predicting the positions of the planets, and a majority 
of astronomers preferred its compromise with Ptolemy to the more radical 
heliocentric thesis. But in the long run Kepler’s analysis could not be resisted. 
Ironically, the vindication of Tycho’s data in the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables  was accompa-
nied by Kepler’s Copernican demonstrations, and by a further irony almost all 
of Tycho’s discoveries fed Copernicanism by showing that Ptolemy needed 
to be replaced. In some respects, in fact, Tycho contributed more to the fall 
of geocentrism than all his predecessors had done, including the timid Coper-
nicus. Yet his genius for observation, and still more for seeing through the 
fallacies of the old systems and crystalline spheres, could not rival the power 
of one idea, whose ramiﬁ cations went far beyond what any one mind could 
conceive. The genius of the Copernican system endured, and it left Tycho’s 
personal genius in the shade. 
 Collectively, these circumstances—the telescope, the reluctant disciple, the 
cosmic idea that did not work out—reduced Tycho’s role in history to sub-
ordinate status. The future would recognize his undeniable greatness, but he 
would not be the protagonist of its grand story, the astronomical revolution 
that could not have happened without him. Such stories are driven by their 
last acts; they shamelessly follow the line of the lucky winner. Nor can that 
destiny be controlled by even the shrewdest management of a career. Tycho 
possessed, or manufactured, every advantage. In addition to his high social 
rank and powerful allies, he knew just how to make himself into a legend. His 
correspondents included nobles and courtiers as well as leading authors and 

170    WHAT GALILEO SAW
scholars, and he circulated his astronomical ideas by publishing (on his own 
printing press) one book that features his exchanges with a prince, Landgrave 
Wilhelm IV of Hesse-Kassel, and another book that interweaves an account 
of his career with descriptions and illustrations of his lifework, especially 
those awe-inspiring instruments.  51  These books were given to prominent 
patrons of the arts and sciences, in elegant presentation copies. Tycho had 
mastered not only the heavens but also the media of his time, and its chan-
nels for spreading fame. But times and the heavens were changing, and they 
were not on his side. 
 Nor did his eminence sustain a sovereign place in history. In a curious 
way, Tycho’s brilliant career and artful maneuvers may well have diminished 
his standing as a genius. Adam Mosley’s account of the Danish Atlas directly 
challenges “traditional grand narratives such as the ‘Astronomical’ or ‘Coper-
nican Revolution’ ” that focus on “a sequence of great individuals”; and it 
offers abundant evidence to justify a different kind of narrative, a history of 
communication that represents the  culture of science. “In the ﬁ nal analysis,” 
Mosley argues, even Tycho “was only one astronomer among many,” and a 
better history would trace the practices of the astronomical community as 
a whole.  52  Whatever the merits of this argument, however, the example of 
Tycho also shows the limited reach of such communities. Mastery of cultural 
practices failed to preserve a perishable Tychonic system; soon Atlas shrugged, 
and Uraniborg crumbled.  53  Stories of genius tend to favor the lonely, isolated 
ﬁ gure who struggles against communities that persecute or ignore him. It is 
not the worldly success of Galileo the courtier that holds the imagination, but 
rather the stubborn, imprisoned victim of dogma. Similarly, the self-abasing 
and troubled Kepler makes a better hero than lordly Tycho. The frontispiece 
of the  Rudolﬁ ne Tables , described in chapter 3, covertly implies that reversal 
of fortunes: Tycho commands the stage, but Kepler underwrites and under-
mines it. The genius grasps the whole scene in which others are merely play-
ing their parts, and he knows that his own time will come. A subversive moral 
deﬂ ates the picture of Tycho: an inclination to stand outside communities 
and shatter their codes is precisely the mark of genius. 
 Francis Bacon: The Genius of Tools 
 Nevertheless, no plausible history of science can ignore the contexts and prac-
tices that both provoke and enable individual efforts. Tycho relied on instru-
ments that other people had invented; and better instruments scaled down 
what he had done. Genius, according to Johnson, cannot be  all , but only a 
 part . “Genius is nothing more than knowing the use of tools; but there must 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    171
be tools for it to use: a man who has spent all his life in this room will give a 
very poor account of what is contained in the next.”  54  The Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion was built with tools. Most leading natural philosophers, like Galileo and 
Descartes, were mechanically minded. They understood how to borrow and 
make and use tools, how to put together telescopes and pendulums and air 
pumps and houses. Despite their well-publicized differences, Robert Hooke 
and Isaac Newton were kindred spirits in one respect, their fabulous inborn 
knack for devising and building contraptions. Genius guided their hands 
as well as their minds. While still a boy, Hooke fashioned a model warship 
with tiny guns that ﬁ red; in middle age, while serving as curator of experi-
ments and all-purpose mechanic of the Royal Society, he also found time 
to help rebuild London, not only designing buildings but also supervising 
their construction.  55  Newton the schoolboy was locally famous for “strange 
inventions,” including numerous sundials and a toy mill run by a mouse; in 
his twenties he became internationally famous for the reﬂ ecting telescope he 
invented, grinding the mirror himself with novel techniques. When asked 
where he got his tools, he “said he made them himself & laughing added if I 
had staid for other people to make my tools & things for me, I had never made 
anything of it.”  56  Imagining what tools might be, imagining what tools might 
ﬁ nd, constitutes an essential part of seventeenth-century genius. 
 Francis Bacon was not so good at making things. Yet more than anyone 
else he insisted that not even the greatest mind could accomplish much with-
out tools. “If men really tackled work for machines with their bare hands, 
and without the help and force of instruments, in the same way as they have 
not hesitated to undertake work for the intellect with little besides the native 
force of the mind, there would have been very few things which they could 
have got going or mastered.” Bacon doubts the efﬁ cacy of genius. For aeons 
the theories of Aristotle and Plato had dominated lesser minds, as they con-
tinued to do, yet their philosophies had long been stagnant. By contrast, “in 
the mechanical arts, however, we see that the opposite happens—which, as 
if they were partaking of a certain breath of life, grow and get better by the 
day.” Such progress depends on drawing aid from other minds as well as from 
better tools. Hence Bacon insists on collaborative activities that anyone can 
perform, correcting the universal tendency of individuals to fall in love with 
their own ideas. “My view of the process of discovering the sciences is this: 
that little be left to sharpness and force of wits, but that wits and intellects 
be put on much the same footing. For in the same way that much depends 
on steadiness and practice if you want to draw a straight line or perfect circle 
by hand alone, and little or nothing if you use a ruler or compasses, so it 
is with the view that I take.”  57  Signiﬁ cantly the instruments he names are 

172    WHAT GALILEO SAW
simple—ruler and compasses—not the sophisticated contrivances of Tycho, 
or later of Hooke and Newton. The legerdemain of a skillful hand or smoke 
and mirrors can always beguile the senses, but solid achievement follows the 
method of many hands in plain sight working together. 
 Bacon’s fondness for tools and suspicion of individual genius would res-
onate through the future advancement of learning in England. The new 
empiricism of the 1640s and 1650s, culminating in the founding of the Royal 
Society in 1660, constantly paid him tribute. Indeed, in retrospect he seemed 
so peerless that he stood alone, as if he had become one of those revered 
ancients against whom he had warned. This was a danger; it contradicted his 
emphasis on equalizing talents and minds. Many of his followers were quite 
aware of this problem. Thus Thomas Sprat’s  History of the Royal Society  (1667) 
carefully walks the line between idolizing Bacon and criticizing his short-
comings. “Methinks, in this one Man, I do at once ﬁ nd enough occasion, to 
admire the strength of humane Wit, and to bewail the weakness of a Mortal 
condition. . . . He was a Man of strong, cleer, and powerful Imaginations: his 
Genius was searching, and inimitable. . . . But yet his  Philosophical Works  do 
shew, that a single hand can never grasp all this whole Design, of which we 
treat.”  58  In this way Bacon’s legacy was divided. He had provided at once an 
example of genius and an object lesson of what it could not do. 
 R. H.’s Hall of Fame 
 Both sides of that legacy would be ﬂ eshed out by those who followed him. 
A generation weaned on Bacon took more than one leaf from his book. 
In September 1660, a year when many things were beginning or being 
restored, a curious work was published in London:  New Atlantis. Begun by 
the Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans: and Continued by R. H. Esquire . Two 
giant ﬁ gures preside over the text: Charles II, “so happily now returned,” 
to whom an adulatory dedication is addressed; and Bacon, the master spirit. 
Continuing or recreating the  New Atlantis , R. H. proposes a set of acad-
emies and universities modeled on Bacon’s “Salomon’s House,” a utopian 
center of research dedicated to “ the Knowledge of  Causes,  and Secrett Motions 
of Things; And the Enlarging of the bounds of  Humane Empire , to the Effecting 
of all Things possible .”  59  At the same time, the new  New Atlantis  bows to a 
resurgent monarch whose laws will authorize and regulate all its activities.  60  
Quite soon this vision seemed to come to life. The Royal Society, founded 
on November 28, 1660, self-consciously invoked Charles II, who would 
grant a royal charter in 1662 (though not the revenue the members wanted). 
In retrospect,  New Atlantis Continued  seems less a fantasy than a petition to 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    173
the king. It reconﬁ gures a past ideal in order to mount a campaign for a 
possible future. 
 Yet the new, improved version of Bacon also magniﬁ es some of the strains 
in what he conceived. After his death in 1626, when the ﬁ rst  New Atlan-
tis was published, his utopian program had been adopted by millenarians 
who viewed Bensalem and Salomon’s House as harbingers of a literal Great 
Instauration, a Puritan golden age in which philosophy would realize God’s 
plan, restoring the dominion of man over nature.  61   New Atlantis Continued 
takes up that dream with many cutting-edge tools, including “a rare  Micro-
scope , wherein the eyes, legs, mouth, hair and eggs of a Cheesmite, as well 
as the bloud running in the veins of a Lowce, was easily to be discerned.”  62  
But its grandest addition to Salomon’s House consists of an elaborate Hall 
of Fame. Just before the end of his fable, Bacon had brieﬂ y described “ two 
very  Long,  and Faire Galleries,” one containing samples of “Rare  and Excel-
lent Inventions,” the other decked with “Statua’s  of all  Principall Inventours,” 
including Columbus and Roger Bacon as well as unnamed local favorites. 
But R. H. expands the parade of moderns much further, recounting at length 
the triumphant initiation into the Hall of Fame of “the ingenious  Ver-
dugo ,” inventor of a ﬁ reproof or  salamandrine paper. In present-day bustling 
England, room must be made for a clever young entrepreneur.  63  
 At the same time, however, the cult of discovery marks a potential conﬂ ict 
of interest. Like any Hall of Fame, the gallery in Salomon’s House sheds luster 
on its own establishment, collecting and enshrining heroes—or statues—
who represent the ideals for which it stands. The absorption or conscription 
of individuals into a collective purpose, as in a scientiﬁ c Leviathan, is one of 
Bacon’s ﬁ rmest principles. In the original  New Atlantis , none of the mem-
bers or luminaries of Salomon’s House is named. Not even the magniﬁ cent 
Father of the House who describes all the features of its “true State” identi-
ﬁ es himself; and almost all his sentences begin with  We —e.g., “ We have also 
diverse  Mechanicall Arts,  which you have not ”; “ Wee have certaine  Hymnes  and 
Services , which wee say dayly, of Laud  and Thanks to God , for his Marveillous 
Works.”  64  In many respects, in fact, Salomon’s House resembles a religious 
order or secret society as much as a scientiﬁ c institution, and it cultivates an 
air of mystery and wonder that individual names could only dispel. 
 New Atlantis Continued  is far more personal. Its overture to Charles II 
places it in a particular moment of English history, and it reserves its greatest 
respect for pedigrees and persons. Here the Hall of Fame not only celebrates 
itself but also implicitly invites new applicants, the inventors whose clever 
ideas already seem to be transforming daily life. In every way initiates are rec-
ognized as  authors ; their works and fame will be published for all to admire. 

174    WHAT GALILEO SAW
Such publicity honors the individual more than the group. The new Hall 
of Fame is rich with modern names, immortalizing not only Magellan and 
Francis Drake and Michelangelo and Dürer but also Simon Stevin, J. Neper 
(Napier), Regiomontanus, Reinhold, Harriot, Harvey—and even a couple of 
ﬁ ctional characters, Verdugo and one Thomas Boniger (inventor of ﬂ ying 
chariots). It teems with genius and relishes the cunning and wit of those who 
stand out in a crowd. In Bacon’s utopia, King Salomona, who reigned “ about 
1900. yeares agoe ,” founded Salomon’s House, named after his counterpart, 
“ that  King  of the  Hebrewes  (which lived many yeares before him) ,” to perpetuate 
the selﬂ ess study of God’s works; and the founder is revered “ Not Supersti-
tiously ,” but as “ a Mortall Man .”  65  But in R. H.’s utopia, the current monarch 
inherits the name Salomona, descended from the founder “by a continued 
uninterrupted succession” without dispute; “for we conceive  Monarchy  the 
nearest to perfection, that is to God, the wise Governour of the Universe, and 
therefore best.”  66  The lineage and name will never die. Thus history confers 
its blessing on a transmigrated king, whose divine right and perpetual rule 
reverse the fate of the Stuarts. In the ceremony that ends the work, the sick 
are cured not by new medicines but by Salomona’s miraculous gift of heal-
ing. His hands are magic; only a special genius could wield such a tool. 
 Far beyond Bacon, therefore,  New Atlantis Continued  functions as a Hall 
of Fame that idolizes the great. Yet its own author is known only as R. H. 
Esquire, and attempts to identify him have been inconclusive.  67  A slim and 
dubious trail of evidence points to Robert Hooke. R. H., like Hooke, is a 
Baconian and Royalist who enthusiastically promotes “a Colledg of Light or 
 Solomons House  . . . for the advance of learning”; he shares Hooke’s interests 
in navigation and double-writing instruments and microscopes and ﬂ ying 
machines; and his prose, like Hooke’s, tends to run on from one idea or name 
to another without any summing up. Yet even if Hooke did not write the 
text, its wavering between the claims of the group and the individual reﬂ ects 
his own. In 1660 no one would have nominated him for a Hall of Fame. 
Though he had already worked with leading natural philosophers in Oxford, 
helping John Wilkins build a model ﬂ ying machine, assisting Thomas Wil-
lis’s chemical research, and above all collaborating with the great Robert 
Boyle on the air-pump experiments that culminated in Boyle’s historic  New 
Experiments Physico-Mechanicall, Touching the Spring of the Air  (1660), Hooke 
could not yet claim the name of an author.  68  When he did publish a little 
tract, the following year, its title page gives Boyle pride of place:  An Attempt 
for the Explication of the Phænomena, Observable in an Experiment Published by 
the Honourable  ROBERT BOYLE , Esq; In the XXXV. Experiment of his Epis-
tolical Discourse touching the Aire, In Conﬁ rmation of a former Conjecture made by 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (1)    175
R. H. This time “R. H.” identiﬁ es himself as Robert Hooke by signing “The 
Epistle Dedicatory” to Boyle; yet even then he looks up to his master as to 
the sun that inspired a ﬂ edgling eagle to soar. But Hooke would soon make 
his name. The Fellows of the newborn Royal Society were intrigued by his 
explanation of capillary action and asked for more experiments; and their 
lack of technical ability to perform them led to Hooke’s appointment, in 
November 1662, as curator of experiments.  69  Henceforth his career and the 
activities of the Royal Society would be tangled together. 
 Yet Hooke’s ambitions could not be conﬁ ned to the group he served. His 
remarkable, indefatigable, and at ﬁ rst uncompensated efforts for the Society, 
which involved designing and carrying out at least three experiments each 
week, were accompanied by a torrent of his own speculations.  70  Often he did 
and said too much. The complications of his service appear most graphically 
in a brief prelude to the work that made him famous,  Micrographia  (1665). 
From the beginning the book had been intended to showcase the Society 
before the world. As soon as Hooke exhibited the peerless microscope he 
had contrived, members directed him to bring in observations, until “it was 
ordered that Mr. Hooke produce at every meeting of the Society one of 
his microscopical discourses, in order to their being printed by order of the 
Society.”  71  The repetitions of “order” and “Society” underline the desire of 
the group to make the project its own. When the book was published, the 
Royal Society dominated its handiwork: its council “Ordered , That the Book 
written by  Robert Hooke,  M.A. Fellow of this Society . . . Be printed by  John Mar-
tyn , and James Allestry , Printers to the said Society ,” and the title page features 
the Society’s motto and coat of arms. But Hooke’s address “To the Royal 
Society” acknowledges that he has not strictly followed its rules. Instead of 
avoiding any hypothesis not grounded in experiments, he admits that “there 
may perhaps be some  Expressions , which may seem more  positive  then YOUR 
Prescriptions will permit: And though I desire to have them understood only 
as  Conjectures  and  Quæries (which YOUR Method does not altogether disal-
low) yet if even in those I have exceeded, ’tis ﬁ t that I should declare, that it 
was not done by YOUR Directions.” This author, both deferential and stub-
born, maintains his independence from  you and  yours . 
 That independent spirit comes alive in  Micrographia . If the bulk of the 
book consists of Hooke’s “descriptions of minute bodies,” made graphic by 
his expert, artful sketches, another substantial part displays his love of specula-
tion. The famous blunt needle point and fuzzy period and bumpy razor edge 
with which the work begins are soon succeeded by a lengthy revision of his 
earlier explanation of capillary action, attributed to what he calls the “con-
gruity” or “incongruity” of ﬂ uids with other bodies, or what we might now 

176    WHAT GALILEO SAW
call “surface energy.”  72  In his tract Hooke had asked “whether this Principle 
well examined and explain’d, may not be found a co-efﬁ cient in the most 
considerable Operations of Nature.” In  Micrographia the principle takes wing; 
it accounts for magnetism, and probably light and gravity as well.  73  Similar 
bold conjectures run through the work as a whole. Thus some observations 
of colors in Muscovy-glass (or mica) set off a long inquiry into “the true 
causes of the production of all kind of Colours” (49), concluding with the 
hypothesis that “there are but two Colours,” red and blue, corresponding 
to the two sides of “the  oblique or uneven pulse of Light” (67)—a “deduc-
tion” that soon provoked a battle with Newton. And the ﬁ nal chapters leap 
from the microscopic world to the skies, with telescopic conjectures about 
“the  inﬂ ection , or  multiplicate refraction ” of rays of light “within the body of 
the  Atmosphere ” (219) and about the surface and gravity of the moon.  Micro-
graphia  insists on going beyond its mandate and delivering more than the 
Royal Society ordered. No reader can ignore the peculiar presence of Hooke. 
He yearns to be known as an author; he bids for a Hall of Fame. 

177
  Chapter 9 
 The Century of Genius (2) 
 Hooke, Newton, and the System of the World 
 The Genius of Robert Hooke 
 Knowing where to place Robert Hooke has never been easy. Two contrary 
roles, the jack-of-all-trades who conducts experiments on order, and the 
visionary in quest of unseen causes, cohabit in his multifaceted career. Few 
scientists have left behind a more equivocal reputation. On the one hand, he 
has often been known as essentially a technician, a useful assistant to Boyle 
and other original thinkers, but someone whose ingenuity seldom rose to 
discoveries of his own. His major claim to fame, “Hooke’s Law”—“the 
Power of any Spring is in the same proportion with the Tension thereof”—
came out of his work with Boyle.  1  On the other hand, some champions of 
Hooke have long regarded him as one of the greatest natural philosophers 
of his time (and other times as well), who anticipated future developments 
in ﬁ elds as various as meteorology, celestial mechanics, engineering, geology, 
and medicine. Thus his biographer Richard Waller remembered him in 1705 
as “one of the greatest Promoters of Experimental Natural Knowledge, as 
well as Ornaments of the last Century (so fruitful of great  Genii ).”  2  In recent 
decades admiration for Hooke’s achievements, along with an almost savage 
indignation at those who have underestimated him, has inspired a cluster 
of biographies and other appreciative studies. Two titles,  London ’ s Leonardo 
and  England ’ s Leonardo , along with  Restless Genius  and  The Forgotten Genius , 
convey their tenor.  3  No longer a mere factotum, whom Sprat had barely 

178    WHAT GALILEO SAW
condescended to mention in his  History of the Royal Society  (1667), Hooke 
takes his place among the truly great. 
 The identiﬁ cation with Leonardo seems especially revealing. From one 
point of view, the two apparently had little in common. Quite aside from 
Leonardo’s spectacular artistic talent, which certainly dwarfed Hooke’s, the 
burst of his ideas was largely penned up in private notebooks, as opposed to 
the experiments and lectures of the English virtuoso, which on Baconian 
principles were supposed to be shared and exposed to public examination. 
Yet the heart of the comparison appeals to the incredible fertility of inven-
tion that these polymaths share, which spans any number of scientiﬁ c pursuits 
and challenges standard divisions between theory and practice. Leonardo 
took all knowledge as his province; his hand and mind worked together; he 
was both thinker and workman; and the same might be said of Hooke. At 
the dawn of modern times, each of these artist/technicians aspired to realize 
the ancient myth of Daedalus, the artiﬁ cer who soared beyond earthbound 
mortals.  4  And the parallel holds in another respect as well: despite some bril-
liant achievements, they carried through only a few of the fabulous projects 
they dreamed of. Their genius is reverenced not only for what they did but 
still more for the window they seem to hold up to the future, anticipating 
any number of later inventions and theories. Like Daedalus, they might have 
taught us how to ﬂ y. 
 The astonishing range and restlessness of Hooke’s genius brim over in 
“The Method of Improving  Natural Philosophy ” (1666?), published in his 
 Posthumous Works . Explicitly modeled on Bacon’s  Great Instauration , this trea-
tise sets out, like  New Atlantis Continued , to build on the guide or “Engine” 
that “the incomparable  Verulam ” started but “seem’d to want time to com-
pleat.”  5  Here Hooke attempts to predict “the search after Philosophical 
Truths” for generations to come. One passage (which cannot be short) will 
serve to exemplify how his mind works. Imagining how all the senses might 
be improved mechanically, as the microscope and telescope transform sight, 
he comes to the sense of hearing.  6  Perhaps “Otocousticons” (devices to 
amplify sounds in the ear) might overhear approaching weather or eavesdrop 
on enemy ships, or even listen to noises made by the planets. But such instru-
ments might also descend to the tiniest sounds. 
 There may be also a Possibility of discovering the Internal Motions 
and Actions of Bodies by the sound they make, who knows but that 
as in a Watch we may hear the beating of the Balance, and the run-
ning of the Wheels, and the striking of the Hammers, and the grating 
of the Teeth, and Multitudes of other Noises; who knows, I say, but 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    179
that it may be possible to discover the Motions of the Internal Parts 
of Bodies, whether Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral, by the sound they 
make, that one may discover the Works perform’d in the several Ofﬁ ces 
and Shops of a Man’s Body, and thereby discover what Instrument or 
Engine is out of order, what Works are going on at several Times, and 
lies still at others, and the like; that in Plants and Vegetables one might 
discover by the Noise the Pumps for raising the Juice, the Valves for 
stopping it, and the rushing of it out of one Passage into another, and 
the like. I could proceed further, but methinks I can hardly forbear to 
blush, when I consider how the most part of Men will look upon this: 
But yet again, I have this Incouragement, not to think all these things 
utterly impossible, though never so much derided by the Generality of 
Men, and never so seemingly mad, foolish and phantastick, that as the 
thinking them impossible cannot much improve my Knowledge, so the 
believing them possible may perhaps be an occasion of taking notice of 
such things as another would pass by without regard as useless. 
 And the rush of ideas continues: experience encourages him to make some 
further trials, such as contriving “an Artiﬁ cial Timpanum.”  7  
 Hooke’s hands are all over this passage. The exuberant ﬁ rst sentence bounds 
from one thing to another with hardly a pause. Constantly moving, it renders 
the insides of engines and bodies and plants as sound effects, or gerunds—
“beating,” “running,” “striking,” “grating”—that remind us that watches, 
like verbs and people, function not as ﬁ xed parts but as actions in time. And 
the thought also never stops moving. This writer keeps leaping ahead, as if he 
could hardly wait to take notice of some other work in progress. Moreover, 
like the protagonist of Galileo’s “Fable of Sound,” he wants to handle what-
ever produces the sounds he hears. His fascination with mechanical devices, 
or the gears that make things tick, converts each organism into an apparatus 
with which one might tinker: “One may discover the Works perform’d in 
the several Ofﬁ ces and Shops of a Man’s Body, and thereby discover what 
Instrument or Engine is out of order.” To such an engineer, the whole world 
seems little more than a shop full of engines; nature itself inspires him to 
make machines.  8  And Hooke also reveals himself in the personal, even boast-
ful, tone he adopts. In principle he intends to set rules for others to follow, 
in the collaborative spirit of Bacon and the Royal Society, where all sincere 
seekers of knowledge are supposed to be equal. But in practice he separates 
his own bold quest for knowledge from “the Generality of Men,” who will 
not notice what he perceives (or imagines). Here and throughout Hooke’s 
writings, the “one” who conducts experiments soon yields to an “I” who 

180    WHAT GALILEO SAW
deﬁ antly refuses to rein in his imagination. What others think impossible will 
only spur him on to prove them wrong. 
 Yet the reach of the passage is thrilling. In a short space Hooke seems to 
foresee the inventions of later centuries: the stethoscope; sonar devices; the 
telegraph; the hearing aid. Dozens of similar creations course through his 
writings. Nor are these only idle conjectures. In many cases he provides 
detailed descriptions as well as sketches of possible contrivances, and often 
he hints that he has already produced a prototype—or might produce one 
if he had the time. Hooke was indeed very busy, too busy to focus attention 
on any one project. Hence a note of impatience, and sometimes frustration, 
accompanies his scattering of ideas, even when he seems inspired. Many 
readers have shared his dissatisfaction. Evidently he might have been robbed 
of credit for being the ﬁ rst to think of inventions or theories that others 
later developed. Suspicions like these consumed Hooke as he grew older. 
A passion for secrecy, quite unlike the Baconian ideal, began to character-
ize his dealings with other philosophers, until his own admiring biographer 
described his temper as “Melancholy, Mistrustful and Jealous.”  9  As his wealth 
and fame grew, so did paranoia and ill health, doubtless agitated by the drugs 
he habitually used to experiment on himself.  10  One ﬁ nal project, “to repeat 
the most part of his Experiments, and ﬁ nish the Accounts, Observations and 
Deductions from them,” in the end came to nothing. Others would have to 
pick up the thoughts he had dropped. 
 Priority, Originality, and Luckey Hitts of Chance 
 In the meantime, priority disputes ﬁ lled his days. The most famous of these 
was his long-standing series of quarrels with Newton, which began as soon 
as he read and reported skeptically to the Royal Society on Newton’s his-
toric letter “ containing his New Theory about  Light  and Colors” (February 2, 
1671/72). That debate would continue after his death in 1703, when New-
ton ﬁ nally published replies he had written in 1675/76.  11  The claims and 
counterclaims produced by these exchanges, argued back and forth not only 
by the participants but also by scholars up to the present day, are too com-
plex to allow any simple verdict. At times the rivals declared a truce or 
made concessions. At other times they ridiculed or tried to obliterate one 
another, as when Newton blue-penciled Hooke from the  Principia  or when 
Hooke told the Royal Society about “those proprietys of Gravity which I 
myself ﬁ rst Discovered and shewed to this Society many years since, which 
of late Mr Newton has done me the favour to print and Publish as his 
own Inventions.”  12  In some ways the two were utterly incompatible—Hooke 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    181
the fox and Newton the hedgehog, Hooke the virtuoso and Newton the 
mathematician—in some ways all too much alike—too driven to admit that 
they might owe an idea to somebody else. When they came into contact, 
it sparked an electric recoil. Nor did they lack other foes, such as the great 
Christiaan Huygens, a rival to both. Such controversies thread through the 
story of Hooke’s life. 
 In fact the natural philosophy of his time seethed with disputes about 
priority. Paradoxically the Royal Society itself may have ignited these com-
petitions, because of the tensions in its ideals. In theory it advocated collabo-
ration; in practice originality was what it prized, as in a worldwide Hall of 
Fame. Of all Hooke’s enemies, the one he eventually most reviled was Henry 
Oldenburg, the ﬁ rst secretary and guiding spirit of the Royal Society, whom 
he came to suspect of plotting to destroy his reputation.  13  At ﬁ rst the two 
men had been allies and friends. Both were protégés of Robert Boyle, who 
donated them as a sort of gift to the Society, where they proved indispensable: 
Oldenburg as the enterprising administrator, diplomat, and publisher; Hooke 
as the philosopher and artisan who made things run. Their complementary 
skills and mutual efforts enabled the ﬂ edgling organization to survive its 
ﬁ rst hard times and ultimately ﬂ ourish. Yet they were also at cross-purposes. 
Oldenburg, a Hanseatic German who was sent from Bremen to England 
in 1653 as an envoy to Cromwell and became attached to Boyle, always 
retained his continental ties. His correspondence with leading European phi-
losophers kept him in touch with the latest scientiﬁ c ideas; and  Philosophical 
Transactions , the journal he founded in 1665, justiﬁ ed its subtitle:  Giving Some 
Accompt of the Present Undertakings, Studies, and Labours of the Ingenious in many 
Considerable Parts of the World . In serving the Royal Society, therefore, he also 
functioned as a distributor or clearinghouse of “philosophical intelligence,” 
forever spreading the word about new inventions. But not all inventors wel-
comed such exposure. Publicity might stir competition, encouraging others 
to follow a similar track or to ferret out secrets or even to steal them. At the 
height of his anger, Hooke looked down on Oldenburg “as one who made 
a trade of Intelligence,” not only a monger of news but also a foreign spy.  14  
When such a man spoke of “We and Us,” “it is desired he would explain 
whether he means the  Royal Society , or the Pluralities of himself.”  15  
 The same explanation might have been asked of Hooke, whose selves were 
so plural: did he represent the Royal Society or his own vainglorious interests? 
Clearly he was torn. Moreover, the free circulation of ideas seemed to him to 
trespass on the grounds of the Society, which might be regarded as a club of 
patriotic British citizens (and a few guests) whose information belonged to 
members only. Hooke’s self-sufﬁ cient genius equated the go-between with 

182    WHAT GALILEO SAW
the double-dealer. Oldenburg had offended him by parleying with Huy-
gens, who had invented a spring watch that Hooke thought stolen from his 
own design, and who had suggested that Oldenburg patent it. This looked 
like treachery. And even though the council of the Society rejected Hooke’s 
charges, he never surrendered his grievance. He pursued it long after Olden-
burg’s death in 1677; and when in the aftermath he took over the duties of 
secretary and dominated the meetings of the Society, he allowed  Philosophical 
Transactions  to lapse, replacing it later with the sporadic  Philosophical Collec-
tions . Temporarily he had won his battle against the “trade of Intelligence.”  16  
Yet in the long run Hooke’s weakness at the business of publication, as well 
as his want of diplomacy, would cost him dearly. To the next generation, 
his resentment of Newton’s fame seemed merely self-centered. The pub-
lic monument of the  Principia  would cast a shadow over Hooke’s carefully 
guarded secrets and theories. 
 Hence the Royal Society, which provided the stage where Hooke mani-
fested his genius, turned out to be also the site of his ordeal. His lectures to 
the Society, in the years after the  Principia , increasingly harp on two themes: 
his inventions and innovations in numerous ﬁ elds, and the failure of younger 
men to credit or recognize him. He seems obsessed with questions of origi-
nality, and with the process by which imitators are enriched while “the ﬁ rst 
discoverer is dismist with Contempt and Impoverishment.”  17  That obsession 
was not Hooke’s alone. The ﬁ erce priority disputes of the late seventeenth 
century reﬂ ect a preoccupation with innovation and genius, as well as pla-
giarism and theft of intellectual property, that had been largely unknown in 
earlier ages.  18  To be sure, Galileo had not been modest about what he had 
discovered. The natural philosophers of his time also hungered for fame and 
wanted to be remembered, as in Tycho’s last words, nor did they shrink from 
being rewarded and praised above other mortals. Yet public disputes about 
originality were rare. Thomas Harriot could surely have claimed that he had 
anticipated some of the discoveries of Galileo and Kepler, but he was content 
to leave that claim in private notebooks for future scholars to mine. More-
over, he lacked the resources to publish what he had done. There were as 
yet no institutions for coordinating and disseminating knowledge, no Royal 
Society and  Philosophical Transactions , no Henry Oldenburg. 
 Most of all, originality itself had yet to be deﬁ ned or gloriﬁ ed. Before the 
eighteenth century, when English borrowed the term from French, there was 
no such word, nor does it appear in Johnson’s  Dictionary .  19  More important, 
in early usage “original” seldom referred to modern ideas. Most scholars 
considered the Bible or the ancients as primal sources from which all later 
knowledge had been derived. When Galileo, Bacon, Descartes, and other 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    183
natural philosophers challenged that assumption, and above all the author-
ity of Aristotle, they set off a war between ancients and moderns that raged 
for a century. It erupted again in 1687—the year of the  Principia —when a 
famous “Querelle” shook the Académie Française; and in 1690 Sir William 
Temple brought the quarrel to England by contending, in  An Essay upon the 
Ancient and Modern Learning , that ancient sciences (now, unfortunately, lost) 
had far surpassed modern achievements. Later, Temple’s secretary, Jonathan 
Swift, recast the war as farce in  The Battle of the Books  (1697), a mock-
epic clash between texts in the royal library. To Swift and other partisans of 
ancient learning, “ the great Genius or Inventions of the  Moderns” suggested the 
spider, which draws on itself alone to spin nothing but cobwebs. A better 
ideal was the bee, which, pretending to no originality, brought home from 
every corner of nature “Honey  and Wax,  thus furnishing Mankind with the two 
Noblest of Things, which are  Sweetness  and Light.”  20  From this point of view 
the advancement of learning seemed an illusion. Slowly the moderns rallied 
their forces, however, and the idea of progress took hold, as the seventeenth 
century passed into the eighteenth, until originality became an indispensable 
word, as natural as breathing.  21  
 These skirmishes are directly related to Hooke’s priority disputes. Few 
natural philosophers have ever been more enthusiastic about the progress 
of technology and science, or more concerned about their own original 
contributions to it. That enthusiasm did not pass unnoticed. In Thomas 
Shadwell’s popular comedy  The Virtuoso  (1676), some of Hooke’s words and 
ideas are put in the mouth of the idiotic Sir Nicholas Gimcrack, who takes 
great pride in his bizarre experiments (after Hooke saw the play, he growled 
to his diary, “Damned Dogs.  Vindica Me Deus . People almost pointed”). 
The ultimate insult arrives when Gimcrack is forced to admit that “I never 
invented an engine in my life. . . . We virtuosos never ﬁ nd out anything of 
use, ’tis not our way.”  22  Such attacks took on a life of their own. Even as late 
as 1726, when Swift published his notorious lampoon of the Royal Society 
in book 3 of  Gulliver ’ s Travels , the absurd experiments of “ the universal Art-
ist ” implicate Hooke’s all-embracing interests and quest for progress.  23  These 
parodies were, of course, grossly unfair. Though “ancients” like Swift might 
regard all modern inventions as useless, Hooke and his fellows had tirelessly 
worked in the spirit of Bacon to bring about practical, useful improvements 
in daily life: better eyeglasses, medicines, watches, and buildings. If they 
did not succeed in their plans for ﬂ ying machines, they were not wrong to 
hope that future inventors would realize what they had dreamed. Yet the 
satirists surely touched one vulnerable point, the pride of Hooke and other 
champions of innovation. Priority disputes revealed the self-importance and 

184    WHAT GALILEO SAW
competitive urges that motivated the virtuoso, who panted for recognition. 
Hooke wanted the world to know that he was a genius. 
 To  prove  that one was a genius, however, was no easy matter. A single 
clever invention, such as Verdugo’s ﬁ reproof paper, might earn a place in 
some imaginary Hall of Fame, but Verdugo might have been lucky rather 
than gifted. True genius had to aim higher, toward something universal: the 
law of gravity, for instance. Hooke’s dispute with Newton, at times quite 
frantic, shows that he knew his immortality was at stake. A famous letter 
that he encouraged and assisted his friend John Aubrey to draft is addressed 
to posterity as well as to Anthony Wood: “This is the greatest discovery in 
nature that ever was since the world’s creation. It never was so much as hinted 
by any man before. I know you will doe him right.”  24  But Wood did not 
take up the cause. 
 Had Hooke been the ﬁ rst to discover the principle of universal gravita-
tion? If so, his insight must be pried out of a lecture ﬁ rst delivered in 1670, 
 An Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth from Observations . Its amazing ﬁ nal 
paragraph hints that he has “discovered some new Motions even in the Earth 
it self, which perhaps were not dreamt of before, which I shall hereafter more 
at large describe,” when “also I shall explain a System of the World differing 
in many particulars from any yet known.” And the paragraph ends by passing 
the idea on to such as “are not wanting of Industry for observing and calcu-
lating, wishing heartily such may be found, having my self many other things 
in hand which I would ﬁ rst compleat, and therefore cannot so well attend 
it. But this I durst promise the Undertaker, that he will ﬁ nd all the great 
Motions of the World to be inﬂ uenced by this Principle, and that the true 
understanding thereof will be the true perfection of Astronomy.”  25  The claim 
of priority is breathtaking, and so is the sense of mystiﬁ cation. In retrospect 
Hooke seems at once to predict the rule that Newton’s mathematical rea-
soning will formulate and to reduce it to mere calculation, a working out of 
something already conceived. But what  is  that something?  26  Though Hooke 
drops clues, including a conjectural inverse square law, he is not ready to show 
his hand; he lays claim to a secret, like the philosopher’s stone, too precious to 
share. No wonder that Newton would later feel so defensive. A lien had been 
placed preemptively on his greatest idea, his System of the World; nor could 
he prove exactly what had or had not been in Hooke’s mind. Two secretive 
and obstinate giants were headed toward a collision. 
 In any case, the evidence for Hooke’s genius does not consist in any one 
idea, however great. It must be sought instead in the ﬂ ood of original inspi-
rations that passed through his mind and his hands, sometimes lingering, 
sometimes quickly straying. That kind of genius leaves many traces but no 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    185
deep, unequivocal track. Full of potential, it shows its power by constantly 
generating new thoughts in new ﬁ elds, which may not take hold for centu-
ries but sometimes unexpectedly turn out to be important. And yet its home 
is the shadow world of the mind, where images ﬂ icker into and out of life 
and do not always move a hand to sketch them or write them down. 
 The published version of the lecture in which Hooke announced his 
revolutionary System of the World begins with an extraordinary disclaimer: 
“No man is able to say he will compleat this or that  Inquiry , whatever it be, 
(The greatest part of Invention being but a luckey hitt of chance, for the most 
part not in our own power, and like the wind, the Spirit of Invention bloweth 
where and when it listeth, and we scarce know whence it came, or whither ’tis 
gone.”  27  The parenthesis, like the inquiry, never closes. Hooke cannot shape 
the course of his creations, even when they might shake the world. His sense 
of mystery anticipates Kant’s famous verdict on genius: “If an author owes a 
product to his genius, he himself does not know how he came by the ideas 
for it; nor is it in his power to devise such products at his pleasure, or by fol-
lowing a plan, and to communicate to others in precepts that would enable 
them to bring about like products.” And Kant then draws a logical conclu-
sion: Newton was far too rational to be a genius.  28  When asked how he had 
made discoveries, Newton is supposed to have replied, “By always thinking 
unto them.”  29  But Hooke’s inventions came and went like the wind. 
 Nor did he often ﬁ nish what he started. Even his best ideas kept being 
interrupted by duties and deadlines and projects. Perhaps Hooke did intuit 
the inverse square law, but there were also “many other things in hand”—by 
his own count, at least a “Centry” of “useful Inventions.” Some of these 
were as practical as the method of forming arches in the shape of an inverted 
hanging chain, which Wren may have used in building St. Paul’s Cathe-
dral;  30  some as visionary as the equatorial quadrant or the spring-regulated 
chronometer, which later generations would develop; some as airy as the 
springy shoes designed to bounce the wearer twelve feet up.  31  But good 
or bad, the ideas kept coming, like the perpetual motion machine he once 
wanted to build. That capacity for invention, in which thoughts forever 
sought instruments to test or activate them, brings out the special nature of 
the virtuoso Hooke. Etymologically his genius occupies the space where 
 genere , the seminal Latin root of “generation,” branches to “ingenuity” as well 
as to “engineer.” He did not make systems but things. 
 Moreover, he talked incessantly about them. Hooke’s attachment to the 
Royal Society, which began not long after its founding and continued for 
forty years, despite his ill health, until shortly before he died in 1703, affected 
all his work.  32  The experiments that he was commissioned to perform 

186    WHAT GALILEO SAW
converged with his own thought experiments and devices, and all of them 
entailed reports and lectures. In the small world of the Society, Hooke’s 
talents—and frailties—were always on display. Perhaps he was even too famil-
iar a ﬁ gure. Often brilliant, sometimes annoying, his genius could be taken 
for granted. If the Society was partly his creation, he was also its creature, as 
if the collective curiosity of its members assumed a visible form in what he 
did. Hence his prodigious talents, however respected, did not inspire awe. 
Few students came to his lectures, in his old age, and fewer still remembered 
the times when every week brought forth some new discovery or gadget. 
Hooke would forever hold a place in the Hall of Fame constructed by the 
history of science, but he had not shaken the world. For that a different order 
of genius was required. 
 The Making of Isaac Newton 
 First and last, mathematics made the difference. When Newton heard that 
Hooke was accusing him of having appropriated the inverse square law, he 
could not contain his rage: Hooke could never have understood the truth 
of the law, since he lacked the capacity to prove it. “Now is this not very 
ﬁ ne? Mathematicians that ﬁ nd out, settle & do all the business must content 
themselves with being nothing but dry calculators & drudges & another that 
does nothing but pretend & grasp at all things must carry away all the inven-
tion as well of those that were to follow him as of those that went before.”  33  
Here Newton fumes not only on his own behalf but also as a member of a 
proud elite, those mathematicians who “do all the business.” In his own eyes 
that group deﬁ nes him, and it is closed to Hooke. Newton implicitly draws 
on a version of the history of science, of those who have gone before and 
are to follow, that traces a logical sequence of accurate calculations. Such a 
history will have nothing to do with mere virtuosi or those who concoct an 
unrelated series of clever inventions. 
 The culmination of Newton’s version of science would arrive the follow-
ing year, in  Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica  ( Mathematical Principles of 
Natural Philosophy , 1687), whose title itself declares that mathematics underlies 
the system of the world. In a brief preface to book 3, Newton observes that 
his principles are not “philosophical but strictly mathematical—that is, those 
on which the study of philosophy can be based. These principles are the 
laws and conditions of motions and of forces,” or what would later be called 
celestial (as well as terrestrial) mechanics. None but “readers who are pro-
ﬁ cient in mathematics”—readers more adept than Hooke—are qualiﬁ ed to 
grasp them.  34  To explain how such principles account for the phenomena of 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    187
nature, Newton had “composed an earlier version of book 3 in popular form, 
so that it might be more widely read.” But that would have led to misper-
ceptions and “lengthy disputations” about the  cause  of the force that propels 
the planets.  35  Instead he traces its effects “ in a mathematical way , to avoid all 
questions about the nature or quality of this force, which we would not be 
understood to determine by any hypothesis.”  36  Hence the  Principia  translates 
the substance of its explanation into mathematical propositions. In the last 
analysis, the system of the world cannot be reduced to what common people 
can see or understand. Instead it obeys eternal laws that only mathematics is 
capable of expressing. 
 Newton had fashioned his views from a long tradition. Many years before, 
during an interlude in one of his quarrels, he had famously conceded to Hooke 
that others had inﬂ uenced his own ideas on light and colors: “What Des-
Cartes did was a good step. You have added much several ways. . . . If I have 
seen further it is by standing on ye sholders of Giants.”  37  As many scholars have 
argued, the remark is probably less modest and gracious than it might seem, 
nor does it pronounce Hooke a giant.  38  Newton associates himself, most likely, 
with the inspired ancient philosophers “who made a  Vacuum , and Atoms, and 
the Gravity of Atoms, the ﬁ rst Principles of their Philosophy; tacitly attribut-
ing Gravity to some other Cause than dense Matter,” and thus preparing the 
way for a divine ﬁ rst Cause, which moderns such as Descartes and Hooke have 
ignorantly banished, “feigning Hypotheses for explaining all things mechani-
cally.”  39  As the apostle of those inspired ancients, Newton too partakes of the 
divine. Yet modern giants, despite their faults, had also helped to elevate him. 
From a mathematician’s perspective, the progress of seventeenth-century phi-
losophy had borne out Galileo’s crucial insight, that the book of the universe 
“is written in the language of mathematics.” A small number of giants—among 
them Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo himself, and Descartes—had learned to read 
that language ﬂ uently, and thus offered their shoulders to later mathematicians. 
This is the line of genius in which Newton takes his place. 
 Descartes, above all, provided a model. So much of Newton’s work explic-
itly repudiates Cartesian principles that the two men might be considered 
implacable enemies, dividing the intellectual world between them. Thus 
Newton sets himself against Descartes’s algebraic calculus, his theories of 
light and gravity, his separation of body and spirit, his vortices ﬁ lling a ple-
num. Even the title of the  Principia  echoes and challenges Descartes’s  Principia 
Philosophiæ  (1644), opposing Newton’s focus on mathematics and “natural” 
philosophy to Descartes’s investment in hypotheses—or what Newton called 
“ﬁ ctions”—about the mechanisms that run the world.  40  Yet Descartes had 
been largely responsible for launching Newton’s career. In 1664, when the 

188    WHAT GALILEO SAW
twenty-one-year-old scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge, fell under the 
spell of mathematics, it was  Géométrie  that opened and provoked his mind. 
“When he had read two or three pages & could understand no farther he . . . 
begain again & got over three or four more till he came to another difﬁ cult 
place, & then began again & advanced farther & continued so doing till he 
not only made himself master of the whole without having the least light or 
instruction from any body, but discovered the errors of Descartes.”  41  New-
ton was anything but a passive reader. Whetting his tools on Descartes, he 
immersed himself for two years—his “ annus mirabilis ”—in the most difﬁ cult 
problems of mathematics; and he did not emerge until he had gone beyond 
anyone else, all the way to inﬁ nity, and reinvented ideas of what mathematics 
could do.  42  He kept these ﬁ ndings to himself for many years. But eventu-
ally the secrets came out, and posterity would regard them as the ultimate 
example and proof of genius: something self-born and almost beyond com-
prehension. Not even Descartes had come so far so fast. 
 Nevertheless, in many ways Newton was treading in Descartes’s footsteps. 
First he began by absorbing and overthrowing Euclid. Traditionally the  Ele-
ments  had provided a basis not only for mathematics but also for rational 
thought, establishing axioms whose demonstration trained the mind; the 
permutations of geometrical ﬁ gures, of triangles, quadrilaterals, circles, and 
spheres, exempliﬁ ed logic in action. But this was a limited language, restricted 
to what could be drawn by the ruler and compasses. Descartes had set out 
to expand the ﬁ eld by superimposing the methods of algebra, its symbolic 
language of abstract equations, on geometrical ﬁ gures. In place of the classic 
conic section, his geometry featured the curve, which expressed the relations 
between lines in terms of coordinates that could be expressed in equations. 
 Géométrie  begins by asserting that “all the problems of geometry can be 
easily reduced to such terms that one need only know the length of certain 
straight lines in order to construct them.”  43  This proud promise was vain, 
and Descartes failed to carry it through. But Newton took up the project, 
transcending classical geometry by reconceiving its lines as the tracks left by 
moving points, whose curving lines could be analyzed in terms of rates of 
ﬂ ow, or “ﬂ uxions.”  Géométrie  had led the way; it had given him “his ﬁ rst true 
vision of the universalising power of the algebraic free variable, of its capac-
ity to generalise the particular and lay bare its inner structure to outward 
inspection.”  44  A few further steps, incorporating insights about quadratures 
and inﬁ nitesimals, culminated in October 1666, when a tract that offered 
mathematical propositions “To resolve Problems by Motion” laid out the 
principles of a new method. Later it would be called the calculus. 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    189
 That period of intense concentration and undeniable accomplishment still 
represents the epitome of what genius can do. But it also remains an enigma. 
What enabled Newton to leap so far ahead? Was the time ripe for him, or 
did his power of mind create its own reality, autonomous and timeless? Each 
rival theory of genius can ﬁ nd its own way to describe what happened. 
For Samuel Johnson, Newton’s breakthrough might conﬁ rm that “the true 
Genius is a mind of large general powers, accidentally determined to some 
particular direction,”  45  as when Newton chanced to fall under the spell of 
 Géométrie . Yet most admirers of Newton consider his attainments not acci-
dental so much as fated. His peerless gift for mathematics was not simply a 
matter of “large general powers” but rather a speciﬁ c transcendent potential 
always ready to seize its occasion. An accident might have cut that potential 
off but could never determine how far it might go. To be sure, he was for-
tunate in his time and place, and envied by his successors: “There could be 
only one Newton,” Lagrange is supposed to have told Napoleon; “there was 
only one world to discover.”  46  But the world was also fortunate to have found 
its Newton: someone uniquely qualiﬁ ed to understand it. 
 Nor could he be distracted from the questions he tried to answer. In every 
way Newton’s genius was single-minded. What Cambridge provided during 
his formative years was less a community of scholars than a sanctuary that left 
him alone, free to pursue his interests without interruption.  47  Wordsworth, 
who felt an odd afﬁ nity with Newton, recorded a Trinity College tradition 
as well as a personal view in his famous lines on the statue “of Newton 
with his prism and silent face, / The marble index of a mind for ever / 
Voyaging through strange seas of Thought, alone.”  48  The statue and the man 
converge in fancy, equally silent and closed to the world outside their marble, 
mysterious ﬁ gures. Such genius makes its own laws. While working on the 
problems that consumed him, Newton wrapped himself in a cocoon of 
solitude; often he forgot to eat or sleep. Eventually, when he had exhausted 
the topic, at least in his own mind, he would rest and then turn to another, 
which might involve theology or alchemy. But mathematics served his genius 
best, because some problems yielded to his relentless attack and because his 
reasoning could be deﬁ nitive, without any need to fabricate hypotheses or 
paper over heresies. After the trial of Galileo, Descartes had suppressed  The 
World , and Newton shied from exposing his own arcane and nonconformist 
beliefs to the public. Even the controversies over his discoveries in optics and 
mechanics upset him and tempted him to withdraw from the glaring light 
of rival claims and publications. Only the business of mathematics—precise, 
obsessive, and most of all private—could furnish a refuge. 

190    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 The System of the World 
 Nevertheless, Newton could not avoid the fame that descended on him. The 
excitement that carried Edmond Halley away when he urged and almost 
forced Newton to ready the  Principia  for publication, and that would also 
stir so many others, was not aroused only by dazzling and elegant mathemat-
ics.  49  It responded to something more, to something to which Descartes had 
devoted his life: the effort to construct a comprehensive system of the world. 
This aspiration had driven natural philosophers for more than a century, ever 
since the new philosophy called all in doubt. In the cosmos that Coperni-
cus, Tycho, Galileo, and Kepler began to envision, Aristotle and Ptolemy 
no longer seemed competent to offer explanations of everything, yet only 
Descartes had made a plausible start at ﬁ lling the void. Even the phrase “the 
System of the World” spoke of a promise yet to be performed. Ever since 
Kepler’s three Laws, an elusive uniﬁ ed theory had seemed to hover just out of 
reach. When Hooke entered his claim to have discovered “a certain rule” on 
which to build “a System of the World,” he hinted that the promised hour 
had come at last. Those were words that all philosophers except Cartesians 
had waited to hear. But Hooke had overreached. Someone else would have 
to make his words good. 
 Such hyperbolic claims did not come easily to Newton. Observations 
and propositions were his forte; he hammered out bold answers to difﬁ cult 
questions and usually left the implications for others to trace. In the letter 
that made him famous, “containing his New Theory about  Light  and  Colors ” 
(1672), he takes satisfaction not only in the absolute certainty of what he 
has found but also in his refusal to speculate about what he does not know: 
“Who ever thought any quality to be a  heterogeneous aggregate, such as Light 
is discovered to be. But, to determine more absolutely, what Light is, after 
what manner refracted, and by what modes or actions it produceth in our 
minds the Phantasms of Colours, is not so easie. And I shall not mingle 
conjectures with certainties.”  50  This is Newton’s characteristic tone, proud, 
decisive, self-contained, and wary. Rhetorically he shuns hypotheses. 
 Even when, three years later, Newton sought to unlock the secrets of 
nature in “An Hypothesis explaining the Properties of Light discoursed of 
in my severall Papers,” he denied that he cared “whether it shall be thought 
probable or improbable so it do but render ye papers I send you, and others 
sent formerly, more intelligible.”  51  Some virtuosos could not understand his 
discourses unless he attached a hypothesis to them; so he would condescend 
to speculate. Hence he affects to disown in advance his ﬁ rst public attempt 
to make sense of the world through light and gravity and aether. “Perhaps 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    191
the whole frame of Nature may be nothing but various Contextures of some 
certaine æthereall Spirits or vapours, condens’d as it were by præcipitation . . . ; 
and after condensation wrought into various formes; at ﬁ rst by the immedi-
ate hand of the Creator, and ever since by the power of Nature, wch by ver-
tue of the command Increase & Multiply, became a complete Imitator of the 
copies sett her by the Protoplast. Thus perhaps may all things be originated 
from æther.”  52  “Perhaps” begins and ends a ﬂ ight of fancy. Signiﬁ cantly this 
all-embracing speculation seems drawn from alchemy far more than from 
mechanics. Freed from the severe constraints of absolute certainties, Newton 
exposes the “strange seas of thought” in which he had been voyaging for 
many years. Indeed, his reference to “the Protoplast” (ﬁ rst agent) may well 
hint at an Arian heresy, which regarded the Son as the mediator between 
the Father and the created world.  53  But Newton was hardly ready to share 
his personal beliefs; nor was he yet quite sure that he had found the truth. 
Most likely his unwillingness to stand behind his own hypothesis represents 
a genuine uncertainty, not merely a strategic precaution. He could not yet 
prove that the universe moved in conformity with his thoughts. 
 Moreover, a coherent system of the world required an author. As Kepler 
plumbed the harmonics of the solar system, he was inspired by the idea that 
he was glimpsing the mind of God. Descartes’s mechanist explanation of 
everything in  The World  insisted that, as ﬁ rst mover, “God alone is the author 
of all the motions in the world,”  54  but his published writings defensively 
concede that his own system of the world  as it might be  is merely human, 
a tissue of suppositions. In Newton’s time, the great “Christian virtuoso” 
Robert Boyle espoused a theology in which the study of nature served as 
a form of worship, because it contemplated God, the author of nature.  55  
Ambitious natural philosophers, even those far more prudent than Galileo, 
could not avoid the theological implications of their world systems. Cer-
tainly Newton did not. Although he does not seem to have turned the full 
force of his mind to theology until the late 1660s, after he had transformed 
mathematics, it soon became his obsession, pursued with the same intensity 
and independence that marked all his serious studies. It remained so for more 
than a decade, until Hooke and Halley brought him back to cosmology and 
mathematics and prodded him to reconceive the world. Yet the ﬁ rst edition 
of the  Principia  draws no conclusions about the author of its system. God is 
almost entirely absent. 
 He was far from absent from Newton’s mind, however. In a series of 
letters to Richard Bentley in 1692–93, Newton emphasized that God alone 
had authored the system of the world described in the  Principia  and that only 
God’s eternal vigilance kept it in place. “When I wrote my treatise about 

192    WHAT GALILEO SAW
our Systeme I had an eye upon such Principles as might work wth consid-
ering men for the beleife of a Deity & nothing can rejoyce me more then 
to ﬁ nd it usefull for that purpose.”  56  Twenty years later, a “General Scho-
lium” appended to the second edition of the  Principia  declared, “This most 
elegant system of the sun, planets, and comets could not have arisen with-
out the design and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being”—“Lord 
God  Pantokrator ,” or “universal ruler.” There is nothing equivocal about this 
repeated assertion that God rules all things and that all things testify to his 
presence; and the section concludes with one more endorsement of the argu-
ment from design: “To treat of God from phenomena is certainly a part of 
natural philosophy.”  57  
 Yet even at this moment of conviction, Newton will go only so far. 
The very next paragraph, which refuses to assign a cause to gravity, revolves 
around his most famous phrase, “Hypotheses non ﬁ ngo” (I do not feign [or 
fabricate] hypotheses). The phrase has an interesting background. Newton 
had used the words before, most notably in Query 28 of the Latin ver-
sion of the  Opticks  (1706), which anticipates the argument of the “General 
Scholium”: “Does it not appear from Phænomena that there is a Being 
incorporeal, living, intelligent, omnipresent, who in inﬁ nite Space, as it were 
in his Sensory, sees the things themselves intimately, and thoroughly perceives 
them, and comprehends them wholly by their immediate presence to him-
self.” This proposition, without a question mark, concludes a train of thought 
that rebukes philosophers for “feigning Hypotheses for explaining all things 
mechanically, and referring other Causes to Metaphysicks: Whereas the main 
Business of natural Philosophy is to argue from Phænomena without feign-
ing Hypotheses, and to deduce Causes from Effects, till we come to the very 
ﬁ rst Cause, which certainly is not mechanical.”  58  In Newton’s mind, evi-
dently, the ﬁ rst Cause he deduces—that incorporeal, omnipresent Being—is 
 not a hypothesis, or is indeed a living refutation of all hypotheses concerned 
only with matter. In that respect Descartes’s separation of matter from spirit 
had fatally set him on a false track. When the “General Scholium” follows 
its account of God the Pantokrator with a disavowal of hypotheses, there-
fore, it assumes that pure reason and truth, not fabrication and speculation, 
proclaim the divine ﬁ rst Cause. Implicitly the cause of gravity must be God. 
But Newton does not say that. 
 One reason may be that he feared to associate his great discovery in 
mechanics with a theology that might be disputed. Such fears were justi-
ﬁ ed. David Gregory, who talked to Newton about a draft of Query 28, 
reports, “The plain truth is, that he believes God to be omnipresent in the 
literal sense,” and that he thought of enlisting the ancients to support him: 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    193
“ What Cause did the Ancients assign of Gravity . He believes that they reckoned 
God the Cause of it, nothing els.”  59  But this presumed that inﬁ nite space is 
the sensorium of God, who presides over his creation as a percipient center 
or mind that at once receives impressions of all things that exist and impels 
them to move. The ﬁ rst Latin edition of the  Opticks  says that explicitly. But 
Newton soon backed down. Apparently he retrieved as much of the edition 
as he could and pasted another passage (the version above, with “as it were 
in his Sensory”) over the more aggressive identiﬁ cation of space with the 
divine sensorium. One copy of the original, however, seems to have fallen 
into Leibniz’s hands, who found the idea of the sensorium richly ridiculous: 
“Sir Isaac Newton says that space is an organ which God makes use of to 
perceive things by.”  60  If gravity depended on the ever-present intervention of 
God, then the universe was no better designed than a watch that constantly 
needed rewinding. Surely the ﬁ rst Cause might have been more efﬁ cient. 
Hence reliance on the sensorium exposed, in Leibniz’s eyes, the weak meta-
physics that grounded Newton’s physics. The system of the world began to 
tremble; a harsh debate ensued. 
 Yet Newton himself did not want to engage directly in that debate. When 
priority disputes broke out, as with Hooke on the inverse square law or 
Leibniz on the invention of the calculus, the situation was different. A chal-
lenge to his originality, or even a suggestion that others had thought as he 
did, touched the essence of his self-esteem, and he was hard to restrain. But 
the system of the world, which meant so much to his followers, could largely 
be left to them. Newton’s genius thrived on certainties; he did not like to 
think of himself as someone who indulged in theories, and he preferred to 
husband rather than publish his work. When word of his genius snowballed 
and spread, he took no overt or active part in the process.  61  Despite his pride 
in his discoveries, Newton did not have much of a gift or inclination for 
explaining why they were signiﬁ cant. There was always something seques-
tered, if not uncanny, about his genius. 
 Thus the industry that grew around Newton, paraphrasing, interpreting, 
popularizing, and ﬁ nally sanctifying his ideas, could mold his image as it 
wished, without descending to the merely human. Even the Royal Society, the 
site of his ﬁ rst public triumph in 1672, could hardly claim him as more than 
a token fellow, until thirty years later he lent it his own prestige by allowing 
himself to be elected president. Meanwhile a troop of enthusiastic champions 
and disciples—among them Oldenburg, John Collins, Halley, Bentley, John 
Craige, Roger Cotes, Henry Pemberton, and J. T. Desaguliers—gathered 
around his singular ﬁ gure, bringing the new ideas home to the public.  62  The 
great man himself had no need to expose whatever he might privately believe. 

194    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 One disciple, Samuel Clarke, spoke openly for Newton. Clarke, like 
Bentley, had given Boyle Lectures on natural theology (1704–5), and the fol-
lowing year had translated the  Opticks  into Latin. Moreover, he sympathized 
with Newton’s unorthodox theological views, including Arianism.  63  The 
correspondence of Clarke and Leibniz in 1715–16 debated fundamental 
issues: the nature of the universe and God, free will, the vacuum and the 
plenum, miracles, and most of all the role of natural philosophy in fortify-
ing religion.  64  When Clarke published these exchanges after Leibniz died, 
they became a central text for disseminating Newton’s system of the world 
to a wide public, in understandable terms. Voltaire, who set Clarke with 
Newton among “the greatest thinkers and ﬁ nest writers of their age,”  65  bor-
rowed some of his arguments to eviscerate their common enemy Leibniz. 
Leibniz’s Principle of the Best, which held that the world perfected by God 
must admit the greatest possible variety and plenitude, denied the existence 
of vacuums and atoms; but Clarke, and Voltaire after him, insisted that such 
reasoning would lead to the absurdity of a universe made entirely of pores, 
without any solid particles of matter.  66  Whatever the merits of this debate, it 
served Newton’s purposes extremely well. Without committing himself to 
any explanation of gravity, he had delegated an active defense of his system 
to someone he could rely on, and at the same time he had put Leibniz in 
the embarrassing position of struggling to justify theories that were not fully 
worked out. When challenged by Leibniz, Newton had gently asked him 
to provide a better explanation of the world.  67  Now it was obvious, even to 
Leibniz himself in the moment before his death, that he had not succeeded.  68  
Hereafter Newton’s system would stand alone. 
 Nevertheless, he would not reveal the full range of his thoughts. Two texts, 
both called  The System of the World  ( De Mundi Systemate ), show how much he 
deliberately withheld. The ﬁ rst was originally intended to conclude the  Prin-
cipia , where it would use the mathematical principles of natural philosophy to 
“demonstrate the frame of the  SYSTEM of the  WORLD .” Simply and directly, 
in Latin, it describes a heliocentric system held together by centripetal forces, 
explains the motions of the planets, the moon, and the tides, places the ﬁ xed 
stars at immense distances from the planets, and works out the trajectories of 
comets. When ﬁ nally published in both Latin and English more than forty 
years later, a year after Newton’s death in 1727, it immediately became the 
most accessible guide to his cosmology. But he himself had never published 
it. To avoid disputes and superﬁ cial responses, he reduced the text to math-
ematical propositions. Hence the altered “System of the World” that con-
stitutes book 3 of the  Principia , extensively revised in the second edition and 
again in the third, addresses a reader who has already mastered at least some of 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    195
the earlier mathematics. Such readers will certainly be rewarded for their toil, 
above all by grasping the power of the theory of gravity to calculate celes-
tial motions. Yet Newton rigorously excludes any talk about the causes and 
implications of his theory, even those he had labored over in many canceled 
drafts, and proposed in searching discussions and correspondence. Even the 
ﬁ rst attempt at a more popular “System of the World” had stepped back from 
provocative claims: “It is none of our present business to explain the causes 
of the appearances of nature.”  69  And it concludes with a set of mathematical 
problems and computations, without any summing up. 
 The Vision of Newton 
 In recent decades, when scholars have explored the range of Newton’s inter-
ests and determined that his “system of the world” was only one small part 
of his lifework, the austerity of what he chose to publish has often seemed 
quite inexplicable. One leading authority, I. Bernard Cohen, confesses that 
he is perplexed. 
 For Newton the system of rational mechanics ( books 1 and 2) and 
the dynamics of the system of the world ( book 3) were not ends in 
themselves but only parts of a uniﬁ ed general ordering of the uni-
verse that encompassed alchemy, the theory of matter, “vegetative” and 
other “spirits,” prophecy, the wisdom of the ancients, and God’s provi-
dence. . . . How could Newton have kept these considerations out of 
his  Principia  to such a degree that readers have had only the barest hint 
of their existence until our own times? Some years ago, I put this ques-
tion to Frances Yates, the doyenne of studies in this area. She replied 
simply but very profoundly that, after all, “Newton was a genius.” Who 
would not agree! We cannot expect a person of such creative genius to 
behave in an ordinary fashion.  70  
 Here “genius” serves as an all-purpose explanation or “wonderful solution 
of all difﬁ culties,” like the  lusus naturae  in Swift.  71  Normal standards cannot 
apply to such a phenomenon, a sport of nature who proves that he is unique 
whenever he ﬂ outs what other people expect. 
 Yet Cohen and Yates ignore one salient point, that Newton safeguarded his 
reputation for genius precisely by suppressing any ideas and theories he could 
not conﬁ rm. In that respect he may have been wiser than modern scholars. 
When specialists recover the contexts of Newton’s thought, in all its com-
plexity, breadth, and confusion, their ﬁ ndings inevitably blur the hard, deci-
sive mathematical truths whose force shook the world. Hence scholars who 

196    WHAT GALILEO SAW
comb his discoveries for psychological or metaphysical sources are always in 
danger of forgetting what matters, as if a falling apple could explain the law 
of gravity. From this perspective alchemy, despite its tantalizing cryptograms, 
is just another apple. Whether or not Newton’s deep hermetic studies pre-
disposed him to imagine gravity as action-at-a-distance, like Robert Fludd’s 
beloved weapon-salve, the breakthrough he achieved depended on meticu-
lous calculations, not magical thinking.  72  Meanwhile he preserved his secrets. 
That reticence was not the least of the traits that built his legend of genius. 
 The vision of Newton as a superior being was ﬁ rst designed, in fact, by 
Newton himself. The humility he expressed late in his life, most of all in the 
moving words he is supposed to have spoken a little before his death—“I 
don’t know what I may seem to the world, but, as to myself, I seem to have 
been only like a boy playing on the sea shore, and diverting myself in now and 
then ﬁ nding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the 
great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me”  73  —carries the weight 
of someone whom the world has gloriﬁ ed. Indeed, the words are literally 
worthy of Jesus. In Milton’s  Paradise Regained  (1671), Satan had tempted the 
Son of God to become a natural philosopher. “Be famous then / By wisdom; 
as thy Empire must extend, / So let extend thy mind o’er all the world, / In 
knowledge, all things in it comprehend.” The cunning rhyme (“extend” and 
“comprehend”) converts the blank verse into an epigram ﬁ t for a braggart 
or devil. But the Saviour contemptuously rejects such studies: a scholar who 
“to his reading brings not / A spirit and judgment equal or superior, / (And 
what he brings, what needs he elsewhere seek) / Uncertain and unsettl’d still 
remains, / Deep verst in books and shallow in himself, / Crude or intoxi-
cate, collecting toys, / And triﬂ es for choice matters, worth a spunge; / As 
Children gathering pibles on the shore.”  74  Newton—at least in his supposed 
self-portrait—agrees with that verdict. Although he may not have known he 
was echoing Milton, he consciously adopts the tone of someone who views 
the world and its concerns from a vast height, where even his own fame and 
acknowledged greatness shrink to triﬂ es.  75  Like Jesus, he understands that a 
superior spirit need not seek approval from others. Hence his magniﬁ cent 
gesture of self-deprecation paradoxically raises him up. Lesser philosophers 
may think they have navigated the great ocean of truth, but Newton resists 
that temptation, because his deﬁ nition of truth encompasses more. Com-
petitive humility is the last resort of a saint, and of this natural philosopher 
as well. 
 Nor did he like to share his toys and triﬂ es. The legend that Newton drew 
around himself left little room for other people. Whether through pride or 
paranoia, he cultivated a vigilant solitude in which his mind could spring, 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    197
unencumbered, from one discovery to another. Such intellectual conﬁ dence 
hardly required the sort of recognition that most scholars crave, through pub-
lication or social circles—though Newton certainly did want to be admired. 
But the attention that he attracted also carried a threat, a potential for dis-
agreement and confrontation. Newton shrank from such scenes. In the for-
tress of his own certainty, he protected an insatiable ambition: not only that 
he be right, but that he be infallible. That was too much for anyone, even a 
genius, to ask. On those occasions when someone caught him in a mistake, 
therefore, he tended to ignore and sometimes tamper with the evidence. 
An infallible being endures no rivals. What Newton wants most, when his 
authority is challenged by Hooke, Leibniz, or Flamsteed, is not so much to 
vanquish them as to make them disappear—somehow to erase all traces of 
their existence. Even those who assisted or enabled his publications were 
seldom acknowledged in print. One mind alone ﬁ lls the vacuum of his great 
works, which suspend the reader in an intense, demanding series of proposi-
tions, far from any hubbub of conversation.  76  
 Thus Newton removes himself effectively from mortals and their con-
cerns. In his last days, as he spun the stories about the apple tree and the boy 
on the shore, he was already disseminating pictures to be remembered.  77  Pos-
terity would cherish these icons: the dreamer alone on the lawn, the seeker 
alone by the sea. They consecrate an eternal and cloistered thinker, distanced 
not only from any scandal or any intruder but also from the civic-minded 
master of the Mint and president of the Royal Society.  78  The great man has 
no peers. In this way, even when he was immersed in London life, Newton 
preserved a reputation as a being incomparable and singular. It was, one 
might say, a stroke of genius. 
 Indeed, the deﬁ nition of genius would never fully recover hereafter from 
Newton’s example. In his own time, one tribute after another insisted that he 
had reached the ne plus ultra, the ultimate human link of the Great Chain of 
Being—or perhaps gone beyond it. Once that might have been a sign of pre-
sumption or fearful ambition; no pride could be worse than that of a mortal 
who wanted to rival God. Yet Newton, unlike Milton’s Eve, had always 
seemed obedient to codes of behavior.  79  Whatever he thought in private, 
he never touched the apple, at least in print. Still more, in the long run he 
doomed and dissolved the Great Chain of Being. A cosmos of visible pleni-
tude, held together by uninterrupted, unbroken links without any gap, could 
not survive the new universe of vast empty spaces, a void with tiny particles 
that gravity invisibly held in place. In these terms genius broke the scale on 
which all human beings had been measured. The hierarchy of wit, ascending 
by degrees from fools below to prodigies on high according to each person’s 

198    WHAT GALILEO SAW
special gifts, now yielded to a sense of “general powers.” Newton’s mind 
comprehended more than those of other people; like gravity, it somehow 
permeated everything and guaranteed an undivided whole whose presence 
governed every individual part. The size of what his powers of thought had 
grasped suggested an order of intellectual magnitude, a sum of mind almost 
too large to calculate.  80  He did not have a genius; he was genius itself. 
 When “genius” was remade in Newton’s image, however, it subtly altered 
notions of what human beings are and what they can achieve. A god had 
always haunted the word, the spirit or daimon that inhabited men and gov-
erned their lives. But under the new mathematical dispensation those spirits 
were soon disenchanted and their powers dispersed among natural human 
talents. Socrates’s daimon told him what not to do; it could foretell the 
future.  81  But Newton’s consuming interest in prophecy, which occupied a 
great portion of his life, depended on endless calculations, as if the power 
of mathematics could ﬁ x the chronology of future times as well as of the 
past.  82  His genius was demonstrable and quantitative, a solid mass of intellect. 
Eventually its quotient represented what human beings could aspire to, not 
because gods possessed them but because their minds could build a universe 
that summed up the best of their thoughts. 
 Such genius also rearranged the history of science. Newton, like Kepler 
and others before him, believed that his laws had unveiled a small part of the 
mind of God, whose divine geometry opened a window into creation. Thus 
natural philosophy, as he told Bentley, aimed at “such Principles as might 
work with considering men for the beleife of a Deity,” until it came to the 
very ﬁ rst Cause.  83  This doctrine supported a strong faith in progress, or a 
providential history of science that drew philosophy ever nearer to God. 
Yet there were also unintended consequences. Many historians have argued 
that Newton’s mathematical principles contributed, against his will, to the 
rise of Deism and a secular worldview.  84  Blake’s vision of him as a geometer 
god, effectively dethroning the one true God revealed by imagination, may 
be fantastic, but it expresses both the awe and the regret that many people 
have felt at the triumph of science. Even Pope’s admiring epitaph might 
provoke similar qualms, since the light beaming from Newton, God’s sur-
rogate, illuminates Nature, not God. As an emblem of progress, the genius 
represents the power of the human mind to bend the universe to its con-
ceptions, inventing new technologies and articles of faith of which religion 
never dreamed. A history of science based on such giant ﬁ gures was bound 
to celebrate their individual achievements, whatever their creeds. Such histo-
ries of progress leap from mind to mind without assuming any ﬁ rst or ﬁ nal 
Cause. They venerate the human mind itself. 

THE CENTURY OF GENIUS (2)    199
 That way of writing history remains both credible and popular. Yet Bacon 
had foreseen the idolatry to which it pays tribute. The singularity of New-
ton’s mental voyaging involves him deeply with the Idols of the Cave, the 
personal outlook that shapes the world as if it were a version of his own 
mathematical preoccupations. And the gloriﬁ cation of Newton reﬂ ects the 
Idols of the Tribe, when people conﬁ rm that man is the measure of things 
by granting authority to one of their own. A less idolatrous view of genius 
might return to the various, distinctive talents parceled out unequally among 
human beings. “One  Science  only will one  Genius  ﬁ t,” according to Pope’s 
conventional wisdom; “So  vast is Art, so  narrow Human Wit.”  85  No one 
owns a permanent or all-embracing system of the world; Newton’s gift for 
mathematics did not extend to the arts. Moreover, no mental power, however 
great, should be regarded as unique or superhuman. Blake, who thought that 
everyone carried an inborn spark of poetic genius, detested authorities who 
sought to impose their own sort of genius on others. A complete human 
being would delight in a “fourfold vision,” four distinct ways of seeing and 
making the world, and those who saw things in only one way had locked 
themselves in mind-forged manacles. “May God us keep / From Single 
vision & Newton’s sleep.”  86  
 A different vision of Newton’s genius might also revise some traditional 
stories about the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. Instead of reaching a peak with the 
giant who mounted highest, the progress of science would undergo many 
ups and downs, without any clear destination. Thus heroic visions of genius 
might break into different kinds and skills, or even into Hooke’s lucky hits 
of chance. Or alternatively, a historian might imagine science as the product 
of any number of minds collaborating and entering into one another over 
time, until together they formed a single great mind or genius compared 
to which even the mind of Newton might seem no more than a drop in 
the ocean of truth. Shelley exalts that One Mind as an irresistible force and 
promise of reform, an idealism he associates with Plato and Bacon.  87  A his-
tory written on such principles would focus not on individual lives but on 
the collective achievements of each era. Whitehead’s “century of genius,” 
following Shelley’s lead, sometimes comes close to that expansive sense of 
genius as gathering all that is best in an age. At one extreme, a history of the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution might record a series of new methods, facts, and ideas 
detached from any particular name. The moons of Jupiter would still be 
there if Galileo had not named them, and gravity would still exert its force if 
Hooke and Newton had not lived. 
 Yet still the vision of Newton casts its spell. It represents not only a model 
of what one human mind can achieve through prolonged and powerful 

200    WHAT GALILEO SAW
thought, but also something unfathomable: the otherness of someone who, 
as Westfall ruefully confessed, can hardly be measured on the terms or scale 
of fellow creatures. No one quite knows Newton. Even if one prefers the 
livelier, more open, and all-too-human genius of Hooke, the legend of oth-
erworldly genius that Newton created cannot be annulled; it is so strong that 
generations to come will want to attack it. The wonder, the uncanniness, 
of such a genius corresponds to a moment when everything that people 
thought they knew about the world proved subject to change. Without it, 
the Scientiﬁ c Revolution would be hard to imagine. 

201
  Chapter 10 
 Rejecting the Starry Message 
 At ﬁ rst most people did not see what Galileo saw. On the nights of April 
24 and 25, 1610, a month after  Sidereus Nuncius  revealed the wonderful little 
stars around Jupiter, he tried to show them to a distinguished group of 
observers in Bologna; but when they looked through his spyglass, very few 
found those wonders. Giovanni Antonio Magini, the eminent astronomer 
who hosted the gathering, told Galileo that his instrument had deceived him. 
And even after Galileo received Kepler’s enthusiastic testimonial, a few days 
later, many skeptics continued to resist the starry messenger and his message. 
Some tried and failed to duplicate his results; others, on principle, would 
not look at all. A host of correspondents, and more than one book, denied 
that Jupiter had or could have moons.  1  Galileo was exasperated. “What do 
you think of the chief philosophers of our gymnasium,” he wrote Kepler, 
“who, with the stubbornness of a viper, did not want to see the planets, the 
Moon, or the telescope, even though I offered them the opportunity a thou-
sand times?” Enchanted by old texts and indifferent to nature, “they closed 
their eyes against the light of truth.”  2  Eventually the eyes of almost all those 
doubters would open to the truth of Galileo’s moons. Yet he never reconciled 
himself to the blindness of people who did not see—or think—as he did. 
 Revolution and Its Discontents 
 The Skeptical Challenge 

202    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Why were observers unable to see those moons? First of all, most lacked 
the skill; quite literally, they could not focus. Though Galileo had learned how 
to use his new, improved spyglass, stopped down to sharpen the image, its ﬁ eld 
of view was narrow and easily blurred by the slightest motion or breath.  3  
Even experienced watchers of the sky, like Magini, were hard to instruct in 
the proper technique. And others, who made their own instruments and 
improvised their own ways of observing, perceived very different heavens. 
Galileo may well have been too quick to accuse those who doubted him of 
not wanting to see what in fact remained indistinct or invisible to them. But 
he was not wrong in suspecting many of malice. Magini, a rival astronomer, 
had reasons and motives for disbelief; and the ambitious young Martin Hor-
key, also present on that disastrous night in Bologna, later defamed Galileo 
so viciously that Magini himself was outraged.  4  Furthermore, the bold and 
proud dedication of  Sidereus Nuncius , which did not hesitate to name the new 
Medicean stars as well as to proclaim the glory of their discovery, seemed 
calculated to inﬂ ame competitors. Galileo’s remarkable self-assurance refused 
to admit the least hint of doubt about the accuracy of his instrument or the 
immortal signiﬁ cance of what he had found. Addressed speciﬁ cally to “phi-
losophers, and astronomers,” the title page seems to throw down a gauntlet 
and dare them to disagree. No wonder that so many took up the challenge. 
 Another obstacle also blocked these “great and exceedingly wonderful 
sights”:  5  in order to see them, many observers would ﬁ rst have to change 
their minds. The moons of Jupiter were unexpected. They ﬁ t no established 
cosmic theory or system, so that astronomers found no place for them and 
astrologers and theologians brushed them off. Nor was it only followers of 
Aristotle and Ptolemy, custodians of immutable celestial spheres, who knew 
that anything new in the heavens could not possibly be there. Many Coper-
nicans were troubled too. When Kepler ﬁ rst heard about Galileo’s discoveries, 
he was gripped by fear that these unknown “planets” would overthrow his 
own cherished cosmic scheme, whose tidy Platonic solids could accommo-
date no more than six planets. Reading  Sidereus Nuncius  restored him to life; 
the little moons would not affect his theory—or his astrology.  6  Hence he 
could accept Galileo’s observations sight unseen. If things had not worked 
out so well, perhaps Kepler would have taken a much harder look. A less 
friendly reader, Francesco Sizzi, could hardly wait to prove that Galileo’s 
additions to the solar system could not conceivably be real, no matter what 
the illusive spyglass seemed to show. In fact Sizzi himself, in the presence of 
Galileo, had gazed through the spyglass and seen a naked Jupiter, without one 
satellite. There is no reason to question his report. If the moons were invis-
ible to him, the wasted effort need not be blamed exclusively on his poor 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    203
eyes, his obstinacy, or a defective instrument. Instead one might consider his 
theological  outlook . As students of vision have repeatedly demonstrated, see-
ing something involves the mind as well as the eyes; we perceive only what 
we are prepared or accustomed to see. In this respect the moons of Jupiter 
lay outside Sizzi’s horizon of expectations.  7  Many years would have to pass 
before most people were prepared to share Galileo’s vision. 
 To share that vision, however, meant more than perceiving a few addi-
tional features of the sky. It also required a sense of excitement, a thrill like 
Galileo’s own in recognizing that something essential had changed and that 
the universe would never again be the same. So long as the issue was nothing 
more than seeing the mottled face of the moon, the tiny stars that sprinkled 
the Milky War, or Jupiter’s moons, Galileo knew that time was on his side. By 
1615, when a “Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina” spoke out strongly 
for his views, he assumed that the facts could no longer be in dispute: “The 
passage of time has revealed to everyone the truths that I previously set forth.” 
Only the “reckless passion” of his enemies, kindled by personal animus as 
well as theological fallacies, could account for their perverse refusal to accept 
what he had discovered.  8  Yet almost as grating were the indifferent onlook-
ers who remained unpersuaded that what he had found was  important . Even 
the marvelous spyglass—or “telescope,” as it was christened to honor him 
in 1611—failed to impress them. Many confused it with the miraculous 
mirrors, supposed to make very distant objects seem near, that had been bla-
zoned in ancient times and that Giovanni Battista della Porta claimed to have 
perfected in  Natural Magic  (1589).  9  Such prototypes familiarized the spyglass 
and reduced it to one more  perspicillum , a device that was known to produce 
surprising spectacles and deceits. Perhaps the new moons were also clever 
illusions. In any case this sensational news might prove to be nothing new. 
 The critics were wrong, of course. But the attitude they represented, a 
disinclination to suspend disbelief about any radical innovation, withstood 
heroic efforts to change entrenched ways of thinking or seeing. One popu-
lar and inﬂ uential work, Polydore Vergil’s  On Discovery  (1499), attributed 
virtually every signiﬁ cant invention and discovery to the ancients; and not 
even revelations of the New World, which Polydore managed to disregard, 
could attract his attention or loosen his hold on readers. Historically, such 
obeisance toward the past sets the stage for the protracted, well-publicized 
quarrel between ancients and moderns. Since ultimately the moderns car-
ried the day, they—and Galileo—had the last word. In retrospect, those who 
could not or would not admit the importance of the Copernican Revolu-
tion have been condemned to a historical graveyard. Yet not all the skeptics 
can be dismissed as willfully ignorant dogmatists. Some of them deserve 

204    WHAT GALILEO SAW
a place among the most intelligent and learned thinkers of their time: for 
example, Michel de Montaigne, John Donne, and Robert Burton. And their 
skepticism expresses much more than a reactionary response to the threat of 
progress. In many ways, one might argue, it exposes a critical tension within 
the new philosophy itself. 
 Under the Sun 
 Consider Montaigne. His credentials as a Renaissance man and corrosive 
skeptic can hardly be questioned. The widespread inﬂ uence of his writ-
ings helped shake dogmatic certainties about truth and error or right and 
wrong.  10  The Old World could learn from the New, he thought; his famous 
essay “Of Cannibals” concludes that Europeans surpass “barbarians” in cru-
elty, since “there is more barbarity in eating a man alive than in eating him 
dead.”  11  From one point of view, this open-mindedness might mark Mon-
taigne as a quintessential modern. Yet the same ways of thinking ward off 
any claim that “novelties and reforms” in natural philosophy have established 
trustworthy knowledge. In the “Apology for Raymond Sebond” (1575–80), 
the motto “What do I know?” subverts Copernicus as well as Aristotle. “The 
sky and the stars have been moving for three thousand years; everybody had 
so believed” until a few ancients maintained that it was the earth that moved; 
“and in our day Copernicus has grounded this doctrine so well that he uses 
it very systematically for all astronomical deductions. What are we to get 
out of that, unless that we should not bother which of the two is so? And 
who knows whether a third opinion, a thousand years from now, will not 
overthrow the preceding two?”  12  A similar line of reasoning cautions against 
adhering to any new doctrine, whether in medicine, physics, geometry, or 
even geography. If a great man like Ptolemy mistook the limits of the world, 
why should we trust any present-day map? 
 A two-edged sword, this unsheathed skepticism cuts in opposite direc-
tions. Montaigne’s undoing of “Natural Theology,” which he himself had 
translated from Sebond’s Latin, has often been taken as a rebuke to those 
who track God in the world, but it might better serve to undermine any ﬁ rm 
belief in the stability of nature or nature’s laws.  13  Pyrrhonism and relativism 
leave no knowledge safely standing. Aristotle had once represented the truth 
about nature on which the church and the philosopher could depend, and 
later corrections of Aristotle might try to replace his certainties with proofs 
that would last forever; but in the long run these too would fall. The same 
arguments that cast a cold eye on ancient authority could look down on mod-
ern mathematics. Moreover, ancient authors were Montaigne’s companions. 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    205
Steeped in classical literature, he effortlessly combines his own experience 
with the wisdom he culls from their texts. Above all, that wisdom teaches 
him the folly of human presumption.  14  New theories may be entertaining, 
but no well-read person ought to be startled or captivated by them. Despite 
his suspicion of Aristotle’s aura as “the god of scholastic knowledge,” Mon-
taigne does approve one maxim: “Aristotle attributes wondering at nothing 
to greatness of soul.”  15  Superior souls refuse to be impressed by prodigies 
such as the “great and exceedingly wonderful sights” that Galileo would 
reveal to the next generation; and many followers of Montaigne made their 
indifference to new discoveries a point of pride. Yet the skepticism that was 
to shape the minds of such thinkers as Marin Mersenne and Pierre Gassendi 
also drove them to search for a “science without metaphysics”—provisional 
knowledge that did not claim to explain the ﬁ nal nature of things.  16  Philoso-
phers, they thought, should be content with useful, pragmatic, more-or-less 
adequate systems of the world; they did not need to know ultimate truths in 
order to reason rightly about the phenomena grasped or composed by the 
senses. In this way Montaigne anticipated both those who attacked the new 
philosophy and those who saved it. 
 Montaigne did not live to see the telescope, which he might well have 
scoffed at as one more deceit of the senses.  17  But Donne was thoroughly 
acquainted with the new philosophy and with Galileo, “who of late hath 
summoned the other worlds, the Stars to come neerer to him, and give him 
an account of themselves.”  18  Donne’s imagination roamed freely among the 
odd and intriguing facts and fancies disseminated by traditional authorities 
as well as by present-day philosophers; all these could furnish materials for 
lively conceits. As a young man, he moved in advanced intellectual circles. He 
may have known Thomas Harriot, the English polymath who corresponded 
with Kepler and sketched the moon, from his own telescopic sightings, before 
Galileo had made it his own.  19  By 1610, Donne was certainly familiar with 
the leading English contribution to the new philosophy, Gilbert’s  De Magnete 
(1600), which extended its study of the loadstone into the motions of the 
earth and the cosmos.  20  Soon after Kepler’s  De Stella Nova  (1606) appeared, 
Donne read it and absorbed its lesson that new stars or nova had exploded the 
ossiﬁ ed Aristotelian dogma of unalterable heavens.  21  Thus he was prepared 
for Galileo’s message;  Ignatius His Conclave , written when  Sidereus Nuncius  was 
still hot off the press, refers to its discoveries with clever and knowing asides. 
Clearly these new ﬁ ndings fascinate Donne. Yet he is also a skeptic. Although 
he does not deny the truth of what those starry-eyed philosophers have seen, 
their enthusiasm fails to infect him. Galileo’s glasses may have brought the 
moon near, but wit and irony, Donne’s own lenses, keep it at a distance. 

206    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 Many habits of mind conspire against allegiance to the new philosophy 
as Donne perceives it. First, as a poet, he relishes difﬁ cult puzzles far more 
than hard facts. What interests him most about the reorganized modern 
heavens seems to be the bewildering theological questions they pose.  Ignatius 
His Conclave  begins with an out-of-body experience or  Extasie  in which the 
author wanders through the cosmos “to survey and reckon all the roomes, 
and all the volumes of the heavens, and to comprehend the situation, the 
dimensions, the nature, the people, and the policy, both of the swimming 
Ilands, the  Planets , and of all those which are ﬁ xed in the ﬁ rmament.”  22  
Galileo and Kepler map out this voyage. But it is not so much the idea of 
space travel that stirs Donne’s imagination as the idea that other planets are 
peopled.  23  Bruno’s heretical speculations had raised the problem of whether 
Christ had brought salvation to those planets as well as to Earth—a danger-
ous line of thought. Yet such problems do not provoke Donne to ﬁ nd a 
solution but rather tempt him to conjure up a metaphor or a poem. When 
the new philosophy clashes with biblical orthodoxy, the cognitive dissonance 
challenges him to wrap his mind around both: 
 At the round earths imagin’d corners, blow 
 Your trumpets, Angells, and arise, arise 
 From death, you numberlesse inﬁ nities 
 Of soules, and to your scattred bodies goe.  24  
 Impossibilities attract this poet. The contradiction between the four-cornered 
earth in Revelation and the round earth of modern times, as well as the mind-
bending perplexity of imagining how souls will reunite with bits and pieces 
of bodies at the Last Judgment, serve only to whet his appetite for paradox 
and poems. Nor does the actual roundness of the earth, or any knowledge of 
atomism, impede his metaphysical faith. 
 Moreover, he reduces cosmic discoveries to human dimensions. That is 
a second reason why he receives the new philosophy without conviction. 
All things in nature had been created by God, as scripture and science then 
agreed, to serve their master, man. In Donne’s poetic and religious universe, 
the wonders revealed by Galileo and others mean little or nothing unless they 
cast light on the personal issues of love and salvation. The lovers of “The 
Canonization” extract “the whole worlds soule,” so that the glasses of their 
eyes reﬂ ect the whole world; the lovers of “The Sunne Rising” tell the sun 
that since the world is contracted in them, he fulﬁ lls his duty by warming 
them alone. Again and again the microcosm of the self engulfs the mac-
rocosm. Such megalomania should not be dismissed as a playful rhetorical 
ﬂ ourish. It touches the gravest issues for Donne, the gulf between salvation 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    207
and damnation, the harrowing personal fate in the face of which the physi-
cal nature of the universe shrinks to insigniﬁ cance. Each soul weighs more 
than Jupiter’s moons.  25  
 When Donne confronts the new philosophy directly and at length, in 
 The First Anniversarie: An Anatomy of the World  (1611), the current state of 
the heavens and earth is notoriously encapsulated in the death of one young 
woman. Coherence vanishes; the ﬁ rmament is torn; the sun is lost; the earth 
encroaches on the sky. It is as if Elizabeth Drury’s death, like the sin of Adam 
and Eve or the cruciﬁ xion of Christ, had power to shock the whole system 
of things and corrupt all nature. One might accuse Donne of a category mis-
take; if the poem had been written about the Virgin Mary, Ben Jonson told 
him, “it had been something.”  26  But human perceptions hold the universe 
captive in these dark days, according to Donne: “We spur, we raine the stars, 
and in their race / They’re diversly content t’obey our pace.” When he refers 
to Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler, he regularly accuses them of thinking 
that they are in charge of the heavens, not merely observers; in  Ignatius His 
Conclave , Copernicus claims that he “was a Soule to the Earth, and gave it 
motion.”  27  Delusions like these convict the new philosophers of self-satisﬁ ed 
pride. Yet they also reﬂ ect the poet’s own imagination, where the world often 
seems no more than the fate of one person writ large. 
 What Elizabeth Drury represents most of all, however, is primal inno-
cence, a spirit and body as free from sin as those of her counterpart, the 
immaculate Virgin.  An Anatomy of the World  exposes a universal decay, 
precipitated by the Fall and gathering force through the centuries until 
Donne’s time, which has apparently lost its only surviving model of a pure 
soul. This inexorable, unstoppable decay provides the ultimate reason for 
Donne’s skepticism about developments in natural philosophy. Each new 
discovery, which to Kepler had promised an age of awe-inspiring progress 
and to Bacon the possibility of recovering the golden age of mankind, con-
ﬁ rms Donne’s diagnosis of a world in its last throes. “Proportion,” a word 
repeated nine times in the poem, has been disﬁ gured or discarded, and all 
colors have faded. “The opinion of the Worlds Decay” was hardly original 
then. It was so generally received, according to George Hakewill, that his 
crusade against it amounted to a declaration of war against the learned and 
vulgar alike.  28  But Donne goes further: the advancement of learning itself, 
in a headlong reversal, turns into the best proof of decay. Whatever the 
mind of a new philosopher touches loses its life and shrivels to dust; spy-
glasses reconnoiter the heavens only to bring them down. Donne’s skepti-
cism heightens his interest in innovations precisely because they accelerate 
decay and draw the Last Judgment closer. 

208    WHAT GALILEO SAW
 In the meantime the new philosophy also provides a rich source of amuse-
ment.  The Anatomy of Melancholy , Robert Burton’s masterpiece, delves into 
each byway of learning in pursuit of distraction. Burton, ﬁ ve years younger 
than Donne but far more settled in life—elected a student (or fellow) of 
Christ Church, Oxford, in 1599, he stayed there until his death in 1640—
enjoys being a skeptic. “A Digression of the Ayre,” included in the ﬁ rst 
edition of 1621, kept growing through four more editions during Burton’s 
life and one more after his death, but he never made up his mind about the 
astronomical theories he recounted. Instead he asks endless questions while 
remarking that scholars differ on every point. All is in ﬂ ux. 
 There are that observe new motions of the Heavens, new Starres,  palan-
tia sydera  [wandering stars], Comets, Clouds, call them what you will, 
like those  Medecean ,  Burbonian ,  Austrian planets lately detected, which 
doe not decay, but come and goe, rise higher and lower, hide and shew 
themselves amongst the ﬁ xed starres, amongst the Planets, above and 
beneath the Moon, at set times, now nearer, now farther off, together, 
asunder; as he that playes upon a Sagbut by pulling it up and downe 
alters his tones and tunes, do they their stations and places, though to 
us undiscerned; and from these motions, proceed (as they conceave) 
diverse alterations.  29  
 The long run-on sentence itself enacts the ﬁ tful movements it describes. At 
the same time, observers seem mixed with the things they observe. Who are 
“they” in the last two clauses? Are stargazers compared to a sackbut player 
who slides like a trombonist from note to note, or do the stars themselves 
alter their tunes and places? The far-fetched simile, involving the player as 
well as the music played, keeps both possibilities open. “Undiscerned” sug-
gests that the stars are “they,” whose stations are independent of any viewer; 
but “they” who conceive in the parenthesis are clearly stargazers. Burton 
will not commit himself to any ﬁ rm decision about whether the new phi-
losophy describes real motions in the heavens or perturbations in the minds 
of observers. At play in the ﬁ elds of multiple texts, he brings the sky down 
to his study.  30  
 Nevertheless, astronomical controversies do serve a useful practical pur-
pose for Burton: by running riot in his head, they chase his blues away.  The 
Anatomy of Melancholy  delivers no ﬁ nal cure for the morbid fancies and fears 
that are its great subject, but it is full of remedies and placebos. Democritus 
Junior, whose name appears on the title page in lieu of Burton’s, appreciates 
madness; he specializes in laughing at folly. The new philosophers wonder-
fully play his game. Building castles in air, astronomers exemplify not only 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    209
the obsessions of melancholy but also its pleasures.  31  Burton comprehends 
both. “A Digression of the Ayre” smiles at the many learned men who have 
invented and defended “absurd and ridiculous” things like the extravagant 
epicycles that they maintain to be real orbs: “For who is so mad to thinke, 
that there should be so many circles, like subordinate wheeles in a clock, all 
impenetrable and hard, as they faine, adde and subtract at their pleasure.”  32  
Once again the theorist mocked by Burton mistakes his own castles in the air 
for God’s creation, as if a human hand had framed the clockwork universe. 
The epicycle is a perfect instance of the philosophy that entertains Democri-
tus Junior. It exists only in the dreams of unworldly scholars, whose eccentric 
and wandering thoughts spin out cosmic gyrations in their own image. 
 Yet Burton himself is susceptible to wild ﬂ ights of fancy. The notion of 
a plurality of worlds enchants him, especially since he expects the inhabit-
ants of those worlds to share the madness of earth. Copernicus, Gilbert, 
and Kepler regard the earth as a kind of moon, according to Democritus 
Junior, and “if it bee so, that the Earth is a Moone, then are we also giddy, 
vertigenous, and lunaticke within this sublunarie Maze.”  33  At the end of “A 
Digression of the Ayre,” Burton launches into a torrent of speculations about 
the puzzles raised by new maps of the heavens. Both ancients and moderns 
lend him wings. Lucian’s  True History , along with Campanella’s  Apologia pro 
Galileo (1622) and Kepler’s  Somnium (1634), turned Burton’s thoughts to 
the moon, where voyagers might ﬁ nd outlandish worlds, and he lived long 
enough to read John Wilkins’s  Discovery of a New World  (1638).  34  But the 
“Digression” daringly pushes its space probe into transcendent realms of 
mystery. Pagans and other overreachers have wanted to “soare higher yet, 
and see what God himselfe doth.” Where did he bide before the world was 
made? What are the limits of his power, and “why lets hee all things be done 
by fortune & chance?” Burton’s daring ﬁ nally frightens himself. “But hoo? 
I am now gone quite out of sight, I am almost giddy with roving about: I 
could have ranged farther yet; but I am an infant, and not able to dive into 
these profundities, or sound these depths, not able to understand, much lesse 
to discusse.”  35  He folds his wings at last and comes down to earth. 
 In fact he had never committed himself to the emerging cosmology of 
his time. The conjectures that stuff the “Digression” draw on famous liv-
ing astronomers but also on cranks as well as a great many ancients. Burton 
superintends a vast republic of print in which any opinion in any era often 
seems just as welcome as any other. In the last analysis he leaves decisions 
about the heavens to “stronger wits” and the future. Signiﬁ cantly, when 
Burton does admit a weak version of progress—“The day will perhaps come 
when things that are now obscure will be made plain through the labors of 

210    WHAT GALILEO SAW
succeeding ages”—he borrows Seneca’s Latin to make the point.  36  Ancient 
philosophers may well have understood more than moderns do. God alone 
knows the truth, and “when God sees his time, hee will reveale these mys-
teries to mortall men, and shew that to some few at last, which hee hath 
concealed so long.” Meanwhile knowledge ebbs and ﬂ ows like the sea, or 
like the heavens themselves. A good skeptic shufﬂ es his texts and moves on. 
In the end the “Digression” stoops to timeless wisdom. “When you have all 
done, as the Preacher concluded,  Nihil est sub sole novum .”  37  There is nothing 
new under the sun. 
 Beholding the Nothing That Is 
 “Revolution,” for Burton, still means that the world goes in endless circles; 
the idea that his age had brought about a “Scientiﬁ c Revolution” would 
not have made sense to him.  38  A similar doubt persists today. “There was 
no such thing as the Scientiﬁ c Revolution,” Steven Shapin’s popular survey 
begins, “and this is a book about it.”  39  A paradox and a commonplace meet 
in that sentence. For more than two decades, historians of science have been 
expressing misgivings about “the Scientiﬁ c Revolution” as a phrase and a 
“thing.” Yet a great many of them continue to write about it. The term seems 
to retain its interest and even a certain glamour despite some determined 
efforts to hollow it out. Thus books intended to instruct the general public 
still adopt not only the phrase, as Shapin does, but also the assumptions on 
which it was based and which once seemed so ﬁ rm:  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution 
and the Origins of Modern Science , and  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution and the Founda-
tions of Modern Science .  40  Both titles acknowledge the inﬂ uence of Herbert 
Butterﬁ eld’s  Origins of Modern Science, 1300–1800  (1949), a text that is often 
credited, or blamed, with popularizing the view that the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion changed the world forever, “since it changed the character of men’s 
habitual mental operations even in the conduct of the non-material sciences, 
while transforming the whole diagram of the physical universe and the very 
texture of human life itself.”  41  Many readers still hold fast to that view, which 
seems as self-evident to them as the Preacher’s wisdom once seemed to Bur-
ton. In the wake of Butterﬁ eld, the history of science took on the task of 
imagining, or demonstrating, what happened in the Scientiﬁ c Revolution.  42  
Yet later historians have often been inclined to imagine something else: that 
the revolution might never have happened, or that there was no such thing. 
 What accounts for such a dramatic reversal? To some extent the war has 
been fought over words. The meanings of “scientiﬁ c” and “revolution” during 
the seventeenth century had little to do with the meanings and connotations 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    211
attached to them two centuries later, so that their fusion compounds an anach-
ronism. Even Butterﬁ eld, on the ﬁ rst page of his book, referred to “the so-called 
‘scientiﬁ c revolution’,” a catchall term that he extended back to 1300. Moreover, 
the verbal anachronism sows the seeds of a more profound misunderstanding, 
the notion that early thinkers shared the interests and disciplinary concerns 
of future “scientists.” Historians who focus on the Scientiﬁ c Revolution are 
always tempted to regard it as a harbinger of things to come, as if the value of 
work in any ﬁ eld depended entirely on what some later generation made 
of it.  43  Such attitudes distort the complicated processes—the mixture of 
inherited assumptions, limited data, and the practices and instruments of the 
workshop—that shape the way that nature might be conceived at any given 
time. Still worse, whatever fails to ﬁ t the retrospective modern narrative is 
apt to be discarded. Notoriously, the alchemical and theological studies on 
which Newton spent most of his life remained invisible for centuries and 
continue to smudge the clear line of his cosmic achievements. When Betty 
Jo Dobbs, an expert on alchemy, considered the stock use of Newton as 
Final Cause or synthesis of  the  Scientiﬁ c Revolution, she saw a teleologi-
cal story that falsiﬁ ed the historical record as well as Newton’s own valiant 
efforts to stem the tide of irreligion. The time had come, she thought, to 
cast aside Butterﬁ eld’s model.  44  
 A host of other arguments support that attack. One major problem is that 
the Scientiﬁ c Revolution has proved so difﬁ cult to date. In Butterﬁ eld’s reck-
oning it sprawled through 500 years, which seems a very leisurely course for 
any dramatic and drastic change. Perhaps the phrase represents no particular 
historical moment but rather a continuous, glacial shift in ways of thinking, 
going back at least to the Greeks and forward to our own times and beyond, 
as human beings redeﬁ ne their world.  45  Nor is the  what of the Revolution 
any easier to categorize than the  when . So long as “science” refers to ﬁ elds 
where the Book of Nature, as Galileo insisted, “is written in the language of 
mathematics”—ﬁ elds such as physics, astronomy, and mechanics—a relatively 
coherent story can be told. But other ﬁ elds—such as chemistry, biology, and 
medicine—seem to be written in other languages, and their stories obey 
very different patterns and sequences of historical change. From this point 
of view, the capitalized “Scientiﬁ c” imposes a rigid uniformity on hetero-
geneous methods and operations. Moreover, it ﬂ aunts a twentieth-century 
bias, when all sorts of ﬁ elds seemed to be ranked on a scale topped by phys-
ics, the “paradigm science” (a hierarchy that lately has been undermined by 
rising life sciences and the ascension of Darwin). And one more argument 
conﬁ rms the vulnerability of the old model. A number of scholars now pro-
pose that the decisive turn or era of change arrived well after the seventeenth 

212    WHAT GALILEO SAW
century: “The period 1760–1848 is a much more convincing place to locate 
the invention of science.” Older historians, on this view, had dwelt on a 
revolution  within science, which they conceived as a timeless, transcendent 
enterprise; but a better understanding of science would embed it in culture, 
as something “distinct and speciﬁ c to our own region of time and space”—a 
product of the Age of Revolutions.  46  Both literally and metaphorically, the 
energy and electricity that power modern science played no part in the Sci-
entiﬁ c Revolution. 
 None of these arguments would be so persuasive, however, without the 
context in which they arose: a general skepticism toward Grand Theories or 
claims about the central role of science in history. Just as Galileo had to con-
vince the skeptics of his time that his discoveries were not only real but also 
 exciting , so twentieth-century historians of science tried to convey not only 
that something had happened in the seventeenth century but also that that 
something was supremely important. When Alexandre Koyré deﬁ ned the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution in 1939, he declared that, by dissolving the cosmos and 
geometrizing space, it had brought about a radically new ontology—not 
merely particular insights, but a decisive “mutation” in human thought.  47  
For better or worse, Galileo and his successors had transformed the very 
nature of things. A similar excitement pervades Butterﬁ eld’s book, which 
begins by afﬁ rming its own importance: “Considering the part played by 
the sciences in the story of our Western civilisation, it is hardly possible 
to doubt the importance which the history of science will sooner or later 
acquire both in its own right and as the bridge which has been so long 
needed between the Arts and the Sciences.” For a few decades that vast 
ambition seemed reasonable. The prestige of science, fortiﬁ ed by the stirring 
word “revolution,” offered an opportunity for a young ﬁ eld, the history of 
science, to win a place among the disciplines and perhaps to revolutionize 
education. Thomas Kuhn’s inﬂ uential, best-selling books,  The Copernican 
Revolution (1957) and  The Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions  (1962), implicitly 
and explicitly adopt Butterﬁ eld’s program.  48  In academic circles, and far 
beyond them, the impact of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution supplied a template, 
or “paradigm,” for other historical narratives. The term “paradigm shift” 
soon came to be used so routinely, in the arts as well as the sciences, as to 
lose almost any particular meaning.  49  Yet even the controversies that swirled 
around this way of writing history conﬁ rmed the excitement that it pro-
voked. 
 Long before the end of the century, that sense of excitement had faded. 
Whether or not there was such a thing as the Scientiﬁ c Revolution, it was no 
longer the single story that gave the history of science its interest and reason 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    213
for being. Shapin begins his account with a few pages that explain why the 
encrusted, traditional views of Koyré and Butterﬁ eld will not be repeated 
by him; and Peter Dear’s well-informed, up-to-date survey,  Revolutionizing 
the Sciences , ignores them and Kuhn.  50  From a scholarly standpoint, Galileo’s 
discoveries now seemed less an earthshaking convulsion than one intriguing 
event in a process with no deﬁ nitive beginning or end. Nor did historians 
of science have any exclusive right to describe that process. As the heroic 
story of intellectual giants and shattered worldviews lost some of its magic, 
it yielded to a sociological emphasis on practices, institutions, and networks. 
Kuhn’s own work came to look, through a rearview mirror, like a transition 
from grand narratives of change to a focus on the communities and situations 
that make change possible.  51  By the end of the 1980s, not only sociologists 
but also many historians and other scholars who studied science became asso-
ciated with “constructivism”: an outlook “which regards scientiﬁ c knowl-
edge primarily as a human product, made with locally situated cultural and 
material resources, rather than as simply the revelation of a pre-given order of 
nature.”  52  This cast a different light on revolutions. If Galileo pictured him-
self as someone who had risen above the usual sphere of mortals, he made a 
mistake; nor had Newton uniquely revealed the truth about nature. Each of 
them depended on tools made by other people. That was the human condi-
tion that each occasionally denied to his cost. 
 Yet no new story has had power to replace the luster of the Scientiﬁ c 
Revolution. While scholarship has ﬂ ourished in two academic ﬁ elds, science 
studies and the history of science, the teeming and sometimes compelling 
micronarratives they have produced still fail to cohere.  53  Constructivism, 
which once seemed so fresh, has run up against its own limits. One problem 
may be its adverbs: in the deﬁ nition quoted above, “primarily” and “simply” 
function to impugn any truth about nature that might not be “locally” situ-
ated. Constructivists insist that science is “never pure”;  54  the knowledge that 
it gives vent to is made or constructed rather than found, and hardly “the 
revelation of a pre-given order of nature.” That phrase itself suggests a high-
minded, timeless ideal, as if science purported to be a kind of religion. Sci-
entists tend to resent the scare quotes of constructivist language, which hints 
that they are naive or self-deceived in their solid respect for facts and things 
and in their devotion to truth. Contemporary enemies of science can all too 
easily appropriate the argument that scientiﬁ c views are merely relative and 
contingent.  55  Moreover, that argument has undermined the bridges between 
past and present, the sustained and continuous narratives on which historical 
thinking once depended. Not many years ago, in 1998, the “constructivist’s 
bible” ended with a sentence full of promise: “Rather than regretting the 

214    WHAT GALILEO SAW
passing of the comforting old stories of scientiﬁ c progress, we should there-
fore embrace with eagerness the prospect of entirely new ones.”  56  But today 
the prospect seems dimmer. Only one major story now rivals Butterﬁ eld’s 
fable of progress: the story of impending cataclysmic decline, in which scien-
tiﬁ c knowledge brings on or fails to prevent the end of the world. 
 More modestly, any storyteller might ﬁ nd it almost impossible to imagine 
“no such thing.” The Scientiﬁ c Revolution obstinately holds its place as a 
term and an index of concrete achievements, and scholars may write it off 
but cannot unwrite it. Even skeptics succumb to its gravitational pull. Shapin’s 
account of the no such thing he calls the Scientiﬁ c Revolution deplores the 
“fables and myths” that prop up its claim to fame, but he too has a story to 
tell: a “cultural legacy,” connecting the past to the present, that has identiﬁ ed 
the modern natural sciences with “the  depersonalization of nature” and the 
production of “ disinterested ” knowledge.  57  Despite all efforts to take account 
of contrary narratives, a conventional stress on mathematics and mechanism 
provides the central thread of his story, and in the absence of “progress,” the 
notion of “inheritance” or “legacy” supplies a satisfying denouement. Per-
haps that narrative is less exciting, in a postmodern way, than the triumph of 
enlightenment that once inspired many historians and their readers.  58  More 
recent accounts have featured a host of subplots, above all the seventeenth-
century controversies that pitted natural philosophers against one another 
and often left the issues unresolved. Hobbes’s disputes with Descartes, with 
Boyle, and with John Wallis, for instance, might each set the stage for a 
lively scene in a play.  59  Yet the overriding drama, which still draws audiences, 
involves a struggle against authorities who denied that there might be some-
thing new under the sun, and who refused to admit that things could change. 
Galileo’s persecution by the church continues to grip the imagination; even 
scholars who question the rights and wrongs of the case contribute to the 
sense of its importance. Hence the story of revolution has a life of its own, 
not least when skeptics try to keep from thinking about it. 
 Nevertheless, imagining no such thing can be a useful way to enter the 
minds of many seventeenth-century thinkers. A proliferation of doubts, a 
skepticism that goes all the way down, a capacity to view the natural world 
and the world of knowledge as empty of anything certain or solid, all clear 
the ground for revolutions to come. “I realized that it was necessary, once 
in the course of my life, to demolish everything completely and start again 
right from the foundations if I wanted to establish anything at all in the sci-
ences that was stable and likely to last.”  60  Descartes notoriously excelled at 
imagining no such thing. Although in the end he did not doubt the existence 
of God, reality itself might be questioned: “How do I know that he has not 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    215
brought it about that there is no earth, no sky, no extended thing, no shape, 
no size, no place, while at the same time ensuring that all these things appear 
to me to exist just as they do now?” These doubts proved too extreme for 
Descartes himself, who dispelled them with the thought that “God is not a 
deceiver.”  61  Yet other philosophers and naturalists also began by questioning 
not only received opinion but even the reliability of everyday experiences. 
 Nullius in Verba , the famous motto of the Royal Society, often extends its 
suspicions to  res as well as to  verba , envisioning no such “thing” as well as no 
adequate “words.” When Bacon imagined an ideal student of natural history, 
he thought of a child who had yet to master his ABCs, and whose lack of 
experience perfectly matched his invaluable lack of erudition.  62  Nothing 
served better than a clean slate to prepare the advancement of learning. 
 Hence skepticism about the existence of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution responds 
to a skepticism at the heart of the revolution itself. When Galileo, Bacon, 
Descartes, and Newton and their colleagues became the revered authorities 
on whose work modern science was built, they also became the targets for 
doubts like their own. Similarly, the idea of progress devours those who set 
it in motion. Kepler imagines a distant time when people will ﬁ nally com-
prehend his laws, but not a time when the cosmos he knew will be absorbed 
into something he could not imagine. In this respect the methods and dreams 
of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution extinguished themselves. Most of the answers 
provided then lasted only a while, but the spirit of questioning would go on 
forever. There is no end to this inquisition; it tears a hole in any attempt to 
close the book on seventeenth-century thinkers. A series of questions both 
constitute the Scientiﬁ c Revolution and reduce it to nothing. Yet somehow 
it still seems important. 
 Imagining Something Important 
 What makes something seem important? At the beginning of his  Apologie 
for Poetrie , Sir Philip Sidney remembers the lesson he learned from an ardent 
horseman, “that self-love is better than any gilding to make that seem gor-
geous wherein ourselves are parties.”  63  He proceeds, therefore, to aggrandize 
his own “unelected vocation,” and argues that poetry surpasses all other 
sciences and arts, because the poet alone makes things even better “than 
Nature bringeth forth.” This witty special pleading drives home a serious 
point. As Bacon would soon contend in  The Advancement of Learning , the time 
had come to reexamine traditional kinds and classiﬁ cations of knowledge, 
and those who had mastered a discipline had a stake in advancing its cause. 
Sidney was not the only humanist who thought that poetry deserved a very 

216    WHAT GALILEO SAW
high place in the ranks of learning—perhaps above philosophy and history.  64  
Bacon acknowledged that view. But his own self-love steered him in another 
direction, toward a great instauration or new organon of learning, in which 
natural history would become the foundation of a true and active philoso-
phy.  65  This was work ﬁ t for a king; and nothing could be more important. 
 That sense of importance pervades the minds that made the new phi-
losophy. One might attribute it to the inﬂ ated self-regard of individuals: 
to Tycho’s identiﬁ cation with Atlas, who held up the world; or to Bacon’s 
grandeur as a temporary head of state; or to Galileo’s arrogant combination of 
vision and blindness; or to Descartes’s conﬁ dence that one man, thinking for 
himself, could accomplish more than all the schools; or even to Robert Fludd’s 
belief that he knew everything worth knowing. But self-regard alone cannot 
explain the growing importance ascribed to natural philosophy and to its 
masters. The hierarchy of sciences was shifting too, in a long transition that 
would eventually deny the name of “scientist” to most scholars. In medieval 
universities, the curriculum had been headed by the quadrivium of math-
ematical arts—arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music—whose prestige 
depended largely on their serene uninvolvement with any practical reality. 
Mathematics, Aristotle maintained, had nothing to do with Plato’s pure, 
supremely real Forms; instead it manipulated artiﬁ cial, unchanging abstrac-
tions.  66  Hence Scholastic students of music learned harmonics, not music 
making, and students of astronomy learned to calculate heavenly ciphers, not 
to watch ﬂ uctuations in the sky. Profoundly unworldly, the mathematical arts 
bore witness to ﬁ xed and permanent rules: to numbers and their relations, to 
the movements of spotless, obedient spheres, to ﬁ ne-tuned music that no one 
could hear. None of these, unlike the existence of mere mortals, was subject 
to fortune.  67  But seventeenth-century mathematics represented a changing 
world as well as heavenly revolutions. Its claim to importance depended on 
ﬁ nding new things and actively unsettling the bedrock of what the schools 
once thought they knew. 
 Common knowledge itself, moreover, came under attack. The princi-
ples of natural philosophy, according to Aristotle, were based on experiences 
familiar and accessible to everyone. Stones fell because they were heavy; 
that was apparent to all. But Galileo had another idea, and he was willing 
not only to test it but also to found a new science on it. Whether or not 
he did drop two balls—one heavy, one light—from the Leaning Tower of 
Pisa to prove that they would fall at the same rate, by 1604 he had stated a 
law that refuted what Aristotle and everyone knew and prepared the way 
for modern mechanics and physics: bodies fall with a uniformly accelerated 
motion.  68  Common opinion was wrong, and it had been refuted by the 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    217
counterintuitive thoughts and actions of one individual. Eventually Galileo 
would conﬁ rm his ﬁ ndings in his last work, the dialogues  Two New Sciences 
(1638), whose publisher marveled at the wonderful properties of motion, 
“none of which has been previously discovered or demonstrated by anyone”; 
this subject was “among the most important in nature.”  69  Here two kinds 
of importance come together: the central place of motion in theories of 
nature, “an age-old subject,” veers into something new through the insights 
of Galileo, who prides himself on having “opened a gateway and a road to 
a large and excellent science of which these labors of ours shall be the ele-
ments, [a science] into which minds more piercing than mine shall penetrate 
to recesses still deeper.”  70  Motion makes the universe go round, but Galileo 
alone has transﬁ gured it into a science.  71  Important subjects create and are 
created by important persons. 
 In some respects this way of making knowledge seems oddly personal. 
Most seventeenth-century philosophers denounced the old Scholastic 
emphasis on disputation, which reduced the principles of nature to debating 
points that a skilled sophist could turn to advantage, whatever the truth might 
be. Cooperation, not competition, would lead to the true advancement of 
learning, according to Bacon. Moreover, the growing ascendancy of mathe-
matics, as in Galileo’s studies of motion, provided explanations of phenomena 
that were quite independent of any human agent. People could no longer 
read signs of themselves in nature, and subjectivity had to be purged from 
credible observations.  72  At the same time, however, cults of personality sprang 
up around some central ﬁ gures. Not many philosophers commanded the 
mathematical skills required for the new understandings of nature, and those 
who did, like Newton, seemed superior beings. The burst of new experi-
ments also served to magnify some individuals. In theory a good experiment 
demonstrated a general truth and anyone could repeat it. But in practice most 
crucial experiments were performed in private—if they were performed at 
all—by virtuosi who wanted to test or prove some favorite thesis. Unlike 
the common experiences that once had veriﬁ ed what was known, these 
were singular events. Unsympathetic rivals often denied them. Had Galileo 
rolled balls down inclined planes? Had Pascal’s brother-in-law ascended the 
Puy-de-Dôme to measure the height of mercury in a Torricellian tube? Had 
Boyle’s air pump evacuated all the air and produced a vacuum? Had New-
ton’s prisms settled questions about the true nature of light? Not everyone 
accepted the facts, let alone the hypotheses they were designed to prove.  73  
Yet even those doubts reinforced the sense that such experiments were  
exceptional —bold and far-reaching, perhaps unique as well. Eventually both 
the events and the people who contrived them assumed a legendary importance. 

218    WHAT GALILEO SAW
If nature had been depersonalized, the persons who had solved some of its 
puzzles seemed more vivid than ever. 
 Nor were those natural philosophers unaware of their own importance. The 
new philosophy encouraged its practitioners to think that they could make the 
most of nature or even conquer it. As interest shifted from knowing  why  to 
knowing  how , from causes to effects, the practical consequences of learning 
became apparent. If the world itself was a machine, then those who under-
stood it could build better machines. In that case power would accrue to them. 
Bacon’s utopia, the New Atlantis, is formally a monarchy, but the power behind 
the throne is Salomon’s House, a scientiﬁ c institute—“The Noblest Founda-
tion, (as wee thinke), that ever was upon the Earth; And the Lanthorne of this 
Kingdome”—which is devoted to “the Enlarging of the bounds of  Humane 
Empire , to the Effecting of all Things possible.”  74  Already a man of learning 
could dream of a time when he might command an empire that embraced all 
human beings, and when monarchs would bow to him and his kind. At any 
rate philosophers felt authorized to imagine new ways of doing things and to 
devise their own methods to carry them through. “It is probably fair to say that 
every one of the new philosophical scientists thought he was a unique genius, 
despite many seemingly humble protestations to the contrary.”  75  In this respect 
Newton’s ostentatious modesty sets just the right tone: “I don’t know what I 
may seem to the world” comes easily off the tongue of someone who knows 
quite well how much the world values his pretty pebbles and shells. He had 
written, after all, his very own  System of the World ; both socially and celestially, 
the world revolved around him. 
 The public also fell under the spell of importance. As the fame of Gali-
leo, Bacon, Descartes, and Newton spread through Europe and beyond, a 
rich mythology enhanced their achievements, fostered by poets as well as by 
would-be heirs. These great men were  founders , and those who came after 
acknowledged their debts. To some extent the leading natural philosophers 
had helped to create their own aura; intentionally or not, they managed to 
stand where the limelight would fall. Galileo’s own writings directed Marino 
and Viviani in their efforts to inscribe him in the sky, and Bacon taught 
Cowley how to picture him as a new Moses, a guide to the Promised Land. 
Thus the modern view that credits such founding fathers with having for-
ever altered perceptions of nature was already well established in the late 
seventeenth century. A clear track leads from Viviani’s hagiography to the 
extravagant popular claims of our own time: “God created the world. Gali-
leo re-created it.”  76  This dramatic sense of importance may well be the most 
lasting legacy of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. Any number of books continue 
to tell the story of irreversible change, when a handful of inquiring minds 

REVOLUTION AND ITS DISCONTENTS    219
dismantled old authorities and old ways of thinking and brought what we 
now call science into being. Sometimes this story represents heroic and desir-
able progress; sometimes, a fatal rupture that has emptied life of its meaning. 
But the story itself endures. 
 Few narratives have had more power to account for modern history as 
if, in imagination, it made sense. From Faust to Frankenstein, the questing 
natural philosopher exempliﬁ es not only what people fear but also what they 
want, the knowledge that carries them on a swift current into the future. 
Ostensibly these cautionary tales denounce the hubris of mad scientists, but 
a secret message is tucked inside: the lure of technological advances that 
might improve everyone’s life. Faust invented the printing press (according to 
Heinrich Heine)  77  and paved the way to the World Wide Web; the children 
of Frankenstein have evolved into test-tube babies. Meanwhile the legendary 
status of early protoscientists grows. The spacecraft Galileo has explored the 
moons of Jupiter, and relics of Galileo rival those of saints.  78  The Kepler satel-
lite, launched by NASA in 2009, has telescopically probed the Milky Way for 
signs of planets that might support extraterrestrial life. The names themselves 
speak of exploration and wonder, and those associations cannot be erased. 
Even more than the discovery of the New World, the discovery of a new uni-
verse and a new sense of human possibilities is a story so well established that 
those who challenge it can also take pride in doing something important. 
The meaning of modernity and the ways that modern people deﬁ ne them-
selves depend on the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. If it did not exist—and perhaps 
it did not—its place would have to be ﬁ lled by another story. 


221
  Appendix 1 
 Galileo 
 The Fable of Sound 
From Il saggiatore ( The Assayer, 1623)
 Through long experience I have observed—such is the human condition in 
regard to intellectual things—that the less someone understands and knows, 
so much the more insistently he wants to speak up; and that, on the contrary, 
the multitude of things someone recognizes and understands makes him 
slower and more hesitant to pontiﬁ cate about something new. Once upon a 
time, in a quite solitary place, a man was born blessed by nature with a very 
perspicacious brain and an extraordinary curiosity; and for his amusement 
he raised several birds, enthralled by their song, and with the greatest wonder 
he used to observe the lovely artfulness with which at will they would trans-
form the very air they breathed into various songs, and all surpassingly sweet. 
One night near his house he happened to hear a delicate sound, nor could 
he imagine what it could be other than some little bird, which he set out to 
catch; and coming to a road found a young shepherd who, blowing into a 
piece of perforated wood and moving his ﬁ ngers over the wood, sometimes 
closing and sometimes opening some of the holes there, drew out from it 
those different voices, similar to those of a bird but produced in a very differ-
ent way. Amazed, and moved by his natural curiosity, he gave the shepherd a 
calf to get that pipe; and retiring into himself, and considering that if he had 
not happened to come across that person, he would never have learned that 

222    APPENDIX 1
in nature there were two ways of forming sweet voices and songs, he decided 
to leave home, deeming he might be able to meet with some other adventure. 
And chancing the following day to pass near a little hovel, he heard a simi-
lar voice resounding within; and to establish whether it was a pipe or just a 
blackbird, he went inside, and found a boy occupied with a bow that he held 
in his right hand, sawing some sinews stretched over a concave piece of wood, 
and with his left supporting the instrument and moving his ﬁ ngers over it, 
and without any breath thus drawing from it different and very sweet voices. 
Now what was his amazement! judge that if you partake of the insight and 
curiosity of such a person; who, seeing that he had happened on two new 
and totally unexpected ways of forming voice and song, began to believe that 
still others might have the power to exist in nature. But what was his wonder 
when, entering a certain temple, he looked behind the door to see what had 
made a sound, and realized that the sound came out of the hinges and cou-
plings when the door opened? Another time, driven by curiosity, he entered 
an inn and, expecting to see someone who with a bow lightly touched the 
strings of a violin, saw someone rubbing the tip of a ﬁ nger on the rim of a 
glass, prying out of it an extremely sweet sound. But when later he came to 
observe that wasps, mosquitoes, and ﬂ ies did not, like his birds earlier, form 
voices with intermittent breath, but with very fast beating of wings sent out 
an incessant sound, how much his astonishment grew! so much as to shrink 
the conviction he had that he knew how sound is produced. Nor could all 
his experience up to then have been enough to make him comprehend or 
believe that crickets, although they do not ﬂ y, have the power, not through 
breath but through shaking their wings, to send forth such sweet and sono-
rous trills. But when he came to believe that it could scarcely be possible that 
there could be other manners of forming voices—after having observed, in 
addition to the ways already recounted, so many more organs, bugles, ﬁ fes, 
stringed instruments, of so many sorts, as far as that little iron reed that, sus-
pended from the teeth, in a strange way makes from the cavity of the mouth 
a resonance throughout the body, and from the breath a vehicle of sound—
when, I say, he believed that he had seen everything, he found himself more 
than ever turned back to ignorance and amazement when he happened to 
take in his hand a cicada, and neither by shutting its mouth nor by stopping 
its wings could he the least diminish its very high shrieks, nor could he see 
its scales or any other part move; until ﬁ nally he lifted up the casing of its 
chest and saw underneath some hard but thin cartilages, and believing that 
the noise derived from shaking these, he was reduced to break them to make 
them quiet. Yet all was done in vain, until, pushing the needle further in, 
transﬁ xing the creature, he took away, along with its voice, its life; so that even 

GALILEO: THE FABLE OF SOUND    223
then he could not ascertain if the song issued from there. Whereupon he 
was reduced to such difﬁ dence about his knowledge, that when called on to 
tell how sounds are generated, he responded generously that he knew some 
ways, but that he ﬁ rmly held that there could be a hundred others unknown 
and unforeseeable. 


225
  Appendix 2 
 Descartes’s Three Dreams 
 From Adrien Baillet,  La vie de M. Descartes , Book 2, Chapter 1 
 The search that he wanted to make for these means [of ﬁ nding Truth] threw 
his mind into violent turmoil, augmented more and more by a continual 
exertion which he held to, without allowing walks or company to make a 
diversion. This exhausted him so much that ﬁ re took over his brain, so that 
he fell into a kind of enthusiasm, which in such circumstances weighed on 
his mind, already depressed, so that it put him in a state to receive the impres-
sions of dreams & of visions. 
 He tells us that on the tenth of November sixteen hundred nineteen, 
having gone to bed  completely ﬁ lled by this enthusiasm , & completely occu-
pied by the thought of  having found that very day the foundations of the won-
derful science , he had three consecutive dreams in a single night, which he 
imagined could only have come from on high. After he had fallen asleep, 
his imagination felt struck by the appearance of some phantoms who pre-
sented themselves to him, & who terriﬁ ed him so much that, believing he 
was walking through the streets, he was compelled to shift to the left side 
in order to be able to advance to the place where he wished to go, because 
he felt a great weakness on the right side which he could not support. 
Ashamed to walk that way, he made an effort to straighten himself; but he 
felt an impetuous wind that carried him away in a kind of whirlwind that 

226    APPENDIX 2
made him take three or four turns on his left foot. Nor was it only this that 
terriﬁ ed him. The difﬁ culty he had in dragging himself along made him 
believe he was falling at every step, until having caught sight of a college 
open on his path, he went inside to ﬁ nd a refuge, & a remedy for what ailed 
him. He tried to reach the Church of the college, where his ﬁ rst thought 
was to go and offer his prayer; but becoming aware that he had passed a 
man of his acquaintance without greeting him, he wanted to turn back his 
steps to show him courtesy, & he was violently pushed away by the wind 
that blew against the Church. At the same time he saw in the middle of 
the college yard another person who called him by name in civil & oblig-
ing terms; and told him that if he wanted to go ﬁ nd Monsieur N. he had 
something to give him. M. Desc. imagined that it was a melon that had 
been brought from some foreign land. But what surprised him still more 
was to see that those who, together with that person, gathered around him 
for conversation were straight & ﬁ rm on their feet; though he was always 
stooped & staggering on the same ground; & that the wind that had nearly 
turned him upside down so many times had greatly diminished. He awoke 
imagining this, & he felt at the same time a real pain, which made him fear 
that this was the doing of some evil genius who had wanted to lead him 
astray. Immediately he turned onto his right side, because it had been on 
the left that he had gone to sleep, & that he had had his dream. He made 
a prayer to God to ask to be protected from the evil effect of his dream, & 
to be preserved from all the misfortunes that might menace him in punish-
ment for his sins, which he recognized might be grievous enough to bring 
down heaven’s thunderbolts on his head; though he had hitherto led a life 
irreproachable enough in the eyes of men. 
 In this situation he fell asleep again after an interval of nearly two hours 
spent in assorted thoughts about the good & evil things of this world. 
There came to him immediately a new dream in which he believed he 
heard a sharp & shattering noise that he took for a clap of thunder. The 
fright it induced awoke him at the same moment; & having opened his 
eyes, he caught sight of a great many sparks of ﬁ re scattered through the 
room. The thing had already happened often to him at other times; & it 
was not very extraordinary, when waking in the middle of the night, for 
him to have enough sparks in his eyes to let him glimpse the objects clos-
est to him. But on this last occasion he wanted to have recourse to reasons 
taken from Philosophy; & he drew conclusions favorable to his mind, after 
having observed, in alternately opening, then closing, his eyes, the quality 
of the sorts of things that appeared to him. Thus his fear dissipated, & he 
went to sleep again in a rather deep calm. 

DESCARTES’S THREE DREAMS    227
 A moment afterward he had a third dream, which contained nothing so 
terrible as the ﬁ rst two. In this last he found a book on his table, without 
knowing who had put it there. He opened it, & seeing that it was a  Diction-
ary , he was carried away with hope that it might be very useful to him. In 
the same instant he came upon another book under his hand which was just 
as new to him, nor did he know from where it had come. He found that it 
was a collection of Poems by various Authors, entitled  Corpus Poetarum  &c. 
Curious, he wanted to read something in it; & opening the book he came 
upon the line  Quod vitæ sectabor iter?  &c. [Which way of life shall I follow?] 
At the same moment he became aware of a man he did not know, who 
presented him with a piece of Verse, beginning with  Est & Non  [It is & it is 
Not], & which he commended to him as an excellent piece. M. Descartes 
told him that he knew what it was, & that this piece was among the Idylls of 
Ausonius to be found in the big Collection of Poets that was on the table. 
He wanted to show it himself to this man; & started to ﬂ ip through the book, 
whose order & arrangement he prided himself on knowing perfectly. While 
he looked for the right place, the man asked him where he had gotten this 
book, & M. Descartes replied that he could not say how he had come to have 
it; but that a moment before he had handled yet another that had just disap-
peared, without his knowing who had brought it to him, or who had taken 
it back from him. He had not ﬁ nished, when he again saw the book appear 
at the other end of the table. But he found that this  Dictionary  was no longer 
so complete as when he had seen it the ﬁ rst time. Meanwhile he came upon 
the Poems of Ausonius in the Collection of Poets that he ﬂ ipped through; & 
not being able to ﬁ nd the piece that began with  Est & Non , he told this man 
that he knew one by the same poet still ﬁ ner than that, & that it began 
with  Quod vitæ sectabor iter?  The person entreated him to show it to him; & 
M. Descartes set himself the task of looking for it, when he came upon vari-
ous little portraits engraved in copper-plate; this prompted him to say that 
the book was very ﬁ ne, but it was not the same edition as the one he knew. 
He was at this point, when the books & the man disappeared, & were erased 
from his imagination, without yet waking him. What he found especially 
remarkable is that, doubting whether what he had happened to see was dream 
or vision, he not only decided while sleeping that it was a dream, but he 
also pursued the interpretation before breaking his slumber. He judged that 
the  Dictionary  could not be called anything else than all the Sciences gath-
ered together; & that the Collection of Poems entitled the  Corpus Poetarum 
marked in particular & in a more distinct way Philosophy & Wisdom joined 
together. For he did not believe that one should be so very astonished to 
see that Poets, even those who only make triﬂ es, brim with precepts more 

228    APPENDIX 2
weighty, more sensible, & better expressed than those found in the writings 
of Philosophers. He attributed this marvel to the divinity of Enthusiasm, & 
to the force of Imagination, which brings forth the seeds of wisdom (which 
are present in the mind of all men like sparks of ﬁ re in ﬂ ints) with much 
more readiness & much more brilliance too, than Reason could bring about 
in Philosophers. M. Descartes continued to interpret his dream in slumber, 
surmising that the piece of verse on the uncertainty of what kind of life one 
ought to choose, & which begins with  Quod vitæ sectabor iter , marked the 
good counsel of a wise person, or even Moral Theology. On that, doubtful 
whether he was dreaming or musing, he awoke without emotion; & con-
tinued, with open eyes, the interpretation of his dream on the same train of 
thought. By the Poets gathered in the Collection he understood Revelation & 
Enthusiasm, by which he did not despair of seeing himself favored. By the 
piece of Verse  Est & Non , which is the Yes & No of Pythagoras, he appre-
hended Truth & Falsity in human knowledge, & the profane sciences. Seeing 
that the application of all these things turned out so well to his taste, he was 
bold enough to persuade himself, that it was the Spirit of Truth which had 
wanted to open to him the treasures of all the sciences by this dream. And as 
what was left to explain was no more than the little portraits in copper-plate 
that he had found in the second book, he looked for no further explanation 
after the visit that an Italian Painter paid him early the following day. 
 This last dream, which had nothing in it that was not very sweet & very 
agreeable, indicated the future, according to him; & it was only what ought 
to happen to him in the rest of his life. But he took the two preceding for 
menacing warnings touching his past life, which could not have been as inno-
cent before God as before men. And he believed that this was the reason for 
the terror & fright that had accompanied those two dreams. The melon that 
someone wanted to make a present to him in the ﬁ rst dream signiﬁ ed, he 
would say, the charms of solitude, but presented through purely human solici-
tations. The wind that pushed him toward the Church of the college, when 
his right side was bad, was nothing other than the evil Genius that was trying 
to ﬂ ing him by force into a place where his intention was to go voluntarily. 
That is why God did not permit him to advance farther, & let him be carried 
away even to a holy place by a Spirit that He had not sent; though he was 
ﬁ rmly persuaded that it had been the Spirit of God that had made him take 
the ﬁ rst steps toward that Church. The fright with which he had been struck 
in the second dream marked, to his mind, his inward monitor [ syndérêse ], that 
is to say, the remorse of conscience touching the sins that he might have com-
mitted during the course of his life up to then. The clap of thunder he heard 
was the signal of the Spirit of truth descending on him to possess him. 

DESCARTES’S THREE DREAMS    229
 This last imagination surely owes something to Enthusiasm; & it might 
incline us readily to believe that M. Descartes had been drinking that evening 
before going to bed. As a matter of fact this was Saint Martin’s Eve, on the 
evening of which it was customary to go on a spree in the place where he was, 
as in France. But he assures us that he had passed the evening & all the day 
in full sobriety, and that for three whole months he had not drunk wine. He 
adds that the Genius that had excited in him the enthusiasm with which he 
had felt his brain seething for several days had predicted these dreams to him 
before he put himself to bed, & that the human mind had no part in them. 


231
 Notes
 Preface
  1. As Edgerton points out, Galileo can hardly have made “such careful pen-and-
wash studies” while standing at the telescope “in a cold, windswept tower.” He must 
have ﬁ nished his pictures in the studio, “relying on remembered impressions, verbal 
notes, and hasty diagrams”;  Heritage of Giotto’s Geometry , 240. 
 2. Benson, “What Galileo Saw.” 
  3. “Che son li segni bui/ di questo corpo”;  Paradiso , 2.49–50. In the  Convito (ca. 
1305) Dante had attributed the spots to rare and dense matter, which Beatrice now 
rebuts by explaining that the spots “alloy” the virtue or divine radiance of the stars 
with the virtue of the moon. 
  4. Edgerton stresses Galileo’s inﬂ uence as a “perspectivist” in  The Mirror, the 
Window, and the Telescope , 151–67. 
  5. I. B. Cohen,  Birth of a New Physics , 188–89. Cohen elaborated his argument 
in “What Galileo Saw.” 
  6. The reception of  Sidereus Nuncius is discussed in chapters 2 and 10 below. 
  7.  Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger , 39. Kepler’s response to 
Galileo is analyzed in chapter 3 below. 
  8. See Pormann and Savage-Smith,  Medieval Islamic Medicine . 
  9. “The eye, in Galileo’s new radical instrumentalism, is no longer the main 
point of reference for visual phenomena. . . .  The eye  mediates and distorts; the instru-
ment provides the standard of trustworthy perception against which the eye should 
be judged”; Gal and Chen-Morris,  Baroque Science , 93. 
 10. “Proverbs of Hell,” Plate 8,  The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (1790). 
 11. In  Theory of the Heaven  ( Thema Cœli , 1612) Bacon refers to Galileo’s discovery 
of “small wandering stars” near Jupiter but declares, “I do not mean to be bound 
by these things”; nor to afﬁ rm that planets orbit the sun;  Oxford Francis Bacon  6:193 
(hereafter cited as  OFB ). Rees concludes that according to Bacon “The Copernican 
theory offended common sense”; “Bacon’s Speculative Philosophy,” 124. 
1 . Introducing a Revolution
  1. “On the morning of C HRISTS Nativity,” lines 181–88. In a letter to Charles 
Diodati, Milton wrote that “we are engaged in singing the heavenly birth of the King 
of Peace . . . and the gods of heathen eld suddenly ﬂ eeing to their endangered fanes. 
This is the gift which we have presented to Christ’s natal day. On that very morning, 
at daybreak, it was ﬁ rst conceived”;  Life Records of John Milton, 1:213. 

232    NOTES TO PAGES 3–4
 2.  Areopagitica , 24. 
  3. See Revard, “Apollo and Christ.” 
 4. “The story of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution retains its hold, even on those schol-
ars who have contributed to its unraveling. . . . It is a genuine mythology, which 
means it expresses in condensed and sometimes emblematic form themes too deep 
to be unsettled by mere facts, however plentiful and persuasive”; Park and Daston, 
“Introduction,” 15. See chapter 10 below for a discussion of skeptical challenges to 
this “mythology.” 
 5. H. Floris Cohen,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution , provides a rich analysis of critical per-
spectives, as well as a spirited defense of the term and its importance. More recently, 
Cohen has challenged the argument of Park and Daston that “the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion” was not a coherent enterprise but is rather “a myth about the inevitable rise to 
global domination of the West” (“The Age of the New,” 15) by attempting to ﬁ nd 
coherent and comprehensive answers to the questions “ whence the onset, and whence the 
original staying power, of modern science ?”;  How Modern Science Came into the World , xv. 
Horkheimer and Adorno,  Dialectic of Enlightenment , offer a classic statement of the 
myth of domination; Butterﬁ eld,  Origins of Modern Science , offers a classic statement 
of the importance of science in creating modernity. Huff,  Intellectual Curiosity , argues 
that the Western European impact of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution far exceeds its inﬂ u-
ence on other civilizations. 
 6. “The growing process of intellectualization and rationalization . . . means 
that in principle, then, we are not ruled by mysterious, unpredictable forces, but that, 
on the contrary, we can in principle  control everything by means of calculation . That 
in turn means the disenchantment of the world”; Weber, “Science as a Vocation,” 
12–13. 
 7. “Science as a Vocation”, 16. 
 8.  Novum Organum (1620), in  OFB 11:78–111. 
 9. Jones,  Ancients and Moderns , tells the story of Bacon’s success. Doubt has been 
cast on the story by many scholars, including Hunter,  Science and Society in Restoration 
England . “ Bacon-faced generation” was coined by Henry Stubbe, a ﬁ erce critic of the 
Royal Society as well as of Bacon ( Jones, 244–62). 
 10. Boyle sets out “the principles of the Mechanical Philosophy” in  The Ori-
gins of Forms and Qualities  (1666) and “About the Excellency and Grounds of the 
Mechanical Hypothesis” (1674);  Works of Robert Boyle , 5:305–35, 8:99–116. Standard 
historical accounts include Dijksterhuis,  Mechanization of the World Picture , 287–491; 
and Westfall,  Construction of Modern Science . 
 11. Mayr’s inﬂ uential book,  Authority, Liberty, and Automatic Machinery in Early 
Modern Europe , explores the clockwork metaphor. 
 12. Aristotle,  De caelo  ( On the Heavens ), 292a18–21. Bruno: “The earth moves 
and so do the other stars, according to their proper local differences, in virtue of an 
intrinsic principle which is their proper soul. Do you think (said Nundinio) that this 
soul is sensitive? Not only sensitive (replies the Nolan) but also intelligent; not only 
intelligent as ours, but perhaps even more so”;  Ash Wednesday Supper , 116. The Nolan, 
who represents Bruno himself, claims that stars possess not only the ﬁ rst two kinds of 
Aristotelian souls, vegetative and sensitive, but also  rational souls. 
 13. Letter to Herwart von Hohenburg, Feb. 10, 1605, in  Gesammelte Werke , 
15:146. See Martens,  Kepler’s Philosophy and the New Astronomy , 81–82. 

NOTES TO PAGES 4–9   233
 14. Thomas Hall traces the development of early biomechanics;  Ideas of Life and 
Matter , 1:218–29. 
 15.  Discourse on the Method  (1637), in  Philosophical Writings , 1:139–41. See chapter 
6 below. 
 16. Galileo’s earliest scientiﬁ c work,  La balancitta  ( The Little Balance , 1586), reﬁ nes 
Archimedes’s thoughts on ﬂ oating bodies, and his ﬁ rst studies of motion (ca. 1590) 
use Archimedes to refute Aristotle. On Galileo’s insistence that the universe is a book 
“written in the language of mathematics,” see chapter 2 below. 
 17. Pascal,  Pensées  L418/S680, in  Œuvres complètes , 2:676–81. Hacking analyzes 
the wager in  Emergence of Probability . 
 18. A skeptical view of this historical division is offered by Latour,   We Have Never 
Been Modern and  On the Modern Cult of the Factish Gods . 
 19.  The First Anniversarie , lines 205, 213. See chapter 10 below. 
 20. William Wordsworth, “Ode” (1807), lines 51–53, 56–57. After 1815 the title 
became “Ode: Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood.” 
 21. Kavey,  World-Building and the Early Modern Imagination , gathers a variety of 
essays on sixteenth- and seventeenth-century cosmogonies. 
 22. Aristotle deﬁ nes  phantasia  in a much-debated section of  De anima , 3.3.
428a-429a. 
 23. Park diagrams these separate faculties in “Organic Soul,” 466. Most physi-
ologists regarded imagination (or phantasy) as one of the three inner senses of the 
brain, along with common sense (which makes objects intelligible by appraising what 
the ﬁ ve outer senses perceive) and memory. 
 24. According to Sidney’s  Apology for Poetry  (ca. 1583), Nature’s “world is brazen, 
the poets only deliver a golden.” Kemp surveys the shift from imitative to creative 
theories of art in “From ‘Mimesis’ to ‘Fantasia’.” 
 25. “Of the Powers of the Imagination,” in  Complete Essays of Montaigne , 68. 
 26.  Novum Organum , in  OFB 11:83–87. In  The Advancement of Learning  (1605) 
Bacon refers to imagination as an agent or  nuncius  like Janus, whose “face towards 
Reason hath the print of Truth.” 
 27. Campbell emphasizes Bacon’s “repression” of wonder;  Wonder and Science , 
71–77. Butler argues for a more nuanced view in which Bacon supports “the pru-
dential imagination”;  Imagination and Politics , 17–55. 
 28. “Imagination,”  Pensées L44/S78, in  Œuvres complètes , 2:551–54. 
 29. Yates’s inﬂ uential studies include  Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition  and 
“Hermetic Tradition in Renaissance Science.” Debus’s popular introduction to the 
“new philosophy,”  Man and Nature in the Renaissance , stresses the impact of alchemy, 
astrology, and natural magic. 
 30. Rossi,  Francis Bacon , 13. Rossi later dissociated himself from efforts to enlist 
Bacon in “the so-called ‘hermetic tradition’ ”; “Hermeticism, Rationality, and the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution,” 247–73. 
 31. Eamon,  Science and the Secrets of Nature , documents relations between early 
science and magic. 
 32. The English word “scientist” was coined by William Whewell in 1833. 
Originally “science” meant “any art or species of knowledge,” but by the eighteenth 
century it was often opposed to “art” and conﬁ ned to “certainty grounded on 
demonstration” ( Johnson’s  Dictionary ). The modern identiﬁ cation of “science” with 

234    NOTES TO PAGES 9–13
“natural and physical sciences” became standard usage only in the late nineteenth 
century. 
 33. Kemp traces this legacy in  Seen/Unseen . 
 34.  Paradise Lost , 1.288. 
 35. Panofsky,  Galileo as a Critic,  4–5; Peterson,  Galileo’s Muse , 13. Chiari’s edition 
of Galileo’s  Scritti letterari  includes poems and a play as well as critical essays. Heilbron, 
 Galileo , translates and analyzes several poems. 
 36. See D. P. Walker,  Studies in Musical Science , 34–62. 
 37. See chapter 3 below. 
 38. The quotation comes from Descartes’s  Olympica  (1619); see appendix 2 
below. 
 39. Nicolson,  Newton Demands the Muse . 
 40.  The World , 21–25. Descartes’s complex attitudes toward dreams and imagina-
tion are analyzed in chapter 6 below. 
 41. “Salomon’s House  in the  NEW ATLANTIS was a Prophetic Scheam of the  ROYAL 
SOCIETY ”; Joseph Glanville,  Scepsis Scientiﬁ ca  (1665), quoted in the introduction to 
Sprat,  History of the Royal Society , xii. Glanvill celebrates the Royal Society as “the 
 Great Body of  Practical Philosophers” in  Plus Ultra , 148. 
 42. In  De Sapientia Veterum  ( On the Wisdom of the Ancients , 1609), Bacon interprets 
the poetic fables of the Greeks and Romans as allegories that convey “the concealed 
and secret learning of the ancients.” 
 43. Campanella to Galileo, August 5, 1632, in Galileo,  Le opere , 14:367. In the 
same month, sales of the  Dialogue were suspended; within a few months the book was 
referred to the Inquisition. Campanella had already published  A Defense of Galileo 
(1622). Garin discusses the cultural context of Galileo’s embrace of the new;  Science 
and Civic Life , 75–116. 
 44. Campanella to Galileo, January 11, 1611, in Galileo,  Le opere , 11:21–26. Cf. 
 Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo , 39. 
 45. Dick,  Plurality of Worlds , examines the long history of speculations about life 
on other worlds. Crowe,  Extraterrestrial Life Debate , 3–26, reviews the history of the 
debate, and also provides a source book. 
 46. See chapter 6 below. 
 47. Nicolson,  Voyages to the Moon  (1948), remains a standard account. Lambert, 
 Imagining the Unimaginable , analyzes the metaphorical implications of interplanetary 
voyages. 
 48. See Catherine Wilson,  Invisible World . 
 49. Dante,  Paradiso , 2.19–30; Ariosto,  Orlando Furioso , 34.68–70. 
 50. Marino,  L’Adone , canto 10. 
 51. The classic study of such effects is Seznec,  Survival of the Pagan Gods . 
 52. Duran,  Age of Milton , examines Milton’s knowledge of contemporary science. 
His efforts to steer between different cosmological models are analyzed by Svendsen, 
 Milton and Science , and Edwards,  Milton and the Natural World . 
 53.  Paradise Lost , 8.172–76. 
 54.  Paradise Lost , 2.891–94, 910. Nicholas of Cusa, Thomas Digges, and Gior-
dano Bruno had envisioned an inﬁ nite universe outside ﬁ xed systems, but not a space 
or abyss unoccupied by God. Koyré,  From the Closed World to the Inﬁ nite Universe , 
examines early notions of a cosmic void. 

NOTES TO PAGES 13–17   235
 55. Spenser,  The Faerie Queene , 3.6.36–38; Lucretius,  De rerum natura , 2.62–293. 
Schwartz argues for the “goodness” of Milton’s chaos;  Remembering and Repeating , 
8–39. 
 56.  Paradise Lost , 2.949–50. 
 57. Aristotle’s argument against the possibility of a void ( Physics , 4.6–8.213a-217b) 
concludes that a body in a void would move at inﬁ nite speed, which cannot be. 
Philosophers later resorted to many other arguments; see Grant,  Much Ado about 
Nothing . 
 58.  Principles of Philosophy , 46. In earlier works Descartes had also doubted the 
possibility of a void in nature but had refused to rule it out absolutely. His arguments 
against the vacuum insist that space, like a body, is extended, and since it has dimen-
sions, it must contain some substance. But he denies that “Nature abhors a vacuum,” 
which would impose a purpose on a mechanical effect. 
 59. Pascal,  Œuvres complètes , 1:356–57. Pascal extended his arguments in responses 
to Étienne Noël and in  Treatises on the Equilibrium of Liquids and on the Weight of the 
Air (1654; published 1663);  Œuvres complètes , 1:373–531. 
 60.  Œuvres complètes , 1:364–65; cf.  Pensées, ibid., 2:554. 
 61.  Œuvres complètes , 1:436–37. Dear examines the status and interpretation of 
this “experience” in  Discipline & Experience , 180–209. The issue was far from settled, 
however. Descartes claimed that he himself had suggested the experiment to Pascal, 
and that its results could be explained by “subtle matter” in the tube. In the 1660s, 
after Robert Boyle’s air pump apparently produced a vacuum, a similar dispute broke 
out between Boyle and Thomas Hobbes, who denied the vacuum and believed that 
he himself had posited a kind of “subtle matter” before Descartes; see Shapin and 
Schaffer,  Leviathan and the Air-Pump , 84. 
 62. “Hydrostatical Paradoxes” (1666), in  Works of Robert Boyle , 5:189–91. Koyré 
elaborates the charge in  Metaphysics and Measurement , 150–56. Cf. Kuhn,  Essential 
Tension , 44–45. 
 63.  Pensées , S680, in  Œuvres complètes , 2:679. 
 64.  Pensées , L201/S233, in  Œuvres complètes , 2:615. 
 65.  Pensées , L68/S102, in  Œuvres complètes , 2:563. 
 66. Letter to Richard Bentley, December 10, 1692,  Correspondence , 3–233–36. 
On the use of comets in renewing seas and ﬂ uids through “exhalations and vapors” 
as well as in providing “that spirit which is the smallest but most subtle and most 
excellent part of our air,” see  Principia , 926. 
 67. Brooke shows that Newton’s authority could be invoked both against and 
for Deists;  Science and Religion , 114–51. Janiak discusses the turning away of later 
“Newtonians” from Newton’s own thought;  Newton as Philosopher , 163–78. Cf. the 
legendary reply of the Newtonian Pierre-Simon Laplace when Napoleon inquired 
about the absence of a Creator in his system: “I had no need of that hypothesis.” 
 68.  Lamia (1820), pt. 2, lines 229–38. 
 69. Warton,  History of English Poetry , 2:463. “Scientiﬁ cally,” for Warton, means 
the application of “speculation and theory to the art of writing.” Studies about “the 
world we have lost” are far too many to enumerate, but see, e.g., Toulmin’s  Cosmopo-
lis , which looks back to an ideal fusion of the natural and social orders that modern 
rationalism has torn asunder. Relations between the history of poetry and natural 
history are examined in chapter 4 below. 

236    NOTES TO PAGES 17–24
 70. “Its resulting fate is that precisely the ultimate and most sublime values have 
withdrawn from public life. . . . It is no accident that our greatest art is intimate 
rather than monumental”; “Science as a Vocation,” 30. 
 71. Thomas Love Peacock’s clever essay, “The Four Ages of Poetry” (1820), 
advises poets to give up their anachronistic dreams and turn to the sciences. Shelley’s 
spirited reply,  A Defence of Poetry  (1821), insists that science and poetry are comple-
mentary or intertwined: “Reason is to Imagination as the instrument to the agent, as 
the body to the spirit, as the shadow to the substance.” 
 72. Cf. Arthur C. Clarke’s famous “third law” in  Proﬁ les of the Future : “Any 
sufﬁ ciently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.” 
 73. Edward O. Wilson pays tribute to Bacon as a hero of consilience and a “thor-
oughly modern man”;  Consilience , 6. This claim is examined by several contributors 
to Solomon and Martin,  Francis Bacon . 
 74. The phrase provides a heading in Newton’s early notebook (1661–65), Cam-
bridge University Library, MS Add. 3996, fol. 109r. Holton directs attention to 
Newton’s fantasies;  Scientiﬁ c Imagination , 268–74. 
2. What Galileo Saw 
 1.  Le opere di Galileo Galilei,  6:280–81 (my translation; for the entire fable of 
sound, see appendix 1). Stillman Drake has translated  The Assayer  and, with C. D. 
O’Malley, documents by other participants in the dispute, including Orazio Grassi, 
Mario Guiducci, and Johannes Kepler, in  The Controversy on the Comets . 
  2. See Palisca, “Was Galileo’s Father an Experimental Scientist?,” in Coelho, 
 Music and Science ; several contributors to that volume examine other aspects of Vin-
cenzio’s and Galileo’s theory and practice of music. Palisca’s many studies of Vin-
cenzio’s work include “Three Scientiﬁ c Essays by Vincenzo Galilei,” in  The Florentine 
Camerata , 152–207. Settle discusses Galileo’s pursuit of his father’s investigations; 
 Galileo’s Experimental Research , 20–28. Galileo expounds his own theory of conso-
nances at length in  Two New Sciences , 96–108. 
 3. Biagioli,  Galileo, Courtier , 301–2. 
 4.  Controversy on the Comets , 152. Riccardi, an ally of the Medicis, became Gali-
leo’s friend and later, as master of the sacred palace (or Vatican secretary), served as an 
intermediary in Galileo’s prosecution. 
 5.  Le opere , 6:200–201;  Controversy on the Comets , 153. 
 6. Redondi provides a chronology of the making and reception of  The Assayer ; 
 Galileo  Heretic , 36–51. For a fuller account of the Roman excursion, see Shea and 
Artigas,  Galileo in Rome , 94–122. 
 7. “Respicimus nigras / In Sole (quis credat?) retectas / Arte tua, Galilaee, 
labes”; from “Adulatio perniciosa,” quoted in De Santillana,  Crime of Galileo , 156. 
 8. Oregius recorded the conversation, which probably took place in 1624, in  De 
Deo Uno  (1629). The translation in the text draws on those of Finocchiaro,  Galileo 
and the Art of Reasoning , 10; and De Santillana,  Crime of Galileo , 127n, 166. 
 9. Finocchiaro traces the later history of “the Galileo affair” in  Retrying Galileo . 
 10.  Galileo on the World Systems , 306–7. 
 11. Finocchiaro,  Galileo Affair , 221. 
 12. Fantoli,  For Copernicanism and for the Church , 367, 371–72. 

NOTES TO PAGES 24–30   237
 13. Wootton reviews the scholarly debates and mounts a sustained argument that 
“Galileo was indeed a heretic” and, even worse, “disloyal and ungrateful” to Urban 
VIII;  Galileo , 266. 
 14. Duhem,  To Save the Phenomena , 104–12. Duhem approves the “truth” of 
which Urban VIII had reminded Galileo: experimental facts, even when numerous 
and precise, can never prove that a hypothesis is certain, since that would require that 
those facts had power to contradict all other imaginable hypotheses, a knowledge 
reserved to God alone. 
 15. In the acknowledgments in  Galileo Heretic , Redondi thanks in particular Car-
dinal Joseph Ratzinger, “president of the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of 
the Faith” and the future Benedict XVI. 
 16.  Controversy on the Comets , 237. 
 17.  Le opere , 6:232;  Controversy on the Comets , 183–84. 
 18. See, for instance, Shea,  Galileo’s Intellectual Revolution , 88–98. 
 19. Biagioli argues that Galileo’s topos of the book of nature “was fraught with 
unavoidable contradictions,” since the “open book of the heavens” inevitably came 
into conﬂ ict with the authority of another book, scripture;  Galileo’s Instruments of 
Credit , 220. 
 20. Drake, “Music and Philosophy,” provides a succinct account of relations 
between Galileo’s interests in physics and in music. See also Walker,  Studies in Musical 
Science ; and Peterson,  Galileo’s Muse , 149–73. 
 21.  Le opere,  6:349–50;  Controversy on the Comets , 311. Gal and Chen-Morris 
argue that Galileo intends to discredit Grassi’s reliance on parallax and other observa-
tions of “the unaided eye”;  Baroque Science , 80–97. See also Butts, “Some Tactics in 
Galileo’s Propaganda.” 
 22. “Lothario Sarsi,”  Ratio Ponderum Librae et Simbellae (Paris, 1626). 
 23. For a much fuller exposition, see Redondi,  Galileo Heretic , esp. 157–65. The 
document itself (G3) is translated on 333–35; it misrepresents the position of Galileo, 
who did not refer to anything “subjective.” Few scholars have accepted Redondi’s 
claims for its importance; see esp. Ferrone and Firpo, “From Inquisitors to Micro-
historians.” Sharratt provides a balanced view of this issue;  Galileo , 148–49. A similar 
document found in the archives of the Holy Ofﬁ ce in 1999 is analyzed by Artigas, 
Martínez, and Shea, “New Light on the Galileo Affair?” It appears to be “a direct 
sequel” to G3 (Redondi’s document) but was written many years later (1631 or 
1632). 
 24.  Le opere , 19:602. 
 25. Segre,  In the Wake of Galileo , 112–22. Bredekamp develops the theme of 
Galileo as a “new Michelangelo” in  Galilei der Künstler , 13–24. 
 26.  Le opere , 11:168. Bredekamp relates Galileo’s skill at drawing to his lunar 
observations in “Gazing Hands and Blind Spots,” and provides much more evidence 
throughout  Galilei der Künstler . 
 27. Edgerton throws light on Galileo’s knowing artistry in “Galileo, Florentine 
 disegno .” Righini concludes that Galileo was “a remarkably faithful recorder of his 
visual experiences”; “New Light on Galileo’s Lunar Observations,” 76. 
 28. Viviani, Galileo’s biographer, originated the anecdote about the Tower of 
Pisa. Lane Cooper,  Aristotle, Galileo, and the Tower of Pisa , pokes fun at the mythogra-
phers who later inﬂ ated that unsubstantiated story. 

238    NOTES TO PAGES 30–34
 29. Galileo’s early inventions are surveyed by Drake,  Galileo at Work , 1–49. 
 30. Reeves questions and amends this account in  Galileo’s Glassworks . See also 
Shea’s and Bascelli’s introduction to  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius” or “A Sidereal Mes-
sage ,” 1–18; Van Helden, “Galileo and the Telescope”; and Biagioli, “Did Galileo 
Copy the Telescope?” 
 31.  Galileo at Work , 148. Dupré contends against Drake that Galileo learned 
about pinholes “on the basis of notes of Leonardo”; “Galileo’s Telescope and Celes-
tial Light.” 
 32. See Rosen,  Naming of the Telescope . 
 33. See Edgerton,  The Mirror, the Window, and the Telescope , 151–67. 
 34. Rosen,  Naming of the Telescope,  31. Galileo’s relations with the Academy are 
explored by Freedberg in  Eye of the Lynx . 
 35. See Winkler and Van Helden, “Representing the Heavens,” 207. 
 36. Panofsky,  Galileo as a Critic of the Arts , 4–5. Bredekamp emphasizes Galileo’s 
distaste for Mannerism in literature as well as in the visual arts;  Galilei der Künstler , 
42–62. 
 37.  Sidereus Nuncius or The Sidereal Messenger , 43. Page numbers in the text refer 
to Van Helden’s translation. 
 38. Galileo’s later reﬁ nements of his observations of the satellites of Jupiter are 
discussed by Swerdlow, “Galileo’s Discoveries with the Telescope.” 
 39. Moss analyzes the rhetorical problems of Galileo’s dialectic;  Novelties in the 
Heavens , 264–67. 
 40. Kristeller discusses the  paragone  in “Moral Thought of Renaissance Humanism.” 
 41.  Galileo as a Critic of the Arts , 11. 
 42.  Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo , 23–31. Kepler’s relations with Galileo will 
be discussed in chapter 3. By 1632 Galileo—or his spokesman “Salviati”—had 
become far more cautious about comparing the moon to the earth, and particularly 
about claiming that there was water on the moon;  Galileo on the World Systems , 
108–11. 
 43. Montgomery,  The Moon and the Western Imagination , examines lunar effects in 
literature and art from antiquity through the seventeenth century. Lambert discusses 
both Ariosto’s whimsical excursion to the moon as the repository for everything 
lost on earth ( Orlando Furioso , canto 34), and the “rhetorical imagery” of Galileo’s 
pictures and descriptions of the moon. 
 44. The tradition, and Galileo’s effect on it, have been thoroughly studied by 
Reeves,  Painting the Heavens . 
 45. In “The Virgin and the Telescope,” Booth and Van Helden point out that 
the moon could also be interpreted as a sign of corruption, especially in the context 
of chapter 12 of the book of Revelation. 
 46. See Reeves,  Painting the Heavens , 29–32. 
 47. Kepler,  Optics , 263–68. 
 48. Bredekamp concludes that Galileo’s drawings of light and darkness on the 
face of the moon enabled him to recognize that he was viewing reﬂ ective surfaces 
and shadows, and thus prepared him to describe the moon’s topography;  Galilei der 
Künstler , 137–46. 
 49. Edgerton,  Heritage of Giotto’s Geometry , 245. 

NOTES TO PAGES 34–37   239
 50. Both Jan van Eyck and Leonardo da Vinci had pictured mottled details on the 
face of the moon, and Leonardo argued that variations in those details were caused 
by lunar clouds and seas;  Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci , 154–68. But neither artist 
evokes a third dimension. 
 51. The forgeries were concocted by Marino Massimo De Caro, a well-
connected Italian bibliophile and thief who later confessed to these and other mis-
deeds. Bredekamp endorsed the forged book and pictures in  Galilei der Künstler , 
149–216, a claim disputed by Gingerich, “The Curious Case of the M-L  Sidereus 
Nuncius ,” and supported by Shea, “Owen Gingerich’s Curious Case.” Bredekamp’s 
case was elaborated in detail by him and other scholars, including Paul Needham, 
in  Galileo’s O  (2011). But sharp-eyed studies by the British scholar Nick Wilding 
exposed the forgery, and analyses of the dubious copy of  Sidereus Nuncius  by Ging-
erich, Wilding, and himself led Needham to admit, in 2012, that he had been wrong 
in accepting its authenticity in 2011. See the reports in  PhiloBiblos (online), June 17, 
2012, and  New York Times , Aug. 11, 2012. Nicholas Schmidle’s  New Yorker  article 
provides a thorough account of the scandal, including an interview with De Caro. 
 52.  Le opere,  10:273–78. In  Galileo Makes a Book , vol. 2 of  Galileo’s O , Needham 
provides a meticulous and thorough review of the documents pertaining to  Sid-
ereus Nuncius  (notwithstanding his mistaken endorsement of the forged “New York 
edition”). 
 53. Bredekamp, who argues with persuasive evidence that Galileo etched the 
prints, points out that a good engraver would have tapered the ends of the wavy lines 
that mark the moon’s topography;  Galilei der Künstler , 191. 
 54. Whitaker reproduces the Florentine drawings and printed illustrations, corre-
lated with modern photographs of the moon, in “Galileo’s Lunar Observations.” Johns 
compares “Galileo’s own” lunar images in  Sidereus Nuncius  to those in three subse-
quent unauthorized editions, and concludes that “the painstakingly crafted verisimili-
tude of Galileo’s original drawings had been signiﬁ cantly eroded”;  Nature of the Book , 
22–23; but this confuses the drawings with the etchings printed in the ﬁ rst edition. 
 55.  Le opere,  9:29–57. The lectures were given in 1588. As Peterson points out, 
Galileo later realized that his scale model was faulty;  Galileo’s Muse , 227–33. 
 56. See Dear,  Discipline & Experience , 124–50. 
 57. Whitaker prints his own reduced version of the sketch in “Selenography 
in the Seventeenth Century,” 121. On Gilbert, see also Whitaker, 44–48, as well as 
Montgomery,  Scientiﬁ c Voice , 207–12. Montgomery makes a strong case that “Galileo 
drew the moon according to certain conventions of pictorial rhetoric in late Renais-
sance mapmaking” (226), but does not distinguish the original drawings from the 
versions printed in  Sidereus Nuncius . 
 58. Whitaker, “Selenography,” 120–23; Montgomery,  Scientiﬁ c Voice , 212–19. 
Roos,  Luminaries in the Natural World , associates Gilbert and Harriot with the “desa-
cralization” of the moon. 
 59. Gingerich, “ Dissertatio cum Professore Righini et Sidereo Nuncio ,” 86. The four 
drawings of lunar craters in Galileo’s letter of January 7, 1610, anticipate the huge 
crater he etched; see  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius ,” 21–24. 
 60. Koyré,  Newtonian Studies , 67–68. Koyré, Panofsky, and Aby Warburg could 
not persuade Einstein, however, that Galileo’s blind spot resulted from an aesthetic 

240    NOTES TO PAGES 37–42
predilection (see Bredekamp, “Gazing Hands and Blind Spots,” 184–86). Hallyn con-
tends that “Galileo’s predilection for circular forms may be based on his veriﬁ cation 
of their efﬁ cacy” rather than on aesthetics;  Poetic Structure of the World , 222. 
 61. Galileo had never been to Bohemia; his description could have derived from 
an Italian edition of Ptolemy’s  Geography ;  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius ,” 24–25. 
 62. “The art of  disegno in which Galileo was so well trained not only meant 
drawing accurately but also arranging objects to suit the purpose of the exercise 
(our idea of ‘design’). In Baroque art a drawing or painting was always a reference to 
something; it always illustrated a theme or text”; Gingerich and Van Helden, “From 
 Occhiale to Printed Page,” 260. 
 63. Galileo originally called the moons  Cosmica Sydera  or “Cosmic Stars,” pun-
ning on Cosimo and “cosmic.” But when the grand duke’s secretary preferred the 
less ambiguous  Medicea , it was pasted over  Cosmica on the title page of the book. 
 64. On the mythology of the Medicis and the rites of patronage, see Biagioli, 
 Galileo Courtier , chap. 2. 
 65. The honor paid by Galileo attracted the eyes of other would-be luminaries. 
Henri IV of France soon asked him to name the next star he discovered Henri, and 
French and Austrian astronomers named sunspots  Borbonia Sidera  and  Austriaca Sidera ; 
see  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius ,” 98n. 
 66. Shea, “Galileo and the Church,” notes the discomfort of theologians, who 
believed that God, rather than mortals, had named the stars. 
 67. Galileo to Federico Cesi, May 12, 1612, in Drake,  Galileo at Work , 183. 
“Unlike  Sidereus nuncius ,  Observations on Sunspots  was not merely an account of 
the phenomena ( istoria ) but also an indication of the true character of the universe 
( dimostrazioni )”; Heilbron,  Galileo , 191. 
 68. Galileo and Scheiner,  On Sunspots , 294. 
 69.  On Sunspots , 296. 
 70. Benjamin, “Theses on the Philosophy of History,” 257–58. 
 71. In the dialogue on the ﬁ rst new science, “concerning the resistance of solid 
bodies to separation,” Salviati proposes “reasons for marvelous things in the matter 
of sounds,” which entrances Sagredo, “as one who is delighted by all musical instru-
ments”;  Two New Sciences , 96. Clavelin,  Natural Philosophy of Galileo , surveys Galileo’s 
contributions to mechanics. 
 72. March 29, 1641, in Drake,  Galileo at Work , 417. Galileo’s repudiation of the 
Copernican system in this letter has disturbed many readers; it may very well be 
ironic. 
 3 . Kepler’s Progress
  1.  New Year’s Gift , 7. Page numbers in the text refer to Hardie's edition, in which 
the Latin text faces an English translation.  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake,  translated by 
Bromberg, also includes the Latin text as well as comments by Owen Gingerich and 
Guillermo Bleichmar and a poem, “The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake,” by John Freder-
ick Nims. Translations in the text are my own. 
 2. Descartes described various structures of snow crystals, accompanied by 
detailed drawings, in the essay on meteorology appended to his  Discourse on 
Method  (1637). Hooke’s  Micrographia  (1665) makes use of a microscope to amplify 

NOTES TO PAGES 42–46   241
and complicate earlier sketches of the “inﬁ nite variety of curiously ﬁ gur’d  
Snow ” (91). 
  3. Koestler’s popular history of astronomy,  The Sleepwalkers , dramatizes that 
“watershed” with his customary ﬂ air: “ A.D. 1600 is probably the most important 
turning point in human destiny after 600  B.C. Astride that milestone . . . stands the 
founder of modern astronomy, a tortured genius in whom all the contradictions of 
his age seem to have become incarnate: Johannes Kepler” (22). The section on Kepler 
was later published separately in paperback as  The Watershed . 
  4. Kozhamthadam examines the shift from circle to ellipse;  Discovery of Kepler’s 
Laws , 199–245. 
 5. This theory, derived from William Gilbert’s famous  De Magnete  (1600), is 
analyzed by Stephenson;  Kepler’s Physical Astronomy , 111–18. 
 6. Burtt’s classic essay calls attention to Kepler’s worship of the sun;  Metaphysical 
Foundations , 44–49. 
 7. Pauli maintains that “Kepler’s ideas reveal quite unmistakably the inﬂ uence 
of Paracelsus and his pupils”; “Inﬂ uence of Archetypal Ideas,” 157. But Lancelot Law 
Whyte suggests that Galen is the primary source for Kepler’s “formative faculty”; 
 New Year’s Gift , 57–63. 
 8. Aït-Touati observes that “in the snowﬂ ake [Kepler] saw the structure of the 
universe revealed,” but does not mention his repudiation of that claim;  Fictions of the 
Cosmos , 1. 
 9. “ ‘The Earth is the circle which is the measure of all. Construct a dodeca-
hedron round it. The circle surrounding that will be Mars. Round Mars construct 
a tetrahedron. The circle surrounding that will be Jupiter. Round Jupiter construct 
a cube. The circle surrounding that will be Saturn. Now construct an icosahedron 
inside the Earth. The circle inscibed within that will be Venus. Inside Venus inscribe 
an octahedron. The circle inscribed within that will be Mercury.’ There you have the 
explanation of the number of the planets”;  Mysterium Cosmographicum , 69. The rela-
tion of Kepler’s polyhedra to Plato’s  Timaeus is analyzed by Field,  Kepler’s Geometrical 
Cosmology , 1–16, 171–76. 
 10. “Libertas, quae sera tamen respexit inertem, / . . . respexit tamen et longo 
post tempore venit”; Virgil,  Eclogues,  1.27, 29. A venerable interpretation associates 
this story with Virgil’s own trip to Rome to appeal to Octavian to restore his con-
ﬁ scated farm. 
 11.  Harmony of the World , 411. “Harmonics,” emphasizing the science and math-
ematics of sounds, might be a more accurate translation of  Harmonice . 
 12. B. J. Mason, “On the Shapes of Snow Crystals,” in  New Year’s Gift , 53. But 
in many respects the morphology of snow crystals remains a puzzle. “So here we sit 
at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁ rst century and we cannot yet explain exactly why 
snowﬂ akes are as they are”; Libbrecht,  Snowﬂ ake , 57. Recent investigations suggest 
that microbes inhabit each snowﬂ ake, affecting its shape. 
 13. See Szpiro,  Kepler’s Conjecture . 
 14. Dyson, “Our Biotech Future,” 6. 
 15.     “Whether [the book] is to be read by the people of the present or of the 
future makes no difference: let it await its reader for a hundred years, if God Him-
self has stood ready for six thousand years for one to study him”;  Harmony of the 
World , 391. 

242    NOTES TO PAGES 47–51
 16. Harriot’s acute speculations on close packing go back to manuscripts of 1599. 
What survives of his correspondence with Kepler in 1606–7 is concerned with 
optics, however, and not crystallography;  Gesammelte Werke , vols. 15 and 16. As Shir-
ley points out, Harriot, though ﬂ attered by Kepler’s attention, “was reluctant to reveal 
too much of his original experimental results, particularly since it appears that he had 
some plans for publishing them for his own credit”;  Thomas Harriot , 386. 
 17.  Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo , 10. Page numbers in this section of the text 
refer to this book. 
 18. Koyré analyzes Kepler’s “rejection of inﬁ nity”;  From the Closed World to the 
Inﬁ nite Universe , 58–87. 
 19. Drake,  Galileo at Work , 237–38. Feyerabend argues that “Galileo was only 
slightly acquainted with contemporary optical  theory ” or the principles of telescopic 
vision, and that his knowledge of optics was far inferior to Kepler’s;  Against Method , 
80–82, 99–100. 
 20. McMullin contrasts Kepler’s positions with Galileo’s; “Galileo on Science and 
Scripture,” 299–302. 
 21. In the  Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems  (1632), published after Kepler’s 
death, Galileo’s only reference to Kepler expresses his surprise that such a great phi-
losopher could have been so wrong about the tides: “Although he had a free and 
penetrating intellect and grasped the motions attributed to the earth, he lent his ear 
and gave his assent to the dominion of the moon over the water, to occult properties, 
and to similar childish ideas”;  Galileo on the World Systems , 304. Ironically, Galileo’s 
explanation of tidal motion proved to be quite mistaken, while Kepler had antici-
pated Newton’s correct theory. 
 22. Spiller argues that the  Conversation “is structured around tension between 
Galileo as an observer and Kepler as a reader”;  Science, Reading, and Renaissance Lit-
erature , 119. 
 23.  Conversation , 14–18. As Kepler recognizes, Della Porta’s fanciful devices draw 
on “natural magic” rather than proper lenses. Reeves,  Galileo’s Glassworks , disposes of 
these supposed predecessors. Galileo had met Della Porta, whose comedies may have 
inﬂ uenced his own unﬁ nished play (if not his optics); see Heilbron,  Galileo , 86–88. 
 24. By the time Kepler died in 1630, the notes were ﬁ ve times as long as the text 
they glossed. Rosen discusses the circumstances of publication in the introduction 
and appendices to  Kepler’s Somnium , 7. Lambert,  Imagining the Unimaginable , compares 
Galileo’s perspective on the moon with Kepler’s. 
 25. The Kepler satellite was launched by NASA in 2009 with the mission of 
searching the universe for planets that might support life. Kepler himself did not 
believe that the stars were other suns, however, and his own speculations about extra-
terrestrial life are limited to the solar system. 
 26. Kepler’s argument echoes Plutarch’s  On the Face in the Moon , in  Moralia , 157. 
Later Kepler translated that text from Greek into Latin, ﬁ lling in some of its gaps, and 
appended it to  Somnium . “Every time I reread this book by Plutarch, I am exceed-
ingly amazed and keep wondering by what chance it happened that our dreams or 
fables coincided so closely”; 31–32. 
 27. On Kepler’s complex involvement with astrology, see Simon,  Kepler astronome 
astrologue ; and Rosen, “Kepler’s Attitude toward Astrology.” 

NOTES TO PAGES 51–56   243
 28. See Caspar,  Kepler , 338–45. 
 29. See Rosen’s note, in Kepler,  Kepler’s Somnium , 76–77. 
 30.  Sidereus Nuncius , 57. 
 31. Nicolson’s classic survey,  Voyages to the Moon  (1948), has been supple-
mented by Montgomery,  Moon and the Western Imagination , and Parrett,  Translunar 
Narrative . 
 32.  Ignatius His Conclave , 7, 15. See chapter 10 below. Donne slyly (mis)quotes 
a sentence from Kepler’s  De Stella in Cygno  (1606). In a note written in the 1620s, 
Kepler surmises (probably wrongly) that the anonymous author of  Ignatius His Con-
clave had seen an early manuscript of the unpublished  Dream ;  Kepler’s Somnium , 38–41, 
212–13. The two men met brieﬂ y in 1619 in Linz, though apparently Kepler never 
realized that it was Donne who had attacked him; see Bernstein, “Heaven’s Net.” 
 33. Adorno, “Postludium.” Blumenfeld, “ ‘Ad Vocem’ Adorno,” analyzes Ador-
no’s polemic against Hindemith, and Lessing,  Die Hindemith-Rezeption , provides a 
detailed critique of Adorno’s unconditional attack. 
 34. Hindemith,  Craft of Musical Composition , 1:22. 
 35. Bruhn argues that Kepler’s death ﬁ nally brings about harmony by transcend-
ing life’s limitations;  Musical Order of the World , 203–7. 
 36. Kater describes the plight of Hindemith, whom he describes as “the reluctant 
emigré”;  Composers of the Nazi Era , 31–56. 
 37. Benjamin,  Reﬂ ections , 92–93. Schubert, a leading Hindemith scholar, consid-
ers this passage a key to the opera, which represents the Hegelian  Entzweiung  (rupture, 
estrangement) of an ordered cosmos. 
 38. Gillispie,  Edge of Objectivity , 39; Kepler,  Harmony , 391. See Exodus 12:35–36, 
25:1–8. “Egyptian vessels,” in this context, refers to Ptolemy’s  Harmony , reclaimed as 
a building block for Kepler’s temple. 
 39. As H. F. Cohen points out, Koyré, who played a major role in deﬁ ning the 
“Great Tradition” of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution, never accepted Kepler as a central 
ﬁ gure in it. “Although Koyré greatly admired Kepler’s achievement, and in particular 
his mathematical conception of nature, he had little use for him in his overall schema 
of things,” since “Kepler regarded the universe as ﬁ nite”;  Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 82. 
 40. “As Archimedes’ axioms are the foundation of the mathematical science of 
statics, so Kepler’s laws were to become the foundation of the mathematical science 
of celestial mechanics”; A. R. Hall,  From Galileo to Newton , 81. 
 41. I. B. Cohen,  Birth of a New Physics , 132. 
 42. “Individual scientists embrace a new paradigm for all sorts of reasons and 
usually for several at once. Some of these reasons—for example, the sun worship 
that helped make Kepler a Copernican—lie outside the apparent sphere of science 
entirely”; Kuhn,  Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions , 152–53. 
 43.  Utriusque cosmi maioris . Fludd’s  Inquiry went through many stages; a ﬁ nal vol-
ume was published in 1621. 
 44.  Harmony of the World , 503–8. Fludd’s criteria of truth are examined in chapter 7 
below. H. F. Cohen,  Quantifying Music , analyzes Kepler’s speculations. 
 45. Caspar,  Kepler , 292. This inﬂ uential biography was ﬁ rst published in Ger-
man in 1948; Gingerich supervised a corrected and expanded edition of the trans-
lation by Hellman (1993). Caspar’s account of the quarrel marvels at “the ﬂ ood 

244    NOTES TO PAGES 57–61
of astrological, alchemical, magical, cabbalistic, theosophic, mock mystic, and pseu-
doprophetic writings which held the intellects in a spell” among Kepler’s foolish 
enemies (291). 
 46. Pauli, “Inﬂ uence of Archetypal Ideas,” 171, 204–12. Westman, “Nature, 
Art, and Psyche,” provides a searching analysis of Pauli’s essay. Other articles in 
 Occult and Scientiﬁ c Mentalities , the volume edited by Vickers, also cast light on the 
quarrel; see esp. Vickers (95–163) and Field (273–96). Meier’s edition of the Pauli-
Jung letters,  Atom and Archetype , includes Pauli’s other studies of Kepler and an 
interpretive essay by Beverley Zabriskie. On the relations of Pauli’s ideas to Jung, 
see also Lindorff,  Pauli and Jung ; Gieser,  Innermost Kernel ; and Miller,  Deciphering 
the Cosmic Number . 
 47. Yates,  Giordano Bruno : 444;  Rosicrucian Enlightenment , 223. 
 48. See Vickers, “Frances Yates and the Writing of History.” The issues are 
debated by many of the contributors to Bonelli and Shea,  Reason, Experiment, and 
Mysticism . According to Shea’s introduction, “Kepler offers a particularly fascinating 
case study in the pitfalls of historical interpretation” (8). 
 49. Clark,  Thinking with Demons , has documented the close relations between 
demonology and early modern science. 
 50. Dekker,  Plague Pamphlets , gives a vivid account of the horrors of the plague 
and the ineffectual efforts of divines and doctors to combat it. Wear examines medi-
cal responses to plague;  Knowledge and Practice in English Medicine , 275–349. 
 51. For Fludd’s advocacy of one occult cure, the weapon-salve, see chapter 7 
below. 
 52. Caspar,  Kepler , 13. Caspar’s love for his subject, it should be added, did not 
keep him from probing analyses of Kepler’s scientiﬁ c writings. Caspar’s biography 
has guided most later treatments of Kepler, including Hindemith’s and Koestler’s as 
well as Banville’s atmospheric novel,  Kepler (1981). 
 53.  Harmony of the World , 391. 
 54.  Sleepwalkers , 11. Cf. Paul de Man’s claim that “a certain degree of blindness 
is part of the speciﬁ city of all literature”;  Blindness and Insight , 141. 
 55.  New Astronomy , 286. 
 56.  Sleepwalkers , 330, 333. 
 57. Useful correctives to Koestler’s analysis include Curtis Wilson,  Astronomy 
from Kepler to Newton , and Voelkel,  Composition of Kepler’s “Astronomia Nova.” 
 58. Jardine,  Birth of History and Philosophy of Science , 290. Jardine provides a text 
and translation of the Latin  Apologia . 
 59. Ursus’s published attack on Tycho (1597) includes a ﬂ attering letter from 
Kepler, who had not read the work. Later Kepler sent a long letter of apology to 
Tycho. But Tycho would not accept Kepler as an assistant until he agreed to write 
a refutation of Ursus’s charges. Kepler’s  Defence  ( Apologia ) was ﬁ rst published in 
1858. 
 60.  Harmony of the World : 447–48. Walker concludes that this comparison marks 
“a real causal connexion,” not only a metaphor;  Studies in Musical Science , 61–62. 
 61. Stephenson,  Music of the Heavens , 184. “Once heaven has been cast as the 
page of a well-staffed polyphonic score, the planets may be perceived as executing a 
cosmological composition in six parts”; Heller-Roazen,  Fifth Hammer , 129. 

NOTES TO PAGES 61–69   245
 62. As Mosley points out, the  Tables were only a part of Tycho’s plan for an  Opus 
Astronomicum  that would describe his techniques and cosmology;  Bearing the Heavens , 
119–26. 
 63. Kepler’s modest annual salary of 500 gulden was largely hypothetical; 
throughout his life he struggled to collect it from the imperial treasury, and at his 
death the arrears amounted to 12,694 gulden, a debt that his heirs never recouped; 
Caspar,  Kepler , 363. 
 64. Caspar,  Kepler , 308. 
 65.  New Astronomy , 157. Tycho hypothesized that the sun and moon circle the 
earth, while the planets circle the sun. Max Brod’s intriguing and unreliable novel on 
Tycho (1916) interprets his last words perversely as a disinterested espousal of “the 
true law”;  Tycho Brahe’s Path to God , 288. Ferguson,  Tycho & Kepler , tells the story of 
the fraught relationship, and Gilder and Gilder,  Heavenly Intrigue , manufacture a case 
that Kepler poisoned Tycho. 
 66. When Kepler belatedly came across Napier’s  Description of the Admirable Table 
of Logarithms  (1614), he characteristically wrote a book that reconceived it on the 
basis of Euclidean arithmetic:  Chilias Logarithmorum at Totidem Numeros Rotundos 
(1624–25). 
 67. See Gingerich,  Great Copernicus Chase , 123–31. 
 68.  Tabulae Rudolphinae , in  Gesammelte Werke,  10:15–26. Arnulf, “Das Titelbild 
der Tabulae Rudolphinae,” throws light on the sources and allegorical ﬁ nesses of 
Kepler’s intricate design. 
 69. See Gingerich,  Eye of Heaven , 340–42, 379–87. 
 70. Martens discusses “the threat to the perfectibility of astronomy”;  Kepler’s Phi-
losophy , 169–72. Aughton,  Transit of Venus , describes the British astronomer Jeremiah 
Horrocks’s improvements over Kepler’s calculations. 
 71.  Kepler’s Somnium , 14, 28–29. 
 72.  Optics , 16. 
 4 . The Poetry of the World
  1. The situation and signiﬁ cance of Hofmannsthal are analyzed perceptively by 
Schorske,  Fin-de-siècle Vienna , 15–22, 304–19; and Broch,  Hugo von Hofmannsthal and 
His Time , 117–25. 
  2. Coetzee’s novel  Elizabeth Costello  concludes with a letter by “Elizabeth,” the 
wife of Lord Chandos, in which she begs Bacon to save them from revelations more 
intense and disturbing than words can express—for instance, the visionary, horrifying 
scene (in Hofmannsthal’s story) in which Lord Chandos feels himself ﬁ lled with the 
death throes of poisoned rats. 
 3.  Letters , 3:80–82. 
  4. On the origins of Bacon’s revolution in natural philosophy during this 
period, see Farrington,  Philosophy of Francis Bacon ; and Zagorin,  Francis Bacon , 25–73. 
 5. “Valerius Terminus: Of The Interpretation of Nature,”  Works of Francis Bacon , 
3:242. 
 6. “Thoughts and Conclusions on the Interpretation of Nature,” in Farrington, 
 Philosophy of Francis Bacon , 81. 

246    NOTES TO PAGES 69–73
 7. Farrington,  Philosophy of Francis Bacon , 72; his italics. For the original Latin, 
see  Works of Francis Bacon , 3:538–39. 
  8. Hofmannsthal,  Lord Chandos Letter , 127–28. 
  9. Sir John Davies’s famous poem  Nosce Teipsum  (1599) is divided into two 
parts: “Of Human Knowledge” and “Of the Soule of Man.” Bacon knew Davies and 
wrote a friendly letter to him on March 28, 1603. See  Works of Francis Bacon , 3:65. 
 10.  Advancement of Learning (1605), in  OFB 4:116. 
 11. In  Back to Nature , Watson argues that “nostalgia for unmediated contact with 
the world of nature” (5) drives much of the art of the late Renaissance. 
 12.  Advancement of Learning , in  OFB 4:63. 
 13. “A Preparative to a Natural and Experimental History” (1620), in  OFB 
11:453. 
 14. Ogilvie,  Science of Describing , explores the reach and variety of sixteenth-
century naturalists. 
 15. Quoted by Freedberg,  Eye of the Lynx , 76—a book lavishly illustrated with 
Lincean drawings. 
 16.  OFB 11:457. 
 17. “In truth, Bacon’s attitude seems to have had little impact on naturalists 
before the era of the Royal Society. If his presence was felt before then, it was so 
subtle as to be, shall we say, occult.” Ashworth, “Natural History and the Emblematic 
World View,” 324. 
 18. The “Bacon-faced generation” is a central concern of Jones,  Ancients and 
Moderns . See also Levine, “Natural History and the History of the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion.” 
 19.  Les mots et les choses , 49 ( Order of Things , 34). Foucault borrows a phrase from 
Hegel’s aesthetics, “the prose of the world,” which had previously been adopted by 
Merleau-Ponty in  La prose du monde (posthumously published, 1969). 
 20.  Les mots et les choses , 39. In the French text, though not its English translation, 
Bacon is cited as the authority for mutual attractions between things (43). 
 21.  Les mots et les choses , 48 ( Order of Things , 33). 
 22. Huppert documents most of these charges in “ Divinatio et Erudito : Thoughts 
on Foucault.” Rossi exposes other errors by Foucault in  Logic and the Art of Memory , 
xxiv-xxvi. 
 23. Ashworth supplies many concrete examples to back Foucault’s position. 
“Michel Foucault has suggested that [the] search for similitudes and resemblances 
was the principal guiding episteme for all of Renaissance thought, and, in the case of 
Gesner’s natural history, he was absolutely right”; “Natural History and the Emblem-
atic World View,” 306. 
 24.  OFB 4:89. 
 25. Rossi,  Francis Bacon , 35. The book was ﬁ rst published, in Italian, in 1957. 
 26. Paolo Rossi, “Hermeticism, Rationality, and the Scientiﬁ c Revolution,” 
257, 259. 
 27. John Ray (1627–1705), whom Raven credits with having put an end once 
and for all to the emblematic worldview “as a serious interpretation of life” ( English 
Naturalists , 47), is mentioned by Foucault only as a late example of a new episteme, 
Cartesian mechanism (140). 

NOTES TO PAGES 73–78   247
 28. See Ashworth, “Natural History and the Emblematic World View,” 311–16. 
In 1632, Henry Reynolds insisted that the ancient poets had commanded “the mys-
teries and hidden properties of Nature”; “Mythomystes,” 1:162. The persistence of 
occult interpretations of nature is stressed by several of the contributors to Debus and 
Walton,  Reading the Book of Nature . 
 29.  Les mots et les choses , 140–41 ( Order of Things , 128–29). 
 30. Ashworth, who agrees that Jonston marks a watershed, also notes the inac-
curacy of the date; “Natural History and the Emblematic World View,” 317–18, 
330. 
 31.  OED , s.v. “history.” Cf. Aristotle’s  History of Animals , which begins by 
describing and comparing the parts of animals, not their origins. 
 32.  Advancement of Learning , in  OFB 4:26. Cf. Italo Calvino, who recommends 
 Naturalis historia  as “a guided tour of the human imagination. An animal, whether 
real or imaginary, has a place of honor in the sphere of the imagination. As soon as it 
is named it takes on a dreamlike power, becoming an allegory, a symbol, an emblem”; 
“Man, the Sky, and the Elephant,” 329. 
 33.  OFB 11:457. 
 34.  Les mots et les choses , 61–63 ( Order of Things , 47–49). 
 35. Sewell argues that Bacon’s attack on “poetical ways of thinking” about natu-
ral history was a betrayal or distortion of his true character, revealed in  On the Wisdom 
of the Ancients  ( De Sapientia Veterum , 1609), “as a dark, riddling, emblematic poet, 
struggling with a metamorphosis of his own thinking and of man’s power over the 
universe”;  Orphic Voice , 61. 
 36. On the structure and critical principles of Warton’s  History , see Lipking, 
 Ordering of the Arts , 352–404. 
 37. Warton,  History of English Poetry , 2:463. 
 38. E.g., Lewis,  Discarded Image  (1964). Parker stresses the cost of Augustan lit-
eralism, a “triumph” that brought about an impoverished “re-invention of nature”; 
 Triumph of Augustan Poetics . 
 39. Eliot,  Selected Essays , 4–5, 247. “Spilt religion” is T. E. Hulme’s deﬁ nition of 
Romanticism. 
 40. Bush,  Science and English Poetry , 44. For a response to Bush, see Lipking, 
“Gods of Poetry.” 
 41. Nicolson,  Breaking of the Circle , xxi-xxii. 
 42.  Works of George Herbert , xl. Summers spells out the “remarkable similarities” 
between Herbert and Bacon;  George Herbert , 97–99, 195–97. 
 43. “ In Honorem Illustr. D.D. Verulamij, Sti Albani, Mag. Sigilli Custodis post editam 
ab eo Instaurationem Magnam ” (“In Honor of the Gift Offered by the Illustrious Ver-
ulam, St. Albans, Keeper of the Great Seal, after Publishing His Great Instauration”); 
Herbert’s  Works , 436–37. The title dates the poem (ﬁ rst published in 1637) during 
the high-water mark of Bacon’s career in 1621, between January 27, when he became 
Viscount St. Albans, and May 1, when his impeachment on charges of bribery took 
away the Great Seal. Bacon had delivered a presentation copy of part 2 of  The Great 
Instauration to Cambridge, for which Herbert, as Public Orator, offers ofﬁ cial thanks. 
 44.  OFB 11:175. 
 45.  Breaking of the Circle , 149. 

248    NOTES TO PAGES 78–81
 46. See chapter 10 below. Donne’s energetic engagement with the cosmography 
of his time has been explored by Cofﬁ n,  John Donne and the New Philosophy , and 
Empson,  Essays on Renaissance Literature . 
 47.  Troilus and Cressida , 1.3.86–88. 
 48. Mazzeo,  Renaissance and Seventeenth-Century Studies , 54–55. 
 49. The appendix to Chester’s  Loves Martyr  (1601) includes “Diverse Poeticall 
Essaies” on the phoenix and the turtle by Shakespeare, Jonson, Chapman, Marston, 
and “Ignoto,” who provide dissimilar and often enigmatic versions of the pair. “ The 
Phœnix Analysde ,” by Jonson, comments ironically on the slippery emblem: “Now, 
after all, let no man / Receive it for a  Fable , / If a  Bird so amiable, / Do turn into a 
Woman. // Or (by our  Turtles  Augure) / That  Natures  fairest Creature, / Prove of 
his  Mistris Feature, / But a bare  Type and  Figure ”;  Loves Martyr , 186. 
 50. Bevis,  Aaaaw to Zzzzzd , supplies a lexicon of words attributed to birds, and 
Burroughs,  Birds and Poets , offers a brief survey of poetic birdsongs. 
 51. British Library, Harley MS 978, fol. 11v. In the manuscript, line breaks are 
indicated only by capitalization and bar lines (in the musical notation), and punctua-
tion is limited to dots (or puncta) that separate phrases. The page is reproduced by 
Hirsh,  Medieval Lyric , 36. 
 52. The English words are interlineated with a Latin hymn, which also ﬁ ts the 
music. W. P. Ker assumed that the Latin came ﬁ rst, so that the Cuckoo song “is the 
result of deliberate study”;  English Literature Medieval , 75. Ezra Pound supposed that 
“Dr Ker has put an end to much babble about folk song by showing us  Summer is 
ycummen in  written beneath the Latin words of a very old canon”;  Literary Essays , 
92. A note to Pound’s “Ancient Music”—“WINTER is icummen in, / Lhude sing 
Goddamm”—repeats that misinformation, which may have inspired his riposte;  Per-
sonæ , 116. But the English is written  above  the Latin, and no evidence indicates that 
it was based on an older canon. Boklund-Lagopoulou concludes that “it is easier to 
see this poem as a popular song than it is to imagine it as the written composition of 
a learned poet”;  “I have a yong suster,” 46. 
 53. Topsell,  Fowles of Heauen , 244. Modern ornithologists observe one variation 
in the cuckoo’s cry, its “chuckle” or “so-called change of tune, when the note is 
triplicated”; Coward and Barnes,  Birds of the British Isles , 208. This variation is artfully 
exploited by Handel when he mimics the song in “The Cuckoo and the Nightin-
gale” (Organ Concerto no. 13). 
 54. As early as Hesiod (eighth century  BC ?) the cuckoo represented the joy of 
spring: “When ﬁ rst the cuckoo cuckoos in the leaves of the oak tree, / Giving delight 
to mortals on the boundless earth”;  Works and Days , lines 486–87. 
 55. For a ﬁ ne analysis of this effect, see Reiss,  Art of the Middle English Lyric , 8–12. 
 56. Symons’s anthology,  Chaucerian Dream Visions , includes the text as well as 
an extensive survey of criticism and scholarship. In 1897 W. W. Skeat convincingly 
removed the poem from the Chaucer canon;  Chaucerian and Other Pieces , lvii-lxi. 
Skeat attributed it to Sir Thomas Clanvowe, but lately most scholars conclude that 
Sir John Clanvowe was the author. 
 57. Baird describes the medieval “bird of violence” who cries “oci”;  Rossignol , 
18–23. Lee Patterson argues that the poem subordinates truth telling to the discourse 
and social practices of the court, and that  ocy  “encapsulates in a single word the 

NOTES TO PAGES 81–84   249
absolutist ideology that is at the center of courtliness”; “Court Politics and the 
Invention of Literature,” 23. 
 58. “The nightingale in Provençal and Old French lyrics is almost exclusively 
male,” as Pfeffer points out ( Change of Philomel , 157); indeed, it sometimes has a 
penis. But by Chaucer’s time the nightingale in English poems is almost exclusively 
female. 
 59. Topsell,  Fowles of Heauen , 240–41. Topsell also recounts an “old Apologue” 
(unidentiﬁ ed) in which a cuckoo and nightingale ask an ass to judge “which of them 
sange the sweetest notes.” The ass decides in favor of the cuckoo, but the nightingale 
appeals to Man, who reverses the judgment: “Amonge Asses greate talkers are best 
esteemed, but amonge wisemen sweete songs and wise sayings are better accompted 
then lowde bablinge and importunate exclamations” (244). Mahler composed a song 
on this theme in  Das Knaben Wunderhorn , with the ass (or donkey) as  critic . 
 60. Nagy,  Poetry as Performance , explores relations between nightingales and poets, 
particularly in oral poetic traditions dating back to Homer. 
 61. Gascoigne,  Complete Works , 2:177. “Philomene” (for “Philomela”) is a tran-
scriptional error with a long history. By the time of the  Carmina Burana  (thirteenth 
century)  philomena was the generic word for “nightingale.” 
 62.  Complete Works , 2:198. See 2:179–80 and 198–203. Austen suggests that this 
exposition may have been added when the poem was revised in 1576;  George Gas-
coigne , 166. 
 63.  Pliny’s “Natural History,”  113. In his commentary on Ovid (1632), Sandys 
contends that Philomela’s “inﬁ nite variety” is “more than natural,” since she devel-
ops skill by competing with other birds as well as through schooling by her elders; 
 Ovid’s “Metamorphosis,”  300. The nightingale’s incredible capacity for learning songs 
has been experimentally veriﬁ ed by Hultsch and Todt, “Learning to Sing,” 101–5. 
 64. Eliot contrasts “Tereu” with “Jug Jug” in  The Waste Land , lines 203–6. John 
Lyly, whom Gascoigne inﬂ uenced, coupled “jug” and “tereu” in  Campaspe (1584). 
Prouty ( George Gascoigne , 262) cites Pausanius ( Description of Greece ) as recording the 
cry of “Tereus,” but I do not ﬁ nd it there. In Greek the nightingale usually sang “Itu, 
itu!,” supposedly a reference to Itys, although Aristophanes’  Birds plays variations on 
“tio”; see Pollard,  Birds in Greek Life , 42–43, 165. Baird suggests that in “Axe Phe-
bus aureo,” a song from the  Carmina Burana , the lines “Philomena querule / Terea 
retractat” (commonly understood as “Philomena retracts her complaint of Tereus”) 
might be translated as “Philomena retracts her complaining cry, ‘Terea’ ”;  Rossignol , 
6–7. Garrod says it was Gascoigne “who ﬁ rst, so far as I know, isolated from among 
the notes of the Nightingale the  Tereu which later poets have made so tiresome to 
us”;  Profession of Poetry , 150. 
 65. Deriving  juggler  from  jugum  (yoke) is a plausible error; the English word 
actually derives from the Latin  joculator  ( joker). “Jug, jug” had long been a familiar 
nightingale’s cry, at least to the “dirty ears” of those who did not want to understand 
why Philomel was crying ( The Waste Land , lines 99–103). 
 66. Keilen argues that “only by estranging this most familiar convention of Latin 
literature, and by framing Latin eloquence as animal sounds, can English poets turn 
the categories of eloquence and literature to new uses and claim the nightingale as 
the symbol of their vulgar kind of writing”;  Vulgar Eloquence , 101. 

250    NOTES TO PAGES 84–87
 67. “Certain Sonnets” (1581?) 4; Sidney,  Poems , 137. Brown analyzes many 
adaptations of Philomela’s story, including Gascoigne’s, in which the violence 
and latent homoeroticism of the two sisters induce anxiety in male writers;  Ovid , 
85–121. 
 68.  Shorter Poems , 145, 188, 192. Cheney argues that “the ‘Nightingale’ is a sign 
of the poet relying on his divine art to free himself from the cycle of nature”;  Spenser’s 
Famous Flight , 99–100. 
 69. “An Elegie, or friends passion, for his  Astrophill .  Written vpon the death 
of the right Honourable sir Phillip Sidney Knight, Lord gouernour of Flushing, “lines 
190–92. First printed in  The Phœnix Nest  (1593), the poem was included in 
 Astrophel  (1595), a collection of elegies for Sidney headed by Spenser (to whom 
it has sometimes been wrongly attributed). According to Thomas Nashe, Roydon 
“hath shewed himselfe singular in the immortal Epitaph of his beloued  Astroph-
ell ”;  Works , 3:323. 
 70.  Love’s Labour’s Lost (1594–95), 5.2.882–86. 
 71. Chaucer,  Parlement of Foules , line 358. See Acworth,  Cuckoo and Other Bird 
Mysteries , 144, 171–72. 
 72. First published in Milton’s 1645  Poems . Most scholars assign the sonnet to 
Milton’s early twenties, but Annabel Patterson hypothesizes that it may have been 
written after his marriage in 1642, when the cuckoo’s song might have posed a threat 
of cuckoldry; “That Old Man Eloquent,” 33. 
 73. “Il Penseroso,” lines 62–65. 
 74. Fowler notes Aristophanes’s accurate rendition of the crescendo, ending in 
“totobrix”;  Year with the Birds , 163. Coward and Barnes hear the crescendo as “pew, 
pew” and the croak as “kur kur”;  Birds of the British Isles , 282–84. The nuances of 
a nightingale’s song are brilliantly captured by Richard Crashaw’s “Musicks Duell,” 
published the year after Milton’s 1645  Poems but far less inﬂ uential. 
 75. “Hear how the Birds, on ev’ry bloomy Spray, / With joyous Musick wake 
the dawning Day! / Why sit we mute, when early Linnets sing, / When warbling 
 Philomel salutes the Spring”; Alexander Pope, “Spring” (1709), lines 23–26. The 
ﬁ rst line of Milton’s ﬁ rst sonnet refers to “yon bloomy Spray.” Pope claimed to have 
written his pastorals in 1704, when he was sixteen. 
 76.  Ornithology of Francis Willughby , 98. 
 77. Ray,  Wisdom of God , 339. On the “anti-marvelous” bias of Baconian natural-
ists, see Daston and Park,  Wonders and the Order of Nature . 
 78.  Ornithology of Francis Willughby  records a long anecdote from a guest at an inn 
who hears caged nightingales, after midnight, “talking one with another, and plainly 
imitating mens discourses”; they repeat a coarse argument between the tapster and his 
wife and even chant a prediction of future wars, presumably from overhearing “the 
secret conferences of some Noblemen and Captains” (221). 
 79. Thomas,  Man and the Natural World , 111. 
 80. Thomson, “Spring,” lines 703–5. This passage responds to Virgil’s  Georgics , 
4:511–15, which compares a nightingale whose nest has been robbed of her young 
to Orpheus, mourning the lost Eurydice. But Thomson focuses on the bird herself, 
whose despair not only explains why nightingales wail but also conveys a political and 
ecological indictment of “tyrant Man.” Chalker analyzes Thomson’s debt to Virgil; 
 English Georgic , 90–140. 

NOTES TO PAGES 87–90   251
 81. “Summer,” lines 1560–62. When Newton died in 1727, Thomson inter-
rupted work on “Spring” to compose a long memorial poem. As Nicolson has 
shown in  Newton Demands the Muse , the  Optics inspired some dazzling effects of light 
and color in Thomson’s poems. 
 82. Raven’s  John Ray  still sets the standard. McKillop,  Background of Thomson’s 
“Seasons,”  provides the best introduction to Thomson’s scientiﬁ c and philosophical 
views. 
 83. Shaftesbury,  Characteristicks , 2:162. On the natural affections of animals, see 
his “Miscellaneous Reﬂ ections”: “We are to believe ﬁ rmly and resolutely, ‘That other 
Creatures have their  Sense  and  Feeling , their mere  Passions  and  Affections , as well as 
our-selves’ ” (3:129–30). 
 84. Johnson,  Lives of the Poets, 4:103. 
 85. On lines 580–81 of “Spring,” Sambrook notes, “A theme not entirely 
unknown to fame; cf. Addison’s Latin verses in  Spectator  412.” Those verses conﬁ rm 
the point that male birds, in their courtship, respond to the colors of their own spe-
cies: “The Black-bird hence selects her sooty Spouse; / The Nightingale her musi-
cal Compeer, / Lur’d by the well-known Voice: the Bird of Night, / Smit with his 
dusky Wings, and greenish Eyes, / Woos his dun Paramour.” (This English transla-
tion comes from the 1744 edition of  The Spectator .) But Addison’s acknowledgment 
of sexual attraction (or attraction to beauty) within each species is not the same as 
Thomson’s universal chorus. 
 86. In “A Hymn on the Seasons” (1730), Thomson emphasizes that the “sweet 
bird” is praising God: “when the restless day, / Expiring, lays the warbling world 
asleep, / Sweetest of birds, sweet Philomela! charm / The listening shades, and teach 
the night his praise!” (lines 77–80). In nature, neither the bird nor night is melan-
choly; unhappy human beings project their own woeful associations on them. This 
correction of Milton, both naturalistic and theological, anticipates the argument of 
Coleridge’s conversation poem “The Nightingale” (1798). 
 87. These are Ralph Cohen’s terms in a ﬁ ne analysis of this part of the poem; 
 Unfolding of “The Seasons,” 51–66. 
 88. “Thou hearest the Nightingale begin the Song of Spring”; Blake,  Milton a 
Poem , Plate 31, line 28. 
 89.  John Clare by Himself , 10;  Poems of the Middle Period, 3:500. 
 90. Thomson: “Spring,” line 860. 
 91. Goodman analyzes the ﬁ gure of “noise” in Thomson, which she associ-
ates with uneasiness about the unseen people ignored by history;  Georgic Modernity , 
56–66. 
 92. See the conservationist Danäe Sheehan in  The Observer , April 23, 2011. 
 93. Sebald,  After Nature . Cf. Durs Grünbein, “To Lord Chandos: A Fax from the 
Future,” in  Bars of Atlantis , 72–74. Merchant argues that the “mechanistic analysis of 
reality” brought about the death of “living animate nature”: “In 1500 the parts of the 
cosmos were bound together as a living organism; by 1700 the dominant metaphor 
had become the machine”;  Death of Nature , 288. To speak of the early Renaissance 
world as “organic” seems anachronistic, however; the notion of “a living organism” 
did not exist before the late eighteenth century. Nor did the reciprocity of macro-
cosm and microcosm and the perception of nature as female constrain Renaissance 
men from exercising absolute dominion over nature, or from oppressing women as 

252    NOTES TO PAGES 91–93
well as other creatures. And Merchant’s own acute comments on the vitalism of Leib-
niz and Newton, who “bequeathed” us “the world in which we live today” (275), 
tend to undermine her opposition of that world to “the world we have lost.” The 
evidence of poetry suggests instead a growing ecological awareness. 
 5. “Look There, Look There!”
 1. First Folio, 5.3.234–37, 285–86. These words do not appear in the First 
Quarto, where Lear’s speech closes with “O, O, O, O.” Line numbers in the text refer 
to  The Oxford Shakespeare . 
  2.  King Lear  was probably ﬁ rst performed in 1605, although not published 
until 1608. In Holinshed’s  Chronicles  (1577) and other likely sources for Shakespeare, 
Cordelia and her husband restore Lear to his kingdom, and after his death two years 
later she reigns in Britain; but after ﬁ ve years the sons of her sisters depose her, and 
she takes her own life.  The True Chronicle , performed in the 1590s and published in 
1605, ends happily with the reconciliation and victory of Cordelia and Lear. 
 3.  I Henry IV , 5.4.102–3, 115–17. 
 4.  The History of Life and Death  ( Historia Vitæ & Mortis ), in  OFB 12:339; volume 
and page numbers in the text refer to this edition. Bacon cites the case of Duns 
Scotus as well as instances in his own time. 
 5. Aubrey,  Brief Lives , 1:223–24. 
 6. John Ward’s  Diaries (1648–79), quoted by Haycock;  Mortal Coil , 18. 
 7. On the art and ritual of dying, a standard study is Philippe Ariès,  Hour 
of Our Death . On English customs, see Cressy,  Birth, Marriage, and Death , and 
Houlbrooke,  Death, Religion, and the Family . “The place where most people were 
ill was the home,” according to Wear ( Knowledge and Practice in English Medicine , 
24), who estimates that “Of a thousand babies born alive, around a hundred 
and sixty would be dead by the end of their ﬁ rst year” (12). Dobson,  Contours of 
Death and Disease , provides extensive demographic data about mortality in early 
modern England. 
 8. As late as 1661, a dialogue by Thomas Hobbes expressed his doubts: “B. But 
when is it that we can truly say of a man that he is dead, or which is the same thing, 
that he has breathed out his soul? For it is known that some men taken for dead 
have revived the next day when exhumed. / A. It is difﬁ cult to determine the point 
in time in which the soul is separated from the body.” “Hobbes’s  Physical Dialogue ,” 
trans. Simon Schaffer, in Shapin and Schaffer,  Leviathan and the Air-Pump , 373. 
 9.  Les mots et les choses , 275–81. After Cuvier, Foucault argues, “Life is no longer 
what can be distinguished more or less certainly from mechanisms; it is what grounds 
all the possible distinctions among living beings [ les vivants ]” (281). 
 10. The prehistory of biological thought is excavated by Roger’s classic study 
of eighteenth-century life sciences,  The Life Sciences in Eighteenth-Century French 
Thought . Treviranus introduced the term “Biologie” in 1802. According to the  OED , 
the word  biology ﬁ rst occurs in English in 1813. Thomas S. Hall surveys efforts to 
answer the question “What is life?” in  Ideas of Life and Matter . 
 11. “Orpheus; or Philosophy”;  Works , 6:720–21. 
 12. Dubos,  Mirage of Health , offers a critique of utopian hopes to restore the 
garden of Eden. More recently, the psychological and ﬁ nancial costs of technologies 

NOTES TO PAGES 93–98   253
that strive to prolong life by radical means have been examined by economists and 
philosophers as well as physicians. “These days, many hospitalized patients die only 
when a doctor has decided that the right time has come. Beyond the curiosity and 
the problem-solving challenge fundamental to good research, I believe that the fan-
tasy of controlling nature lies at the very basis of modern science”; Nuland,  How We 
Die , 259. John Gray,  Immortalization Commission , examines post-Darwinian efforts to 
reassert the possibility of eternal life, an occult project often related to science. Jona-
than Swift’s classic satire of the Struldbruggs,  Gulliver’s Travels  (1726), pt. 3, chap. 10, 
mocks the naive illusions of those who feed a “keen Appetite for Perpetuity of Life.” 
 13. Haycock,  Mortal Coil , 1–5, 39–41. 
 14.  Novum Organum , in  OFB 11:347. On Bacon’s conception of spirits, see 
Walker, “Frances Bacon and  spiritus ”; Rees, “Frances Bacon and  spiritus vitalis ,” in 
Fattori and Bianchi,  Spiritus , 265–81; and in the same volume, Fattori, “ Spiritus  dans 
l’ Historia vitae et mortis de Francis Bacon,” 283–323, which includes a concordance 
of Bacon’s use of  spiritus . 
 15. Bacon,  Sylva Sylvarum , 75. The  OED cites Bacon for the deﬁ nition of  enjoin 
as “to impose rules on oneself.” 
 16. In the utopian  New Atlantis , Salomon’s House, an institution dedicated to 
“the ﬁ nding out of the true Nature of all Things,” contains “large and deepe Caves” 
used for “ Prolongation of  Life , in some  Hermits  that choose to live there, well accom-
modated of all things necessarie, and indeed live very long.” 
 17.  OFB 12:147. The Etruscan king Mezentius, “scorner of the gods,” killed his 
victims by binding them face-to-face with dead bodies ( Aeneid , 8:485–88). 
 18. Giglioni, “Hidden Life of Matter,” 142. 
 19. On Bacon’s place in the history of theories of procreation, see Thomas Hall, 
 Ideas of Life and Matter , 1:237–38. In 1668, Francesco Redi showed that maggots do 
not arise spontaneously in rotten meat but are produced by eggs laid by ﬂ ies. But the 
theory of spontaneous generation was not refuted deﬁ nitively until Louis Pasteur’s 
experiments in 1859. 
 20. Rees, “The  De viis mortis and the speculative philosophy,” in  Francis Bacon’s 
Natural Philosophy , 20–32. Rees moderates this view somewhat in his introduction 
to vol. 6 of the  OFB : “Francis Bacon’s natural philosophy may be viewed as a single 
philosophy with two aspects or as two philosophies each with its peculiar character” 
(xxxvi). For an answer to Rees, see Zagorin,  Francis Bacon , 118–20. 
 21. The ﬁ rst deﬁ nition in Johnson’s  Dictionary (1755). Illustrative quotations 
begin with  King Lear —“On thy  life  no more. /—My  life  I never held but as a 
pawn”—and  Antony and Cleopatra —“She shows a body rather than a  life , / A statue 
than a breather.” 
 22. “That subtile knot, which makes us man”; John Donne, “The Extasie,” line 
64. “Death broke at once the vital chain, / And free’d his soul the nearest way”; 
Samuel Johnson, “On the Death of Dr Robert Levet,” lines 35–36. In  The Passions 
of the Soul  (1649), Descartes maintains that the standard view of death is a serious 
error: “the soul takes its leave when we die” only because the body has already died; 
 Philosophical Writings, 1:329. 
 23. Paracelsus,  Hermetic and Alchemical Writings , 2:323; 1:135. Weeks sets Para-
celsus’s ideas about spirit and matter in the context of contemporaneous religious 
debates (see esp.  Paracelsus , 108–14). 

254    NOTES TO PAGES 98–103
 24. On the physican as priest and magus, see Debus,  Chemical Philosophy : 1:96ff.; 
and Webster,  Paracelsus . 
 25. Pagel,  Paracelsus , 117. 
 26. Contrasting views of Bruno’s cosmology are offered by Yates,  Giordano Bruno 
and the Hermetic Tradition , and Gatti,  Giordano Bruno and Renaissance Science . 
 27. Gilbert,  On the Loadstone (1600), 309. 
 28. Garber provides a useful survey of theories of soul and mind in Garber and 
Ayers,  Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century Philosophy , 1:759–95. 
 29.  De anima , 2.3. Des Chene,  Life’s Form , examines Scholastic versions of Aris-
totle’s distinctions among souls. 
 30.  Discourse on the Method  (1637), in  Philosophical Writings,  1:141. Descartes reex-
amined his view of animals, both theologically and anatomically, on many occasions. 
Clarke analyzes his various arguments in  Descartes’s Theory of Mind , 71–77, and more 
broadly in  Descartes: A Biography , 331–36. 
 31. See Rosenﬁ eld,  From Beast-Machine to Man-Machine . 
 32. “The problem is less that he makes animals into mere machines, but rather 
that animal faculties are capable of so much that the line between animals and human 
beings becomes blurred”; Gaukroger,  Descartes’ System of Natural Philosophy , 215. 
 33.  Leviathan , 9. 
 34. “Ça mon âme, il y a long temps que tu es captive; voici l’heure que tu dois 
sortir de prison et quitter l’embaras de ce cors.” This is the version of Claude Clerse-
lier, in  Œuvres de Descartes, 5:482. 
 35. Elton associates Kent’s word with “the pagan ghost, or  umbra ”;  “King Lear” 
and the Gods , 258. The complexity of relations between “spirit” and “ anima ” or 
“pure spirit” in the Middle Ages is examined by Jean-Claude Schmitt;  Ghosts in the 
Middle Ages , 25–27, 196–200. 
 36. McGinn,  Meaning of Disgust , argues that disgust reﬂ ects the consciousness of 
human beings that life depends on organic processes that carry the stain of corrup-
tion and death. 
 37. W. B. Yeats, “Sailing to Byzantium,” line 22. Yeats often associated himself 
with Lear. In “Lapis Lazuli,” he insists on the ultimate “gaiety” of Lear and other 
tragic ﬁ gures. 
 38. Knight,  Wheel of Fire , 177–206, and “Soul and Body in Shakespeare,” in 
 Shakespearian Dimensions,  3–21. Kott,  Shakespeare Our Contemporary , 101–37. Cf. 
Spurgeon,  Shakespeare’s Imagery , 338–43. 
 39. Empson,  Structure of Complex Words , 150. 
 40. Davies,  Poems , 134. Donne, “Aire and Angels,” line 6. 
 41. Davies,  Poems , 167. These lines may glance at members of the Northumber-
land circle, especially Thomas Harriot, whose doctrine  ex nihilo nihil ﬁ t  (“Nothing is 
made of nothing”) contradicts Davies’s position that God “didst  Mans-soule of noth-
ing make” ( Poems , 123); see Jacquot, “Harriot, Hill, Warner,” 108. But Davies’s main 
source on theories of the soul seems to be La Primaudaye, especially “Of the bodie 
and soule”;  French Academie , 1:19–27. 
 42. Sanskrit  prana  and Chinese  ch’i , for instance, both signify “life force” as well 
as “breath.” 
 43. King James Version. In Hebrew “breath” of life is  neshamah , and the living 
“soul” is  nephesh . The Hebrew word  Ruach  can mean “breath,” “wind,” or “spirit.” 

NOTES TO PAGES 103–108   255
Abrams surveys the traditional use of such ancient words as metaphors in  Correspon-
dent Breeze , 25–43. 
 44. Louis Delatte, Suzanne Govaerts, and Joseph Denooz trace the entangling and 
separation of  spiritus and  anima in Fattori and Bianchi,  Spiritus , 55–62. 
 45.  On the Generation of Animals  ( De generatione animalium ), 736b30–737a1. Freu-
denthal surveys opinions on this much-disputed passage;  Aristotle’s Theory of Material 
Substance , 106–30. 
 46. See Thomas Hall,  Ideas of Life and Matter , 1:104–5, 115–16, 155–63. 
 47. Johnson’s  Dictionary . To illustrate  pneumatical , Johnson cites Bacon: “All solid 
bodies consist of parts  pneumatical and tangible; the  pneumatical substance being in 
some bodies the native spirit of the body, and in some other, plain air that is gotten 
in.” In this free translation, the interchangeability of “intangible” and “pneumatic” is 
warranted by Bacon himself, who refers to “intangible or pneumatic bodies” ( Novum 
Organum , in  OFB 11:353). 
 48. Putscher,  Pneuma, Spiritus, Geist , details the historical relations between theo-
logical and scientiﬁ c understandings of spirit. 
 49. Boyle’s early  New Experiments Physico-Mechanical, Touching the Spring of the 
Air and its Effects  (1660) examines opinions on breathing, air, and life, including 
Paracelsus’s view “that there is in the Air a little vital Quintessence,” but draws no 
ﬁ rm conclusion; Boyle,  Works , 1:287. Haycock reviews Boyle’s research on chemical 
and alchemical processes that might rejuvenate diseased or aging bodies;  Mortal Coil , 
60–74. 
 50. Burton,  Anatomy of Melancholy , 2:58–59. 
 51.  De Motu Cordis (1628) in  Anatomical Exercises , vii. 
 52. Quoted by Thomas Hall,  Ideas of Life and Matter , 1:246. 
 53. On Fludd’s weapon-salve and its relation to Harvey, see chapter 7 below. 
Debus analyzes Fludd’s views on spirits of the blood and air in “Harvey and 
Fludd.” 
 54. Katharine Park, “Organic Soul.” 
 55. Harvey,  Anatomical Exercises , 59. 
 56. In a chapter entitled “Concerning Weight,” Sir Thomas Browne reports 
experimental evidence refuting Pliny’s well-known claim that “men weigh heavier 
dead than alive”;  Pseudodoxia Epidemica , 1:315. On Charles II, see 2:917–18. 
 57. Robert Fludd (“Rudolfo Otreb”) mounts a vigorous defense of Rosicrucian 
teachings on life, death, and resurrection in  Tractatus Theologo-Philosophicus (1617). 
 58. Nicholl,  Chemical Theatre , 217–18. 
 59.  White Devil , 5.2.38–41. The play was ﬁ rst published in 1612, four years after 
 Lear . 
 60. Cf. Bacon’s essay “Of Death”(1625): “It is as Naturall to die, as to be 
borne; And to a little Infant, perhaps, the one, is as painfull, as the other”;  OFB 
15:10–11. 
 61. Freud,  Collected Papers , 4:244–56. 
 62.  Tolstoy on Shakespeare ; Nahum Tate,  The History of King Lear  (London, 
1681). 
 63. “A man would die, though he were neither valiant, nor miserable, onely 
upon a wearinesse to doe the same thing, so oft over and over”; Bacon, “Of Death,” 
in  OFB 15:10. 

256    NOTES TO PAGES 110–113
 6 . The Dream of Descartes
 1. Maritain’s attack on Descartes ( Dream of Descartes , 29), ﬁ rst published in 1920, 
is ampliﬁ ed by the contributors to Sweetman,  Failure of Modernism . 
  2.  Philosophical Writings of Descartes , 1:116 (hereafter cited as  PW  ). Volume and 
page numbers in the text refer to the Cambridge edition. 
  3.  Œuvres de Descartes , 10:7–8. 
 4. Notes by Baillet, Leibniz, and Descartes himself are edited by Hallyn, along 
with studies by various hands, in  Les Olympiques de Descartes . Cole translates the 
relevant portion of the notes;  Olympian Dreams , 25–29. Aczel,  Descartes’ Secret Note-
book , argues that Leibniz deciphered Descartes’s great secret: inﬂ uenced by Kepler’s 
cosmological model based on the ﬁ ve Platonic solids, he had been the ﬁ rst to discover 
the principles of topology. 
 5. Cole makes a strong case for the ﬁ delity of Baillet’s transcriptions;  Olympian 
Dreams , 41–48. But Richard Watson, who thinks that “in many cases Baillet just 
makes things up,” suspects that he “greatly embellished the dreams”;  Cogito, Ergo 
Sum , 97, 113. Cole provides a facsimile of Baillet’s chapter (book 2, chap. 1 of  La vie 
de M. Descartes ) on the dreams as well as his own translation of the dream sequence; 
 Olympian Dreams , 32–40. 
 6. Recent clinical studies of sleep and dreams have described three distinct sleep 
conditions, each with its own kind of dreams: sleep onset, REM (rapid eye move-
ment), and NREM (non-REM). Descartes’s dreams seem to fall into those three 
types. The ﬁ rst, which is lengthy, dramatic, bizarre, and full of movement, character-
izes REM; the second, a night terror that shocks the dreamer awake, matches one 
pattern of NREM sleep; the third, in which prior associations return in sleep, and 
the dream and waking states blend together, seems to occur at sleep onset. Hobson, 
 Dreaming , provides a simpliﬁ ed survey of modern research. 
 7. My translation. Unless otherwise noted, all quotations in this chapter are 
drawn from Baillet’s account of the dreams, translated in appendix 2. 
 8. Self-conscious states of dreaming are analyzed by two essays in Barrett and 
McNamara,  New Science of Dreaming : David Kahn, “Metacognition, Recognition, and 
Reﬂ ection while Dreaming” (1:245–67); and Jennifer Michelle Windt and Thomas 
Metzinger, “The Philosophy of Dreaming and Self-Consciousness: What Happens 
to the Experiential Subject during the Dream State?” (3:193–247). 
 9. Leroy,  Descartes , 1:89–90. Freud’s letter on the dreams was written at Leroy’s 
request. 
 10. Gouhier,  Les premières pensées de Descartes , argues that the dreams are actually 
“thoughts” or allegorical ﬁ ctions that warrant esoteric interpretations. Paul Arnold 
associates the dreams with  The Chemical Wedding of Christian Rosencreutz  (1616), a 
Rosicrucian classic (see Richard Watson,  Cogito, Ergo Sum , 133–34). Von Franz pro-
vides an elaborate Jungian reading; “Dream of Descartes,” 55–147. 
 11. Poulet provides a brilliant, tendentious close reading that links the dreams not 
only to Descartes’s philosophy but to his “entire being”;  Studies in Human Time , 72. 
According to Marion, “the  cogitatio  is awakened in the dreams of 1619” by Descartes’s 
ability to think in his dreams, or “think dreams,” “his consciousness being freed from 
affections”;  Cartesian Questions , 19. 
 12. Sebba,  Dream of Descartes , 54–56. 

NOTES TO PAGES 113–118   257
 13. Jama’s bibliography of studies of the dreams, though incomplete (for instance, 
it omits Sebba), cites eighty-ﬁ ve items. Clarke’s account of the dreams in  Descartes: 
A Biography (58–63) draws freely on Jama. 
 14. Harris suggests that Descartes’s later theory of dreams marks a crucial turn-
ing away from the earlier mode of the “epiphany dream”;  Dreams and Experience , 
85–90. 
 15. Wittgenstein,  Lectures & Conversations , 51. 
 16. According to Poulet, “In the language of the period, ‘charms of solitude’ and 
‘charms of nature’ are equivalent expressions. The charms of solitude are nothing 
other than those proposed by the sensuous nature, the ensemble of which, fecund, 
succulent, compact and multiple at the same time, is indeed very well represented 
by this fruit”;  Studies in Human Time , 60–61. Gabbey and Hall offer many possible 
interpretations of the melon, and favor the view that it represents the sphere of the 
cosmos or “a complete world of knowledge”; “Melon and the Dictionary,” 662. 
 17. The date of the dreams, Baillet points out, “was Saint Martin’s Eve, on the 
evening of which it was customary to go on a spree”;  La vie de M. Descartes . 
 18. Gaukroger suggests that Descartes was undergoing “a mental collapse of 
some kind,” and that his thoughts on method “came to symbolize his recovery from 
this”;  Descartes: An Intellectual Biography , 111. 
 19. Inﬂ uential accounts of the Cartesian banishment of imagination include 
Whitehead,  Science and the Modern World ; Dijksterhuis,  Mechanization of the World Pic-
ture ; and Heidegger,  What Is Called Thinking?  In an impassioned series of essays, the 
poet Durs Grünbein argues that Descartes, as “the quintessence of the free subject, 
the autonomously thinking and acting human being,” was the progenitor not only of 
modern science, through a cognitive “I” that masters the world, but also of modern 
poetry, through a poetic “I” immersed in language;  Descartes’ Devil , 84–87. 
 20. Rodis-Lewis,  Descartes , 57–58. 
 21. In Popkin’s  History of Scepticism , successive chapters are entitled “Descartes: 
Conqueror of Scepticism” and “Descartes: Sceptique Malgré Lui.” See also Curley, 
 Descartes against the Sceptics . 
 22. In an appendix on “Dreaming,” Bernard Williams defends Descartes’s claim 
that when we are awake, we can tell that we are awake;  Descartes , 309–13. 
 23. Flanagan discusses Descartes’s efforts to distinguish dreaming from wakeful-
ness, and concludes that “Descartes got both the problem and the solution right”; 
 Dreaming Souls , 174. 
 24.  The World , 21. According to Gaukroger, when Descartes applies mathematics 
to the corporeal world “the contents of the intellect and the contents of the world 
must both be represented in the imagination”;  Descartes’ System of Natural Philosophy , 
220.  The World  (1633) was abandoned after Galileo’s condemnation and was not 
published in Descartes’s lifetime. It consists of two parts, the  Treatise on Light  and the 
 Treatise on Man . 
 25.  The World , 24. 
 26.  Principles of Philosophy , 105–6. 
 27. Platonic inﬂ uence on Descartes’s cosmology is viewed skeptically by Cath-
erine Wilson, “Soul, Body, and World”; and by Cottingham, “Plato’s Sun and Des-
cartes’s Stove,” in  Cartesian Reﬂ ections , 292–318. 
 28.  The World , 38–39. Cf.  Principles of Philosophy , 96, 117–22. 

258    NOTES TO PAGES 118–123
 29. Newton mounted a full-scale attack on the “absurdity” of Cartesian vortices in 
an undated manuscript on gravity,  De Gravitatione , in  Philosophical Writings , 12–39. But 
as late as 1752, Bernard le Bouvier de Fontenelle, who had published the ﬁ rst biography 
of Newton in 1728, defended vortices in  Théorie des tourbillions cartésiens . 
 30.  Optics , Discourse One (Light),  PW 1:154–55 
 31. See Gal and Chen-Morris,  Baroque Science , 37–51. Baigrie argues that the 
images provided by Descartes are cognitive thought experiments rather than repre-
sentations of anything in the world: “Descartes’ illustrations are to be seen as two-
dimensional models of how things might work, and not what they look like”;  Picturing 
Knowledge , 116. 
 32. These issues are explored in good studies by Sepper ( Descartes’s Imagination ) 
and Schouls ( Descartes and the Possibility of Science ). Clarke emphasizes that for the 
later Descartes “imagination is a cognitive faculty and, like any other instrument, it 
may be used properly or improperly”;  Descartes’s Theory of Mind , 81. 
 33. Alan R. White,  Language of Imagination , mounts a sustained attack on the 
prevailing doctrine that imagination is coextensive with imagery. 
 34.  The World , 105, 107. In the Royal Gardens at Saint-Germain-en-Lay, visitors 
stepped on tiles that activated mechanisms in the shape of gods or monsters. The 
rational soul, in Descartes’s simile, presides over the waterworks like an alert foun-
taineer. Salomon de Caus,  La raisons des forces mouvantes  (Paris, 1624), had amply 
explained and illustrated the designs of grottoes and fountains. 
 35. On Descartes’s continuing belief in the power of inspiration—“An inner joy 
has some secret power to make Fortune more favourable”—see his letter to Princess 
Elizabeth, October or November 1646 ( PW 3:296–97). 
 36.  The World , 99. For the functions of the pineal gland, see 142–60. 
 37. E.g., Ryle,  Concept of Mind ; and Damasio,  Descartes’ Error . Arguments about 
Descartes’s dualism and the mind/body problem are so extensive that modern phi-
losophy might be considered a series of footnotes to the issues he introduced. Some 
clariﬁ cation of Descartes’s own views is offered by Machamer and McGuire,  Des-
cartes’s Changing Mind . 
 38. Opposing views are well expressed in the debate between Changeux and 
Ricoeur,  What Makes Us Think? 
 39. “Of the Consequence or T RAYNE of Imagination”;  Leviathan , pt. 1, chap. 3. 
 40. See Aarsleff,  Study of Language in England , 44–72. 
 41. In  Principles of Philosophy  Descartes states that “all the things which we clearly 
perceive are true” (15), and subsequently refers to clear and distinct  perceptions rather 
than to  ideas , which might involve illusory images. 
 42.  The Prelude (1850), 5.45–47. 
 43. This formulation draws on Gaukroger, “Nature of Abstract Reasoning.” 
 44. Lüthy, “Logical Necessity,” points out that Descartes’s extensive use of visual 
aids or “iconography” was an innovation in natural philosophy that accounts for 
much of his inﬂ uence on the natural sciences. 
 45. The globe of the earth is represented as a great magnet or loadstone in book 
6 of Gilbert’s  De Magnete (1600), which Descartes acknowledged as his source. 
 46.  Principles of Philosophy , 243, 265. 
 47. According to Dear, in the mechanical philosophy exempliﬁ ed by automata 
and endorsed by Descartes “the distinction between art and nature was dissolved by 

NOTES TO PAGES 123–129   259
 ﬁ at ”; “Mechanical Microcosm,” 123. Stone,  Tables of Knowledge , compares Descartes’s 
and Vermeer’s modes of representing thought. 
 48. The ﬁ gures conceived by Descartes were prepared for print by his friend 
and editor Frans van Schooten the Younger, a Dutch mathematician and artist. Bai-
grie offers some interesting speculations about Descartes’s acquaintance with Dutch 
painters, though it is not true that Rembrandt was apprenticed to Frans van Schoo-
ten’s father;  Picturing Knowledge , 88. 
 49. Cyrano de Bergerac, “Les états et empires du soleil,” in  Œuvres complètes, 
1:180–83. Unﬁ nished at Cyrano’s death in 1655, this sequel to the  Voyage to the Moon 
was ﬁ rst published in 1662. 
 50. Descartes’s apparition suggests that this section of  Voyage to the Sun  was writ-
ten just after his death in 1650. According to Vartanian,  Voyage to the Sun  contrasts 
sharply with Cyrano’s previous work “by ﬁ nding its inspiration wholly in Des-
cartes”;  Diderot and Descartes , 56. 
 51.  Œuvres complètes,  1:342–43. Cyrano’s posthumously published  Fragment 
de physique , perhaps based on work by Jacques Rohault (see  Œuvres complètes, 
1:347–94), has been analyzed in relation to Descartes by Harth;  Cyrano de Bergerac , 
99–108. 
 52. In “Cyrano de Bergerac’s Epistemological Bodies,” Romanowski emphasizes 
Cyrano’s use of multiple perspectives. 
 53. Descartes’s own detailed descriptions of mechanical devices, written for 
Constantijn Huygens, were later published by Nicolas Joseph Poisson,  Traité de la 
mechanique, composé par Monsieur Descartes (Paris, 1668). 
 54.  Principles of Philosophy , 46–48. On the Lucretian origins of Cyrano’s engine, 
see the note in  Œuvres complètes, 1:207–8. 
 55.  Principles of Philosophy , 171–72. 
 56.  Œuvres de Descartes, 1:570. 
 57. The phrase “the self-assured inner voice” is Thomas Pavel’s; “Literature and 
the Arts,” 358. 
 58. Paul Valéry’s long engagement and debate with Descartes are explored by 
ﬁ ve pieces in Valéry,  Œuvres , 1:787–854, translated in  Masters and Friends , 6–85, along 
with some comments from notebooks, 309–14. 
 59. Gabbey and Hall identify the  Dictionary  with Rudolf Goclenius’s  Lexicon 
Philosophicum  (editions of 1603 or 1611), which had “reappeared” in abridged edi-
tions in 1613 and 1615; “Melon and the Dictionary.” 
 60.  Œuvres de Descartes , 1:156;  PW 3:26–28. 
 61.  PW  3:46. See Shea,  Magic of Numbers and Motion , 292–95. 
 62. Alexander Pope,  An Essay on Man (1733), lines 245–46. 
 63. A classic account is Curtius, “Book of Nature,” in  European Literature , 319–26. 
 64. J. C. Scaliger’s  Poetices (1561), cited by Shepherd in his edition of Sidney’s 
 Apology . Inﬂ uential accounts of this concept include Panofsky’s  Idea  and Abrams’s 
 Mirror and the Lamp , 272–85. 
 65.  Apology for Poetry , 100. 
 66.  Principles of Philosophy , 287, 288. 
 67. Quoted by Hutchinson, “What Happened to Occult Qualities.” Guicciardini 
observes that “anti-Cartesian feelings pervade Newton’s work”;  Isaac Newton on 
Mathematical Certainty , 21. 

260    NOTES TO PAGES 129–138
 68. Newton,  Principia , 943. 
 69.  Biographia Literaria , 1:304. In chapter 12, Thesis 7 mounts a critique of the Car-
tesian Cogito, which is equated with self-consciousness or “the conditional ﬁ nite I” 
as opposed to “the absolute I  AM, ” which originates in God (1:276–80). 
 70.  Biographia Literaria , 1:296–97. The ﬁ rst sentence is borrowed from F. W. J. 
von Schelling, where the word translated as “naturalist” is “Physiker.” 
 7 . A History of Error
  1.  Mosaicall Philosophy: Grounded upon the Essential Truth or Eternal Sapience , 28. 
This is Fludd’s own translation of his last work,  Philosophia Moysaica , ﬁ rst published 
in 1638, a year after his death. 
  2. “Christ sayeth: When I am exalted I will draw bodys unto me”; “Truth’s 
Golden Harrow” (1623), 109. For Jacob, see 122; for Moses, 110. This manuscript, 
unpublished at the time, responds to Patrick Scot,  The Tillage of Light (1623). 
 3. Debus traces the history of the debate, with special attention to Mersenne, 
van Helmont, and Fludd, in  Chemical Philosophy . 
  4.  Doctor Fludds Answer , 108–9. Page numbers in the text refer to the ﬁ rst edi-
tion (1631). Huffman reprints substantial excerpts from this work as well as from 
“Truth’s Golden Harrow” in  Robert Fludd: Essential Readings . 
  5. Hacking’s  Emergence of Probability  builds on a challenging thesis advanced by 
Foucault in  Les mots et les choses . See also Shapiro,  Probability and Certainty . 
 6. Despite this forbearance, Fludd later remarks that “this our adverse Author 
was a Barber Chirurgians sonne” ( Doctor Fludds Answer , 122). Surgeons had ﬁ nancial 
motives to oppose the salve. 
 7. Shapin,  Social History of Truth , 42. 
 8. A similar conﬁ dence invigorated some of Fludd’s contemporaries, particu-
larly Athanasius Kircher; see Findlen,  Athanasius Kircher ; and Glassie,  Man of Mis-
conceptions . 
 9. Westman, “Nature, Art, and Psyche,” analyzes Fludd’s “visual epistemology,” 
with particular attention to Dürer. Godwin reproduces and annotates a great many 
of these pictures in  Robert Fludd . 
 10. Harvey,  Anatomical Exercitations , 59. The ﬁ rst English translation, quoted here, 
dates from 1653. 
 11.  Pulsus  (1629?), in vol. 2 of Fludd’s  Medicina Catholica . Debus discusses Fludd’s 
use of Harvey in  Chemical Philosophy , 1:271–76, and  Man and Nature , 66–73. 
 12. The “Second Partition” of Burton’s  Anatomy of Melancholy  begins with 
“ Unlawfull Cures Rejected ,” and in its 4th edition (1632), a year after Foster’s attack, 
Burton lists Fludd, who had been his contemporary as a student at Christ Church, 
Oxford, among authorities who vouch for the efﬁ cacy of “magneticall” or magical 
cures. 
 13. The white magic of alchemy serves benign purposes, both literally and sym-
bolically, in Mantel’s ingenious novel  Fludd , set in the 1950s. 
 14. Keith Thomas,  Religion and the Decline of Magic , 644. 
 15. Willey,  Seventeenth Century Background , 48. In an epilogue to Raven’s  English 
Naturalists , Browne represents “the coming of modern man”: “He desired to reject 
all infallibilities, to test all propositions, to expose all superstitions”; 350. 

NOTES TO PAGES 138–141   261
 16. Lerer,  Error and the Academic Self , provides a wide-ranging study of blunders. 
 17. “La diritta via”;  Inferno,  1.3. Cf. “la verace via” (the true way) at line 12 and 
“dritto” at line 18. 
 18. “Chi crederebbe giù nel mondo errante, / che Rifeo Troiano in questo tondo / 
fosse la quinta delle luci sante?”  Paradiso , 20.67–69. 
 19.  The Faerie Queene , 1.1.10–26. 
 20. Although a few thinkers in Spenser’s time had doubts about spontaneous (or 
more precisely, equivocal) generation, both literary and medical authorities (including 
Thomas Browne) gave overwhelming support to the fecundity of Nile mud. 
 21. Johns cites one instance from 1538: “Thomas Elyot had found it necessary 
to list heresies so that they could be ‘the sooner espeyed and abhorred in suche 
bokes, where they be craftily enterlaced with holsom doctrine’ ”;  Nature of the 
Book , 424. 
 22. Letter from Robert Ridley to Henry Gold, Feb. 24, 1527, in Pollard,  Records 
of the English Bible , 122, 125. As Lerer points out, Ridley did not need to read the 
translation in order to accuse it of error; any vernacular rendering would open the 
door to “lutheranes heretikes & apostates”;  Error and the Academic Self , 28–29. 
 23.  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  1:3 (hereafter cited as  PE ). Volume and page numbers 
in the text refer to the 1981 Oxford edition. 
 24. “Of Truth,” in  OFB 15:7. 
 25.  Novum Organum , Aphorism 65, in  OFB 11:101–3. 
 26. Debus identiﬁ es Fludd as Bacon’s target in the introduction to  Robert Fludd 
and His Philosophical Key . Huffman concludes that the success of Bacon’s ideas “con-
tributed a great deal to Fludd’s passage to obscurity”;  Robert Fludd and the End of the 
Renaissance , 173. According to Seth Ward in  Vindiciæ Academiarum  (Oxford, 1654), 
“there are not two waies in the whole World more opposite, then those of the  
L. Verulam and  D. Fludd , the one founded upon experiment, the other upon mystical 
Ideal reasons”; quoted in Jones,  Ancients and Moderns , 112. It may be worth noting, 
however, that Bacon himself provided a recipe for the weapon-salve “upon the Rela-
tion of  Men  of  Credit ” in  Sylva Sylvarum ( 1627), “though my selfe, as yet, am not fully 
inclined to beleeue it” (264). 
 27. Jones describes the inﬂ uence of “the ‘Bacon-faced Generation’ ”;  Ancients and 
Moderns , 237–67. But Purver ( Royal Society ), Hunter ( Establishing the New Science ), 
and Lynch ( Solomon’s Child ) have questioned the extent to which the practices of the 
Royal Society followed the theory and methods recommended by Bacon. 
 28. Glanvill,  Plus Ultra , 88.  Plus ultra  (Further Beyond) was Bacon’s motto, 
adopted from the Spanish king Charles V, who encouraged his mariners to explore 
beyond the Pillars of Hercules, which formerly had been considered the “Ne Plus 
Ultra.” The famous frontispiece of the  Instauratio Magna  (1620) pictures a ship sailing 
beyond the pillars. 
 29. “Ode, To the  Royal Society ” (1667), line 93, in Sprat,  History of the Royal 
Society , xlvi. 
 30. Gillispie’s own view of Bacon is less than enthusiastic: since Bacon “discoun-
tenanced imagination,” he “would have none of Kepler or Copernicus or Gilbert or 
anyone who would extend a few ideas or calculations into a system of the world”; 
and “No discovery has ever been made by following his method”;  Edge of Objectivity , 
77, 82. Solomon,  Objectivity in the Making , also casts doubt on Bacon’s “objectivity.” 

262    NOTES TO PAGES 141–144
Daston and Galison argue that “objectivity is a nineteenth century innovation,” 
preceded epistemologically by “truth-to-nature,” and that Bacon’s remedy for idols 
“had nothing to do with suppression of the subjective self,” but rather advised an 
extreme counteraction to one-sided predilections;  Objectivity , 27–32. 
 31. Digby,  A Late Discourse (1658). Digby, who opposed occult or astral explana-
tions of the salve, ﬁ rst offered his own mechanistic defense in  Two Treatises  (1644); 
see Dobbs, “Studies in the Natural Philosophy of Sir Kenelm Digby”; and Hedrick, 
“Romancing the Salve.” 
 32. Huffman,  Robert Fludd , 166. 
 33. Pauli, “Inﬂ uence of Archetypal Ideas ,” 207; see chapter 3 above. Arthur I. 
Miller discusses Pauli’s “Jungian take” on Fludd;  Deciphering the Cosmic Number , 203–7. 
 34. Dear,  Revolutionizing the Sciences , 166. Willey begins with a similar view of 
“what was  felt to be ‘truth’ and ‘explanation’ under seventeenth century conditions”: 
“Interest was now directed to the  how , the manner of causation, not its  why , its ﬁ nal 
cause”;  Seventeenth Century Background . 
 35. On the patent, see  Robert Fludd,  29–31. Gough discusses Fludd’s unfulﬁ lled 
hope to capitalize on steel;  Rise of the Entrepreneur , 91. Yates analyzes Fludd’s “astral 
mnemonics” in  Art of Memory and  Theatre of the World . 
 36.  Novum Organum , in  OFB 11:103–7. 
 37.  The Garden of Cyrus  (1658), in Browne,  Religio Medici , 174 (hereafter cited as  RM ). 
According to Knott, Browne’s “fondness for the ﬁ gure of the labyrinth reveals both an 
inclination to marvel at the complexity of the divine order and a tendency to dwell upon 
the human capacity for error, including his own”; “Sir Thomas Browne,” 19. 
 38.  Christian Morals , 115–16 (hereafter cited as  CM ; page numbers in the text 
refer to Roberts’s edition). Browne was attracted at times by the supposedly ancient 
writings attributed to Hermes (exposed as forgeries by Isaac Casaubon in the early 
seventeenth century), but it was their obscurity, not their truth, that pleased him. 
“I am now content to understand a mystery without a rigid deﬁ nition. . . . Where I 
cannot satisﬁ e my reason, I love to humour my fancy”;  RM 10. On several occasions 
he approvingly quoted a sentence ascribed to Hermes: “ Sphæra, cujus centrum ubique, 
circumferentia nullibi ” ([God is] a circle whose center is everywhere, whose circumfer-
ence is nowhere). A manuscript comment on artiﬁ cial forms of verse (“odd con-
trived phancies”) shows that Browne was acquainted with Fludd’s hermetic ingenuity: 
“More ænigmatical and dark expressions might be made if any one would speak 
or compose them out of the numerical Characters or characteristical Numbers set 
down by Robertus de Fluctibus”;  Works of Sir Thomas Browne , 3:68. Hack-Molitor, 
 On Tiptoe in Heaven , discusses Browne’s mystical leanings. 
 39. Johnson, “A Life of the Author” (1756);  CM 18. Browne left  Christian Morals  
in manuscript at his death in 1682, and it was ﬁ rst published in 1716. 
 40.  Diary of John Evelyn , 3:594 (October 17, 1671). Preston puts  Pseudodoxia 
within “the culture of collecting”;  Thomas Browne , 103–20. 
 41. “The problem that occupies Browne’s  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  is the relation 
of wandering to truth”; West, “Brownean Motion,” 186. 
 42.  RM 33. 
 43. Harvey,  Anatomical Exercitations,  226. See Thomas Hall,  Ideas of Life and 
Matter , 1:242–49. Browne greatly admired Harvey’s “excellent discourse  of Generation ” 

NOTES TO PAGES 144–147   263
( PE 1:288), which he seems to have read more than a decade before it was pub-
lished. 
 44.  RM 33. In the preface to  Anatomical Exercitations , Harvey had questioned 
whether the animal in the womb might begin as “some  rude  and  undigested lump .” 
A long paragraph in  PE (1:212–13) describes the gradual emergence of the frog, 
“according to the amphibious and mixt intention of nature,” from a “blacke or 
duskie substance” in the seed through “the strange indistinction of parts in the Tad-
pole” to the process by which “successively the inward parts doe seem to discover 
themselves, untill their last perfection”: “what a long line is runne to make a Frogge.” 
 45. Commonplaces about Browne’s “Latinity” are analyzed and challenged by 
Havenstein;  Democratizing Sir Thomas Browne , 184–97. 
 46.  RM 33. 
 47.  Hamlet , 2:2:293–98. “What a piece of work is a man! . . . And yet to me 
what is this quintessence of dust?” Cf. Pascal: “What kind of chimera is man? What 
a novelty, what a monster, what chaos, what a mass of contradictions, what a prodigy? 
Judge of all things, idiot earthworm, depository of truth, sinkhole of unknowing 
and error, glory and refuse of the universe”;  Pensées , L131/S164, in  Œuvres complètes , 
2:580. 
 48.  RM 55. “Neither in the name of multitude doe I onely include the base 
and minor sort of people,” Browne continues. “There is a rabble even amongst the 
Gentry.” 
 49.  PE 1:16. Killeen links Browne’s deuteroscopic hermeneutics to ways of 
interpreting politics and science;  Biblical Scholarship , 10–20. 
 50. “The falling of Salt is an authenticke presagement of ill lucke,” according to 
Browne, because “salt as incorruptible, was the Simbole of friendship,” so that its fall 
might portend a breach of friendship or perhaps even a breach with God ( PE 1:425). 
 51. Browne’s iconoclasm is a central concern of Killeen;  Biblical Scholarship , 185–
216. 
 52. Preston,  Thomas Browne , 83–84. Preston supplies a very thorough study of 
Browne’s uses of “vulgar” and also explores the many ramiﬁ cations of the word. 
 53. The title of the ﬁ rst edition (1646), including the spelling “Tenents,” was 
retained through “The Sixth and Last Edition, Corrected and Enlarged by the 
Author” (1672). 
 54. Earlier on the same page Browne’s “ingenuous” means “ingenious,” but he 
clearly distinguishes this freeborn class from “the people.” Wilding argues that Browne’s 
fear of the multitude, during the mass demonstrations of 1641–42, led him to include 
“gentry” among “the rabble” in  Religio Medici , though he modiﬁ ed that verdict a few 
years later;  Dragon’s Teeth , 103–5. 
 55.  CM 19. 
 56. Geis and Bunn,  Trial of Witches , give a thorough account of Browne’s role. 
Killeen ( Biblical Scholarship , 147–53) and Silver (“ ‘Wonders of the Invisible World’ ”) 
contend that a “scientiﬁ c” reliance on circumstantial evidence, not magical thinking, 
guided Browne’s testimony. 
 57.  PE  1:229. The title essay of Gardner’s  Did Adam and Eve Have Navels?  begins 
with Browne, who considered Michelangelo’s picture of Adam’s navel a mistake, as if 
“the Creator affected superﬂ uities” ( PE 1:377). 

264    NOTES TO PAGES 147–152
 58. In “A Digression of the wisdome of God in the site and motion of the Sun” 
( PE 1:464–68), Browne thanks providence for the sun’s motion, “for, had it stood 
still, and were it ﬁ xed like the earth,” there would have been no seasons. At the end 
of the chapter he mentions “the hypothesis of Copernicus, afﬁ rming the Earth to 
move, and the Sunne to stand still,” but he does not endorse it. 
 59.  PE 1:351. Robbins notes that Browne’s discussion draws on as many as eigh-
teen predecessors ( PE 2:930). 
 60.  PE  1:81. Browne seems to have taken special pains with this entry; he revised 
it extensively after the ﬁ rst edition in 1646. Preston counts at least twenty examples 
of experimental activity in the book;  Thomas Browne , 186–89. 
 61.  PE 1:96, 300, 288. Though seemingly indifferent to telescopes, Browne often 
does commend “exquisite Microscopes and Magnifying Glasses” (1:155). 
 62. As Robbins points out ( PE 1:xxi-xxvii), Browne frequently makes use of 
George Hakewill’s strong modernist argument against the “pretended decay” of 
nature and mankind, but he never cites or mentions it directly. 
 63.  PE 1:71; cf. 1:586–87. On the clash of theories, see Joseph Needham, who com-
mends Browne’s “originality and genius” as an embryologist;  History of Embryology , 133. 
 64.  CM 120–21. 
 65. Temple, “An Essay upon the Ancient and Modern Learning” (1690), in Spin-
garn,  Critical Essays , 3:32–72. Levine provides a useful overview in  Battle of the Books . 
 66. On the turn from oral to written media, see Nagy, “Death of a Schoolboy,” 
in  Poetry as Performance. Jacques Derrida famously deconstructs the privileging of 
speech over writing in  De la grammatologie (1967) and  La carte postale (1980). 
 67. The pursuit of “ardent etymologies” is one of the themes of Lerer,  Error and 
the Academic Self . 
 68. Johns,  Nature of the Book , 123. 
 69. John Dunton’s very successful periodical,  The Athenian Gazette  (1691–97), 
opened its pages to questions from readers of every class. According to McEwen, 
760 questions about science were posed and answered in the twenty volumes of the 
 Mercury;  Oracle of the Coffee House , 114. 
 70. Gay discusses Bayle’s inﬂ uence in  Enlightenment , 1:290–95. 
 71. Bayle,  Various Thoughts on the Occasion of a Comet , 6. 
 72.  PE  1:535. Browne’s speculations on comets are based on commentaries on 
Aristotle’s  Metereologica by Nicolas Cabeus (1646). 
 73.  Various Thoughts , 89. 
 74. Lipking argues that the form of Bayle’s perpetual commentary inﬂ uenced 
many later writers, including Johnson and other British biographers;,  Ordering of the 
Arts , 76–83. 
 75. “Truth, he held, is not a body of knowledge that can simply be handed down, 
by ancestors, priests or rulers. It is something one has to discover for oneself and make 
one’s own, and this necessarily makes it subjective, ﬁ nite and liable to the inﬂ uence 
of ignorance and error. It has to be thought of as the object of a permanent quest, a 
goal that no human being can ever actually reach”; Labrousse,  Bayle , 87. 
 76. Laurence Sterne,  Tristram Shandy , 85, 86. 
 77. Locke,  Essay concerning Human Understanding , 706. In his fourth meditation, 
Descartes had similarly argued that errors arose not from faults of understanding but 
from the will: “The scope of the will is wider than that of the intellect; but instead 

NOTES TO PAGES 152–156   265
of restricting it within the same limits, I extend its use to matters which I do not 
understand. Since the will is indifferent in such cases, it easily turns aside from what 
is true and good, and this is the source of my error and sin”;  PW 2:40–41. But Locke 
does not equate bad judgment with will or error with sin. 
 78.  Essay concerning Human Understanding, 718, 719. 
 79. A similar point has often been made about I. A. Richards’s attempt to reform 
practical criticism; irrelevant associations and stock responses so dominate readings 
that anything like a “correct” interpretation begins to resemble a spiritual exercise, 
mysterious and incommunicable. See Richards,  Practical Criticism , pt. 4. 
 80.  Essay concerning Human Understanding, 716. 
 81. Hume’s  Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  were probably completed in 1751 
or 1752 but remained unpublished until 1779. 
 82. Imlac, in Johnson’s  Rasselas , chap. 44, “The dangerous prevalence of imagina-
tion” (150). 
 83. Wimsatt comments on Johnson’s afﬁ nities with Browne;  Prose Style of Samuel 
Johnson , 117–20; Yolton,  John Locke and the Way of Ideas , analyzes Locke’s theory of 
mind. 
 84.  Rasselas , 150–53. According to Mrs. Thrale, “The vacuity of Life had at 
some early period of his life perhaps so struck upon the Mind of Mr. Johnson, that it 
became by repeated impressions his favourite hypothesis”;  Thraliana , 1:179. 
 85. DeMaria,  Johnson’s “Dictionary,” 70. 
 86. “The Life of Sir Thomas Browne,” in  CM 18. 
 87. Boswell’s  Life of Johnson , 2:434. 
 88. Johnson preﬁ xed his life of Browne to  Christian Morals  on the grounds that 
“an edition of a posthumous work appears imperfect and neglected, without some 
account of the author”;  CM  3. Preston errs in stating that “Johnson committed his 
only essay on a writer solely of prose in  Lives of the Poets  to Browne” ( Thomas Browne , 5); 
Browne does not appear in the  Lives of the Poets , and Johnson wrote many other lives 
of writers of prose. Barbour and Preston repeat the error that Browne was “the only 
writer of prose biographized by Johnson” and also err in calling this Johnson’s “most 
detailed ‘literary’ life”;  Sir Thomas Browne , 1. 
 89.  CM 37. Johnson emphasizes the need of biographers to note the minute 
details of private life in  Rambler 60 (1750) and many other places. 
 90.  CM 10. Shuger analyzes Digby’s attacks on  Religio Medici  in “The Laudian 
Idiot.” 
 91.  RM 69–70; my italics. 
 92. For Johnson’s use of common or vulgar readings as his critical standard, see 
Tracy, “Johnson and the Common Reader”; and Lipking, “Inventing the Common 
Reader.” In homage to Johnson, Virginia Woolf collected two series of her essays 
under the title  The Common Reader . 
 93.  Rasselas , chaps. 41–43. 
 94. In a passage cited by Johnson, Isaac Watts had charged Browne with “arro-
gant temerity” for declaring himself “to have escaped ‘the ﬁ rst and father-sin of 
pride’.” Johnson agrees: “A perusal of the R ELIGIO MEDICI will not much contribute 
to produce a belief of the author’s exemption from this  FATHER-SIN : pride is a vice, 
which pride itself inclines every man to ﬁ nd in others, and to overlook in himself” 
( CM 45). 

266    NOTES TO PAGES 157–160
 95. See Popper,  Conjectures and Refutations . 
 96.  Adventurer  50:362; cf. Boswell,  Life of Samuel Johnson , 3:293. Johnson para-
phrases Browne from memory; see  PE 1:72: “So large is the Empire of truth, that it 
hath place within the walles of hell, and the divels themselves are dayly forced to prac-
tise it; . . . although they deceive us, they lye not unto each other; as well understanding 
that all community is continued by truth, and that of hell cannot consist without it.” 
 97. Shapin suggests that the trust formerly placed in “gentlemen” is now accorded 
to institutions; but he argues that modern scientists also depend on trusting a limited 
“core-set” of people they know or know about;  Social History of Truth , 409–17. 
 8 . The Century of Genius (1)
  1. Johnson,  Rambler, 1:320. 
  2. Westfall,  Never at Rest , ix. In “Newton and His Biographer,” Westfall con-
fesses that he understood Newton less well at the end of his biography than at its 
beginning. 
 3. “Surgite Mortales, terrenas mittite curas; / Atque hinc cœligenæ vires digno-
scite Mentis, / A pecudum vita longe lateque remotæ. . . . / Nec fas est propius 
Mortali attingere Divos”; Halley’s “Ode on This Splendid Ornament of Our Time 
and Our Nation, the Mathematico-Physical Treatise by the Eminent Isaac New-
ton,” lines 27–29, 48 (my translation). MacPike prints Halley’s verses, along with 
“improvements” made by Richard Bentley in the second edition of the  Principia 
(1713) and a free translation by “Eugenio” (Francis Fawkes, 1755), in appendices to 
Halley’s  Correspondence , 203–8. 
 4. The inscription (1755) inserts “Newton” in the line from Lucretius,  De 
rerum natura , 3:1043. Thomas and Ober trace the background and aftereffects of the 
statue. Albury, “Halley’s Ode,” stresses the danger of associating a Christian hero 
with a pagan. 
 5. Allan Ramsay (1728), William Whitehead (1738), and Henry Jones (1746) all 
call Newton “godlike.” The “nice barrier” (pronounced “bareer”) is Fawkes’s trans-
lation of Halley’s ode, line 48. Fara,  Newton , provides a wide-ranging, iconoclastic 
survey of Newtonian idolatry. 
 6. Westfall,  Never at Rest , 874. 
 7. Gleick,  Isaac Newton , 3. 
 8. Einstein, foreword (1952) to Newton’s  Opticks , lix. 
 9. T. S. Eliot, “Sweeney Erect” (1919), lines 25–26. By nominating Sweeney as 
the representative man of his century, Eliot slyly deﬂ ates the gloriﬁ cation of greatness 
in Carlyle and Emerson. 
 10. Canguilhem,  Vital Rationalist , 28. 
 11. “We gladly return to the company of those illustrious men who by aspiring 
to noble ends, whether intellectual or practical, have risen above the region of storms 
into a clearer atmosphere, where there is no misrepresentation of opinion, nor ambi-
guity of expression, but where one mind comes into closest contact with another at 
the point where both approach nearest to the truth”; James Clerk Maxwell (1871), 
in Gillispie’s foreword. 
 12. See A. Rupert Hall,  Philosophers at War . 
 13. Whitehead,  Science and the Modern World , 55–56. 

NOTES TO PAGES 161–165   267
 14. A similar argument impels Burtt, whose doctoral thesis was titled “The 
Metaphysics of Sir Isaac Newton.” 
 15. The story was passed on by John Conduitt, who may have heard it from his 
wife Catherine, Newton’s niece, and who had seen other versions by Abraham de 
Moivre and Henry Pemberton. Voltaire and William Stukeley also vouched for the 
apple. Iliffe, Keynes, and Higgitt,  Early Biographies , vol. 1, offers several accounts of 
the story. A. Rupert Hall,  Isaac Newton , discusses the early biographical traditions. 
 16. “The Great Tradition” in writing about the Scientiﬁ c Revolution is named 
and analyzed by H. F. Cohen,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution : 21–150. The notion of a New-
tonian synthesis, which dominates many studies, was appraised in 1948 by Koyré, 
 Newtonian Studies , 3–24, and is explicitly supported by Westfall’s  Construction of Mod-
ern Science . 
 17. Halley’s ode: “rerumque immobilis ordo, / Et quæ præteriti latuerent sæcula 
mundi”; James Thomson, “To the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton,” line 72. 
 18. Pope intended the epitaph, written in 1730, for the monument executed by 
Rysbrack the following year; but a more conventional Latin inscription was chosen. 
 19. “To the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton,” lines 201–2. 
 20. Hume,  History of England , 6:542. 
 21. Feingold,  Newtonian Moment , surveys the slow and sometimes reluctant accep-
tance of Newton’s ideas by other European countries. Ferrone,  Intellectual Roots of the 
Italian Enlightenment , inspects the Italian reception of Newton. 
 22. Voltaire,  Letters on England (1733), 68. 
 23. See Guicciardini,  Reading the “Principia .” 
 24. According to Kilmister, the “inexplicable creative insight” of Newton’s 
genius inspired awe by showing that mathematical abstractions could be applied to 
the real world; “Genius in Mathematics.” 
 25. Desaguliers, preface to  A Course of Experimental Philosophy (1734). 
 26. “The incomparable Mr.  Newton , has shewn, how far Mathematicks, applied 
to some Parts of Nature, may, upon Principles that Matter of Fact justiﬁ e, carry us 
in the knowledge of some, as I may so call them, particular Provinces of the Incom-
prehensible Universe”; Locke,  Some Thoughts concerning Education , 248. 
 27. Manuel examines Newton’s collaborations with Locke;  Portrait of Isaac New-
ton , 183–87. 
 28. Daston and Park cite the opening passage of Newton’s “New Theory about 
Light and Colours” (1672) as an example of the interwoven passions of wonder and 
curiosity;  Wonders and the Order of Nature , 303–4. But later Newton’s “Rules of Rea-
soning” in the  Principia contributed to “the learned rejection of wonder and wonders 
in the early eighteenth century” (350–52). 
 29. John Maynard Keynes, “Newton the Man,” argues extravagantly that New-
ton was not so much a scientist as a “wonder-child” or magician. 
 30. The sense of “genius” as “mental power” or “a remarkably clever person” is 
equivalent to Latin  ingenium , which also elicits “ingenuity” and “engine.” 
 31. Johnson,  Lives of the Poets , 1:191. 
 32. Boswell,  Life of Samuel Johnson , 5:35. 
 33.  Science and the Modern World , 291–92. Whitehead deliberately echoes the 
ﬁ nal sentence of his hero Shelley’s  Defence of Poetry : “Poets are the unacknowledged 
legislators of the World.” 

268    NOTES TO PAGES 166–171
 34.  Copernican Revolution , 1–2. Blumenberg,  Genesis of the Copernican World , 
mounts a sustained and detailed argument for the epochal turn in European thought 
that Copernicus represented. 
 35. Copernicus, preface to  On the Revolutions , 5. Frombork (Frauenberg) was 
part of Varmia, a Catholic province surrounded by Prussia. Repcheck,  Copernicus’ 
Secret , provides historical contexts for Copernicus’s life and times. 
 36. Swerdlow, “Derivation and First Draft of Copernicus’s Planetary Theory,” 
proposes 1514 as the latest possible date. 
 37. Danielson discusses the circumstances of publication;  First Copernican , 
103–14. 
 38. Gingerich,  The Book Nobody Read , estimates the ﬁ rst edition at 400–500 cop-
ies, a considerable number at the time. “The Book Nobody Read” refers ironically 
to a phrase from Koestler, whose lively but sometimes contemptuous account of 
Copernicus asserts that  De Revolutionibus  “was and is an all-time worst seller”:  Sleep-
walkers , 194. 
 39. Erasmus Reinhold’s  Prutenic Tables  (1551), based on Copernican methods of 
calculation, became standard in the later sixteenth century. 
 40. Preface to  On the Revolutions , 4. 
 41. “The signiﬁ cance of the  De Revolutionibus  lies, then, less in what it says itself 
than in what it caused others to say”; Kuhn,  Copernican Revolution , 135. 
 42. Danielson,  First Copernican , 7, 231. 
 43. The “latitude theory” improbably synchronizes the inclinations of plane-
tary orbits with the motions of the earth. Swerdlow and Neugebauer,  Mathematical 
Astronomy , meticulously compare the mathematical astronomy of Ptolemy with that 
of Copernicus. 
 44. Johnson,  Lives of the Poets , 1:294–95. 
 45. Christianson,  On Tycho’s Island , provides a detailed account of the patronage 
system that sustained Tycho. The standard life is Thoren’s  Lord of Uraniborg . 
 46. Tycho described his instruments in  Astronomiæ Instauratæ Mechanica  ( Instru-
ments of the Renewed Astronomy ). The instruments were dispersed after Tycho’s death, 
though some are displayed at the National Technical Museum in Prague. 
 47. Mosley,  Bearing the Heavens , explores the image of Atlas that Tycho and his 
admirers linked to himself. 
 48. See chapter 3 above. 
 49. Christianson,  On Tycho’s Island , includes a comprehensive biographical direc-
tory of Tycho’s many “coworkers.” 
 50.  New Astronomy , 184, 157. 
 51.  Epistolarum Astronomicarum Libri  ( Astronomical Letters ), and  Astronomiæ Instau-
ratæ Mechanica ( Instruments of the Renewed Astronomy ). 
 52. Mosley,  Bearing the Heavens , 295–97. 
 53. Christianson describes Tycho’s “fragmented legacy”;  On Tycho’s Island , 
237–48. 
 54.  Diary and Letters of Madam D’Arblay , 2:271. 
 55. See Cooper,  “A more beautiful city.”  Cooper and Hunter,  Robert Hooke , include 
essays by Jacques Heyman and Alison Stoesser on Hooke’s architectural work. 
 56. Recorded by John Conduitt, August 31, 1726; Iliffe, Keynes, and Higgitt, 
 Early Biographies, 1:163. 

NOTES TO PAGES 171–177   269
 57.  OFB 11:55, 13, 97. 
 58. Sprat,  History of the Royal Society , 36. 
 59.  New Atlantis. A Worke unﬁ nished (1627), 31. 
 60. The principles of this “royalist utopia” are analyzed by J. C. Davis,  Utopia 
and the Ideal Society , 279–92. 
 61. Classic studies of the rise of Baconian science include R. F. Jones,  Ancients and 
Moderns , and Charles Webster,  The Great Instauration . 
 62.  New Atlantis Continued , 68. 
 63.  New Atlantis Continued , 54–60. Johns points out that this ceremony protects 
the inventor from rival claimants or pirates;  Nature of the Book , 480. 
 64.  New Atlantis , 38, 46. 
 65.  New Atlantis , 17–19. 
 66.  New Atlantis Continued , 22. 
 67. J. C. Davis,  Utopia and the Ideal Society , lists seven candidates, including Sir Robert 
Harley (280), but omits Richard Haines (1633–85), an advocate of public workhouses 
and other projects, whom Hazlitt suggested might be the author. Claeys,  Restoration 
Utopias (xxxiii), thinks that the most likely candidate is Richard Hawkins, author of  A 
Discourse of the Nationall Excellencies of England  (1658). Freeman, “Proposal for an Eng-
lish Academy,” makes a thin case for Hooke; see also Manuel,  Freedom from History , 107. 
 68. Lisa Jardine surveys Hooke’s Oxford years;  Curious Life of Robert Hooke , 63–89. 
 69. Hooke expected but did not soon receive an annual salary of £80. After 
1664, Sir John Cutler paid him £50 a year to lecture at Gresham College, which 
supplemented £30 a year from the Society, and Hooke was elected curator “in per-
petuity” in January 1665. 
 70. The complexity of Hooke’s relations with the Royal Society, both as curator 
of experiments and as Cutlerian lecturer, is documented by Hunter,  Establishing the 
New Science , which includes Hooke’s memoranda on the organization of the Society 
(232–39). 
 71. March 23 1664, quoted in Gunther’s preface to Hooke’s  Micrographia , vi. 
 72. Lynch argues that congruity furnishes Hooke with “an explanatory principle 
applicable to all natural phenomena”;  Solomon’s Child , 114. S. H. Joseph, “Assessment 
of the Scientiﬁ c Value of Hooke’s Work,” in Cooper and Hunter,  Robert Hooke , offers 
support for Hooke’s conjectures (92–94, 105–6). 
 73.  An Attempt for the Explication of the Phænomena , 41;  Micrographia , 11–32. Gouk 
associates Hooke’s principles of congruity and incongruity with sympathetic vibra-
tions in music, and by extension “with the exoteric expression of natural magic”; 
 Music, Science, and Natural Magic , 222. 
 9 . The Century of Genius (2)
  1.  Lectures De Potentia Restitutiva, or of Spring, Explaining the Power of Springing 
Bodies (1678). 
  2. Waller, “The Life of Dr. Robert Hooke,” in  Posthumous Works of Robert 
Hooke , i. 
 3. Bennett et al.,  London ’ s Leonardo ; Chapman,  England ’ s Leonardo ; Ellen Tan 
Drake,  Restless Genius ; Inwood,  Forgotten Genius . See also Nichols’s edition of Hooke’s 
 Diaries , subtitled  The Leonardo of London . 

270    NOTES TO PAGES 178–183
 4. In one of his many speculations about human ﬂ ight—“’Tis not impossible 
to ﬁ t a Pair of Wings for a Man to ﬂ y with”—Hooke compares the natural long ﬁ ns 
of ﬂ ying ﬁ sh to Daedalus’s artiﬁ cial wings;  Posthumous Works , 56. 
  5.  Posthumous Works , 6. 
  6. Hooke had already touted some inventions to enhance the senses in the pref-
ace to  Micrographia , where he claims to have made a kind of telegraph, “a  distended 
wire ” that propagates sounds to “a very considerable distance in an  instant .” 
 7.  Posthumous Works , 39–40. In 1668 Hooke would invent an ear trumpet to 
aid the hard of hearing. 
 8. “Throughout there is no hesitation in making the hypothesis that the true 
and hidden causes of things are mechanical”; Hesse, “Hooke’s Philosophical Alge-
bra,” 69. 
 9.  Posthumous Works , xxvii. 
 10. Lisa Jardine documents Hooke’s extensive and systematic self-experiments 
with a variety of pharmaceuticals in  London’s Leonardo , 181–94. In his later years, 
though still vigorous, he seemed shrunken and stooped, possibly because he suffered 
from a condition known as Scheuermann’s kyphosis; Inwood,  Forgotten Genius , 10. 
 11.  Isaac Newton ’ s Papers & Letters , 47–236. 
 12. Westfall,  Never at Rest , 448–49; A. Rupert Hall, “Two Unpublished Letters,” 
224. 
 13. Marie Boas Hall documents relations between Hooke and Oldenburg from 
1662 to 1677:  Henry Oldenburg , 243–67. Lisa Jardine argues that Oldenburg did 
damage Hooke’s reputation (perhaps unintentionally); “Robert Hooke, A Reputation 
Restored,” in Cooper and Hunter,  Robert Hooke , 247–58. 
 14. After the Dutch ﬂ eet ravaged the English in 1667, Oldenburg was accused 
of “dangerous desseins and practices” and imprisoned for two months in the Tower; 
Hall,  Henry Oldenburg , 114–19. 
 15. Hooke,  Lampas (1676), in Gunter,  Early Science in Oxford , 8:207–8. 
 16. Johns sets the dispute between Oldenburg and Hooke in the context of a 
“fragmentation of credit” that threatened the authority of the Royal Society and its 
publications;  Nature of the Book , 514–42. 
 17. On Hooke’s “Fear of Being Forgotten,” see Inwood,  Forgotten Genius , 378–94. 
 18. Orgel, “Renaissance Artist as Plagiarist,” argues that the age of John Dryden 
developed a notion of plagiarism unknown in the age of Ben Jonson. 
 19. Johnson does include “originalness,” but without any illustrative quotation. 
In other writings he often refers to and values “original thought.” When Edward 
Young read  Conjectures on Original Composition  (1759) to him, Johnson “was sur-
prized to ﬁ nd Young receive as novelties, what he thought very common maxims”; 
Boswell,  Life of Samuel Johnson , 5:269. 
 20.  Prose Works of Jonathan Swift , 1:151. 
 21. Standard surveys of the idea of progress include Bury ( Idea of Progress ), Nisbet 
( History of the Idea of Progress ), and Spadafora ( Idea of Progress in Eighteenth-Century 
Britain ). Levine analyzes the quarrel between ancients and moderns in  Battle of the 
Books . 
 22. Shadwell,  The Virtuoso , 5.3.76–79. 
 23.  Gulliver’s Travels , pt. 3, chap. 5. Swift, like Shadwell, aims his satire not only at 
Hooke but at his mentor Robert Boyle. 

NOTES TO PAGES 184–187   271
 24. September 15, 1689; Gunter,  Early Science in Oxford , 7:716. 
 25.  An Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth , 27–28. Hooke claims that he 
meant to publish the lecture in 1670, but delayed in the hope of completing his 
observations—a task still not accomplished in 1674. An earlier lecture to the Royal 
Society, “The Inﬂ ection of a Direct Motion into a Curve by a Supervening Attrac-
tive Principle” (May 23, 1666), had already posited an attractive centripetal force 
exerted by the sun. 
 26. In an analysis of the “poetics of proof” in Hooke’s  Attempt , Aït-Touati argues 
that his “ ‘System of the World’ was the logical outcome of a spectacular demonstra-
tion of the power of instruments in the realm of astronomy”; through parallax he 
could “see” the path of a star and thus establish mechanics and experiments as the 
basis of natural philosophy;  Fictions of the Cosmos , 168–69. 
 27. Note to the “Reader,” in  Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth . 
 28.  Critique of Judgment  (1796), 175–78. Gammon, “ ‘Exemplary Orginality’,” 
discusses the seeming paradox in Kant’s insistence that geniuses do not follow rules 
but create them. 
 29. This familiar quotation, which dates in this form from 1833 (Iliffe, Keynes, 
and Higgitt,  Early Biographies , 2:31), probably derives from a French phrase, “en 
y passant sans cesse,” in a note (ﬁ rst published in the 1780s) to Voltaire’s book on 
Newton. But Newton himself often expressed similar sentiments about the merit of 
“patient thought.” See Westfall,  Never at Rest , 105n. 
 30. The museum in La Sagrada Familia in Barcelona includes a massive hang-
ing chain that Gaudi designed to experiment with catenary construction similar 
to Hooke’s. In pt, 3, chap. 5 of  Gulliver’s Travels , Swift’s parody of the “ingenious 
Architect” who begins building houses at the roof and works downward may have 
been aimed at Hooke. 
 31. Gunter,  Early Science in Oxford , 7:601. At the end of  A Description of Helio-
scopes  (1676), “to ﬁ ll in the vacancy of the ensuing page” Hooke adds “a  decimate of 
the  centesme of the Inventions I intend to publish”; the second contains, in cipher, his 
principle for forming arches (Gunter, 8:151). Mills, Hennessy, and Watson describe 
“Hooke’s Design for a Driven Equatorial Mounting,” in Cooper and Hunter,  Robert 
Hooke , 77–88. 
 32. Hooke was inducted into the Society on November 12, 1662. He continued 
to participate until December 1702, and died on March 3, 1703. Waller records that 
Hooke intended to leave his considerable estate to the Society but procrastinated and 
died intestate ( Posthumous Works , xxvii). 
 33. Newton to Halley, June 20, 1686. Halley replied that Hooke’s claim had been 
misrepresented, and Newton moderated his attack;  Correspondence , 2:438, 442–43. 
 34. In 1679 Hooke had publicly corrected Newton’s faulty sketch of a body fall-
ing in a spiral on a rotating earth. Their exchanges provoked Newton to ponder the 
action at a distance entailed by the inverse-square force, which produced the elliptical 
orbits of the planets. When he returned to the problem in 1686, the law of gravity 
decisively solved it. But the  Principia  does not acknowledge Hooke’s inﬂ uence. See 
Westfall,  Never at Rest , 382–90; and I. B. Cohen’s “Guide to Newton’s  Principia ”; 
 Principia , 76–82. 
 35.  Principia , 793. A “General Scholium” was added to conclude the second 
edition in 1713. 

272    NOTES TO PAGES 187–192
 36.  Treatise of the System of the World , 2nd ed. (1731), 5. This is an English ver-
sion of the Latin tract that Newton originally intended to be the second book of 
the  Principia . 
 37. Newton to Hooke, February 5, 1676, in  Correspondence , 1:416. Merton traces 
the history of the phrase in  On the Shoulders of Giants . 
 38. Michael White supposes that Newton is maliciously calling attention to 
Hooke’s short stature;  Isaac Newton , 187–88. 
 39.  Opticks , 369; Query 28. Sawday agrees with Newton’s conclusion that 
Hooke’s “intellectual being” depended on mechanical speculations;  Engines of the 
Imagination , 222. In Newton’s own account the philosophers he admires descend 
from Moschus the Phoenician and include Pythagoras and other pre-Aristotelian 
Greeks. McGuire and Rattansi, “Newton and the ‘Pipes of Pan’,” relate Newton’s 
beliefs to those of the Cambridge Platonists. 
 40. “I shall venture to dispose of his ﬁ ctions”;  De Gravitatione , in  Philosophical 
Writings , 14. Dobbs argues that  De Gravitatione , an unpublished manuscript that she 
dates just before the  Principia , “reveals his anger with Descartes’s  Principia , which 
had misled him for a long time”;  Janus Faces of Genius , 145. Hall and Hall assign 
 De Gravitatione  to a much earlier date (1664–68?);  Unpublished Scientiﬁ c Papers , 90. 
Koyré’s classic study “Newton and Descartes,” in  Newtonian Studies , dates it “some 
time around 1670” (83). 
 41. John Conduitt’s version of a memorandum by Abraham de Moivre (1727); 
 Mathematical Papers,  1:17. Conduitt probably exaggerates the extent of Newton’s 
early self-reliance and repudiation of Descartes. When Newton reread  Géométrie  in 
1680, however, he distanced himself from what he then considered its bungling and 
manifest errors;  Mathematical Papers, 4:336–44. 
 42. When asked his opinion of Newton in 1701, “Leibnitz said that taking 
Mathematicks from the beginning of the world to the time of Sr I. What he had 
done was much the better half”; Westfall,  Never at Rest , 721. 
 43.  The Geometry of René Descartes , 3; my translation. 
 44. Whiteside, “Newton the Mathematician,” 114. 
 45. Johnson,  Lives of the Poets , 1:191. Johnson’s remark that Newton, had he 
applied to poetry, “would have made a very ﬁ ne epick poem” (Boswell,  Life of Samuel 
Johnson , 5:35) supports the notion of genius as “general powers.” 
 46. Gillispie,  Edge of Objectivity , 117. 
 47. Shapin, “ ‘The Mind Is Its Own Place’,” analyzes the association of scientiﬁ c 
genius with solitude. 
 48. Wordsworth,  The Prelude  (1850), 3.61–63. The last two lines were added to 
the poem in 1838/39. See Thomas and Ober,  Mind For Ever Voyaging , 49–51. 
 49. Diverse perspectives on the relations between Halley and Newton are offered 
by the contributors to Thrower,  Standing on the Shoulders of Giants . 
 50. Letter to Oldenburg, Feb. 6, 1671/2, in  Correspondence, 1:100. 
 51. Letter to Oldenburg, Dec. 7, 1675, in  Correspondence 1:361. 
 52.  Correspondence, 1:364. 
 53. See Dobbs,  Janus Faces of Genius , 106–9. 
 54. Descartes,  The World , 30. 
 55. Sargent,  Difﬁ dent Naturalist , 87–108. 
 56. Newton to Bentley, Dec. 10, 1692, in  Correspondence, 3:233. 

NOTES TO PAGES 192–197   273
 57.  Principia , 940, 943. Two of the ﬁ ve surviving drafts of the “General Scho-
lium” are translated by Hall and Hall,  Unpublished Scientiﬁ c Papers, 348–64. 
 58.  Opticks , 370, 369. Seven new queries, including this one, were introduced in 
the Latin edition (1706) and retained, with revisions, in later English editions. 
 59. Dec. 21, 1705; Hiscock,  David Gregory, Isaac Newton , 30. 
 60. Leibniz and Clarke,  Correspondence , 4. On the two versions of the passage, see 
Koyré and Cohen, “Case of the Missing  Tanquam .” 
 61. In the draft of a letter in 1716, Newton wrote that Leibniz “has spent his life 
in keeping a general correspondence for making disciples, whilst I leave truth to sift 
for it self”; Iliffe, “ ‘Is he like other men?’,” 162. 
 62. Fara surveys Newton’s disciples;  Newton , 59–97. Pemberton, who edited the 
3rd edition of the  Principia , published an accessible, simpliﬁ ed  View of Sir Isaac New-
ton’s Philosophy  in 1728. Desaguliers made a career by capitalizing on Newton with 
lectures and books. 
 63. On Clarke’s theology, see Pﬁ zenmaier,  Trinitarian Theology . 
 64. Vailati,  Leibniz & Clarke , discusses the philosophical and theological disagree-
ments at length. 
 65.  Letters on England , 43. Voltaire pays homage to Clarke as “a man of unswerv-
ing virtue” and “a real reasoning machine” (42). 
 66. Leibniz and Clarke,  Correspondence , 27–35. Voltaire adopted Clarke’s argu-
ment in  Elements of Sir Isaac Newton ’ s Philosophy , maintaining there are “atoms 
which will never be divided, as long as the present Constitution of the World 
subsists” (111). 
 67. Oct. 16, 1693; Newton’s  Correspondence, 3:287. 
 68. On Leibniz’s doubts about his own theory, see Meli,  Equivalence and Priority , 
145–70, 215–18. 
 69.  A Treatise of the System of the World, 124. 
 70. I. B. Cohen, “Guide to Newton’s  Principia ”;  Principia , 60. 
 71.  Gulliver ’ s Travels , pt. 2, chap. 3. 
 72. Michael White claims that Fludd’s writings were an “important source for 
Newton”;  Isaac Newton , 121. 
 73. Spence,  Observations, Anecdotes, and Characters , 1:462. Andrew Ramsey ﬁ rst 
quoted these words to Spence in 1730. 
 74.  Paradise Regained , 4.221–24, 323–30. 
 75. The catalog of Newton’s library includes Milton’s  Poetical Works  as well as 
Addison’s  Notes upon . . . Paradise Lost  (1719), though these may reﬂ ect the taste of 
Catherine Barton, Newton’s niece; Harrison,  Library of Isaac Newton , 70–71. 
 76. Despite his isolation Newton did rely, of course, on the accumulated resources 
of scholarship; see Schaffer,  Information Order . 
 77. Fara points out that Newton sat for over twenty busts and portraits, which 
typically showed him deep in thought;  Newton , 34–38. 
 78. In 1693, his “black year,” Newton suffered a breakdown or “ﬁ t of frenzy,” 
which may have been precipitated by a rupture with Fatio de Duillier, a young Swiss 
polymath with whom his relations had been affectionate and intense. This episode 
remained a secret until the nineteenth century. Manuel argues that “Newton’s crisis 
was followed by a dramatic reorganization of his personality” in which he achieved 
“real, palpable, immediate” power in the world at the price of cutting himself off 

274    NOTES TO PAGES 197–202
from his own “boundless inner world”; “to the extent that he became a successful 
manipulator of men he was alienated from himself”;  Portrait of Isaac Newton , 224–25. 
 79. “It is an eminent instance of Newton’s superiority to the rest of mankind, 
that . . . he stood alone, merely because he had left the rest of mankind behind him, 
not because he deviated from the beaten track”; Johnson,  Adventurer 131:482. 
 80. “He has even done honour to human nature, by having extended the great-
est and most noble of our faculties, reason, to subjects, which, till he attempted 
them, appeared to be wholly beyond the reach of our limited capacities”; Pemberton, 
dedication, in  View of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy . Cf. the inscription (1731) on 
Newton’s tomb in Westminster Abbey: “Sibi gratulentur Mortales, tale tantumque 
exstitisse  HUMANI GENERIS DECUS ” (Mortals rejoice, that there has existed such and 
so great  AN HONOR TO THE HUMAN RACE ). 
 81.  Apology ( Socrates’ Defense ), 31d. 
 82. Newton’s  Chronology of ancient Kingdoms Amended  (1728) was published 
shortly after his death, followed by  Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel, and the 
Apocalypse of St. John  (1733). Long before these late works, he had devoted much 
of his time in the 1670s and 1680s to studies of theology and prophecy, recorded 
in the important manuscript  Theologiæ Gentilis Origines Philosophicæ . Manuel,  Isaac 
Newton, Historian , clariﬁ es Newton’s chronologies. The selection of Newton’s 
theological manuscripts edited by H. J. McLachlan (Liverpool, 1950) is limited 
and unreliable. 
 83.  Correspondence,  3:233. Manuel,  Religion of Isaac Newton , makes use of New-
ton’s voluminous theological manuscripts. 
 84. Ramiﬁ cations of Newton’s unorthodox theology are explored by the con-
tributors to Force and Popkin,  Newton and Religion . 
 85.  Essay on Criticism , lines 60–61. “Science” means “branch of knowledge” or 
“trained skill”; “Art” also stands for “trained skills,” as opposed to “Nature”; and 
“Wit” means “intelligence.” Gardner,  Frames of Mind , provides a classic modern argu-
ment for heterogeneous mental powers. 
 86. Letter to Thomas Butts, November 22, 1802. Blake’s quarrel with Newton 
is discussed sympathetically by Frye,  Fearful Symmetry , and Ault,  Visionary Physics . 
 87. Shelley, preface to  Prometheus Unbound  (1819). Cf.  A Defence of Poetry  (1821), 
which speaks of “that great poem, which all poets, like the co-operating thoughts of 
one great mind, have built up since the beginning of the world.” 
 10. Revolution and Its Discontents 
 1. Van Helden surveys the reception of  Sidereus Nuncius  in an appendix to his 
translation (87–113). The reasons why many of Galileo’s colleagues did not accept 
his ﬁ ndings are explored by Blumenberg;  Genesis of the Copernican World , 644–74. 
  2.  Le opere , 10:340. Biagioli argues that Galileo’s own efforts to take credit 
for his discoveries, and to withhold information from potential competitors, 
account for his mixed reception by other astronomers;  Galileo’s Instruments of 
Credit , 77–134. 
 3. As Galileo points out in a letter, the instrument had to be mounted on a 
ﬁ rm stand because hands could not help shaking:  Le opere , 10:277–78. See Stillman 

NOTES TO PAGES 202–206   275
Drake,  Galileo at Work , 142–48. Feyerabend stresses the “ strong positive illusions ” 
that might have disturbed the telescopic vision of early observers;  Against Method , 
89–90. 
  4.  Sidereus Nuncius , 92–93, 100–102. 
  5. “Magna, Longeque Admirabilia Spectacula”;  Sidereus Nuncius , title page. 
  6.  Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo , 9–11, 36–37. See chapter 3 above. 
  7. Blumenberg,  Genesis of the Copernican World , 661–74, analyzes the “horizon 
of expectations” in Sizzi’s attack on Galileo, which Kepler dismissed as a childish 
reverie about “a world on paper.” 
 8.  Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo , 176. 
  9. Reeves documents this confusion in  Galileo ’ s Glassworks . 
 10. The decisive role of Montaigne in shaping modern skepticism is traced by 
Popkin,  History of Scepticism , 44–63; Paganini,  Le débat des moderns ; and Bakewell, 
 How to Live . 
 11.  Complete Essays of Montaigne , 155. 
 12.  Complete Essays , 429. Montaigne credits Cleanthes of Samos or Nicetus of 
Syracuse with originating the theory of a moving earth. 
 13. Starobinski analyzes Montaigne’s paradoxical attitude toward the authority 
of nature: “It is man’s ‘nature’ to use his rational faculties to contradict and disﬁ gure 
what is  given  in Nature, that is, to particularize the universal”;  Montaigne in Motion , 
215. 
 14. Thorne argues that Montaigne’s bombardment of quotations reduces the 
ancients themselves to “little more than a humanist curiosity shop,” so that “classical 
wisdom comes to disgrace itself”;  Dialectic of Counter-Enlightenment , 77. 
 15.  Complete Essays , 435. 
 16. On the “science without metaphysics” that began with Mersenne (1588–
1648) and was developed further by his friend Gassendi (1592–1655), see Pop-
kin, who describes their “constructive or mitigated scepticism”;  History of Scepticism , 
112–27. 
 17. The “Apology for Raymond Sebond” laughs at the mirrors used by the 
ancients to magnify their private parts. Which sense was better, the sight that enlarged 
these “members,” or “the touch which showed them small and contemptible?” (453). 
 18. Donne,  Ignatius His Conclave (1611), 7. 
 19. Montgomery analyzes Harriot’s drawings;  Moon and the Western Imagination , 
106–13. Carey calls Harriot Donne’s “friend”;  John Donne , 272. Haffenden reviews 
the evidence for this friendship in his introduction to Empson’s  Essays on Renaissance 
Literature, 1:36–44. 
 20. Gilbert,  On the Loadstone , 313–58. Cofﬁ n,  John Donne and the New Philosophy , 
remains the standard work on Donne’s knowledge and use of science. 
 21. Donne cites Kepler’s book in a marginal note to  Biathanatos  (1608?); the con-
text is an attack on theologians who resist innovation. Tycho, another author whose 
work Donne knew, had understood the signiﬁ cance of a nova as early as 1572, the 
year of Donne’s birth and a year after Kepler’s. 
 22.  Ignatius His Conclave , 6–7. 
 23. In one of his  Devotions  (1623), Donne writes that natural philosophers think 
“that every  Planet , and every  Starre , is another  world like this: They ﬁ nde reason to 

276    NOTES TO PAGES 206–210
conceive, not onely a  pluralitie in every  Species in the world, but a  pluralitie  of  worlds ”; 
 Complete Poetry , 421. See Empson’s  Essays, 1:78–128. 
 24. Holy Sonnet, ﬁ rst published in 1633;  Complete Poetry , 249. 
 25. “As new Philosophy arrests the Sunne, / And bids the passive earth about 
it runne, / So wee have dull’d our minde, it hath no ends; / Onely the bodie’s busie, 
and pretends; / As dead low earth ecclipses and controules / The quick high Moone: 
so doth the body, Soules”; “To the Countesse of Bedford” (3), lines 37–42;  Complete 
Poetry , 155. 
 26. “Conversations with William Drummond of Hawthornden,” in  Ben Jonson , 
596. According to Jonson, Donne answered “that he described the idea of a woman, 
and not as she was.” 
 27.  Ignatius His Conclave , 13. “T’obey our pace”;  Anatomy of the World , lines 
283–84. 
 28. Hakewill’s  Apologie . . . Or an Examination and Censure of the Common Errour 
Touching Natures Perpetuall and Universall Decay (1627) was enlarged in 1630 and 1635. 
On “The Decay of Nature,” see R. F. Jones,  Ancients and Moderns , 22–40; and Cofﬁ n, 
 John Donne , 264–79. 
 29.  Anatomy of Melancholy, 2:45. 
 30. Babb points out that the rival theories presented by Burton “contradict and 
neutralize one another”;  Sanity in Bedlam , 61. Burton did keep close track of astro-
nomical developments, however. In 1628 he added a note that some of Jupiter’s 
moons “I have seene my selfe by the helpe of a glasse 8 foot long” ( Anatomy, 2:52), 
and he frequently corresponded with his friend Edmund Gunter, professor of astron-
omy at Gresham College. Barlow argues that in early editions Burton “clearly favors 
the old astronomy,” but that “the evidence in Burton’s ﬁ nal text suggests that he was 
not only a zealous advocate of the system of inﬁ nite worlds but also a harsh critic of 
the traditional ideas of the Aristotelians”; “Inﬁ nite Worlds,” 302. 
 31. “When I build Castles in the aire, / Void of sorrow and voide of feare, / 
Pleasing my selfe with phantasmes sweet, / Me thinkes the time runnes very ﬂ eet. / 
All my joyes to this are folly, / Naught so sweet as melancholy” ( Anatomy, 1:lxix). 
 32.  Anatomy, 2:48. 
 33. “Democritus Junior to the Reader,” in  Anatomy,  1:66. Burton later refers to 
the historical Democritus’s belief in a plurality of inhabited worlds;  Anatomy, 2:49, 
52. Vicari argues that Burton rejects the theory of inﬁ nite inhabited worlds, which 
he identiﬁ es with the Copernican worldview:  View from Minerva’s Tower , 22–26. 
 34. Burton cites Wilkins in the ﬁ fth edition of the  Anatomy  (1638). It is uncer-
tain whether he read Francis Godwin’s  Man in the Moone  (1638). Nicolson surveys 
these interplanetary texts and concludes that Burton’s “Digression” “is in its way the 
most extensive of cosmic voyages”;  Voyages to the Moon , 225. 
 35.  Anatomy, 2:56–57. 
 36.  Anatomy, 2:57, quoting Seneca on comets, from the  Naturales quæstiones . 
 37.  Anatomy, 2:58. 
 38. I. B. Cohen traces the modern sense of a “revolution” in mathematics to 
Fontenelle in the early eighteenth century;  Revolution in Science , 88–90; but Jacob 
argues that Boyle and others had already used precisely that sense of the word in the 
mid-seventeenth century; “Truth of Newton’s Science,” 317. 
 39. Shapin,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 1. 

NOTES TO PAGES 210–213   277
 40. Respectively by Henry,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science , 
and Applebaum,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution and the Foundations of Modern Science . Cf. A. R. 
Hall,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution . 
 41. Butterﬁ eld,  Origins of Modern Science , 7–8. The book is based on a series of 
lectures that Butterﬁ eld gave in Cambridge in 1948 and published the following year. 
 42. In 1994 H. F. Cohen maintained that historians of seventeenth-century sci-
ence prize Butterﬁ eld because he “expresses an acute sense of their being at work, 
somehow, at one of the key junctures of world history”;  Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 5. 
Cohen’s effort to provide a full-ﬂ edged study and justiﬁ cation of that “Great 
Tradition” has been restructured and expanded in  How Modern Science Came into 
the World  (2010), a work that frames a comprehensive answer to the famous ques-
tion posed by Joseph Needham: why was modern science created in Europe rather 
than China? 
 43. Ironically, Butterﬁ eld’s own  Whig Interpretation of History  (1931) had cautioned 
against such “progressive” rewriting of the past; but he confessed that in practice this 
Whiggism was difﬁ cult to avoid. 
 44. Dobbs, “Newton as Final Cause and First Mover.” In the same volume West-
fall responded to Dobbs with “The Scientiﬁ c Revolution Reasserted.” 
 45. Duhem,  Les précurseurs parisiens de Galilée  (1913), famously traced the begin-
nings of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution to fourteenth-century Paris. Gaukroger,  Emergence 
of a Scientiﬁ c Culture , argues that natural philosophy began to replace other ways of 
understanding the natural world in the thirteenth century. 
 46. Cunningham and Williams, “De-centring the ‘Big Picture’,” 220. A version 
of this relocation is popularized by Holmes,  Age of Wonder . 
 47. Koyré credits Gaston Bachelard with the term and idea “mutation”;  Galileo 
Studies , 39n. He expanded and revised his argument in “Signiﬁ cance of the New-
tonian Synthesis” (1948), which ends by lamenting that as a result “the world of 
science—the real world—became estranged and utterly divorced from the world of 
life, which science has been unable to explain”;  Newtonian Studies , 23. I. B. Cohen 
discusses “the seminal role” of Koyré,  Revolution in Science , 396–8, and H. F. Cohen 
analyzes his views and inﬂ uence,  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution : 73–86. 
 48. James B. Conant’s foreword to Kuhn’s  Copernican Revolution  afﬁ rms that 
“the approach to science presented in this book is the approach needed to enable 
the scientiﬁ c tradition to take its place alongside the literary tradition in the culture 
of the United States” (xviii). Kuhn’s introduction to  Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tions proposes “a role for history” or “a historiographic revolution in the study of 
science, . . . perhaps best exempliﬁ ed in the writings of Alexandre Koyré” (3). 
 49. Masterman identiﬁ es at least twenty-one different senses of “paradigm.” In 
a 1969 postscript to  Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions , Kuhn tried to clarify his use of 
the word as “the Constellation of Group Commitments” or “Shared Examples.” He 
tried again in “Second Thoughts on Paradigms” (1974). 
 50. Dear does refer to Kuhn’s  Copernican Revolution  in his notes, and brieﬂ y to 
Koyré. 
 51. Fuller,  Thomas Kuhn , expands on this misperception in his critique of Kuhn. 
In Kuhn’s own set of reﬂ ections on the development of his thought,  The Essential 
Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁ c Tradition and Change , note the absence of “Revolu-
tion” in the subtitle. 

278    NOTES TO PAGES 213–216
 52. Golinski,  Making Natural Knowledge , xvii. Golinski’s ﬁ rst chapter traces the 
turn from Kuhn to various sociological and semiotic programs, including that of 
Bruno Latour, whose account of networks that link people with things, or “nonhu-
man entities,” challenges the notion of science as an exclusively “human product” 
(37–46). 
 53. Daston, “Science Studies and the History of Science,” concludes that “a new 
vision of what science is and how it works has yet to be synthesized from the rich 
but scattered and fragmented materials gathered by some twenty years of historicized 
history of science,” 813. 
 54. E.g., Shapin,  Never Pure: Historical Studies of Science as If It Was Produced by 
People with Bodies, Situated in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for Cred-
ibility and Authority . 
 55. Latour acknowledges the complicity of constructivism in such appropriations 
in “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam?” 
 56. Golinski,  Making Natural Knowledge , 206. According to Matthew Eddy, 
quoted on the back jacket, the book “has been called the ‘constructivist’s bible’ in 
many a conference corridor.” 
 57. Shapin,  Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 161–65; cf. 12–13. 
 58. “Enlightenment” can also be plotted as a disaster, as in Horkheimer and 
Adorno: “The impartiality of scientiﬁ c language deprived what was powerless of the 
strength to make itself heard and merely provided the existing order with a neutral 
sign for itself”;  Dialectic of Enlightenment , 17. 
 59. On Hobbes and Boyle, see Shapin and Schaffer,  Leviathan and the Air-Pump ; 
on Hobbes and Wallis, see Jesseph,  Squaring the Circle . 
 60. Descartes, “First Meditation,” in  PW 2:12. 
 61. “First Meditation,” in  PW 2:14; “Sixth Meditation,” in  PW 2:55. 
 62.  OFB 13:172–73, 305–6. 
 63.  Apology for Poetry , 95. Sidney died in 1586; the  Apology  and a similar text,  The 
Defence of Poesie , were published in 1595. 
 64. As Sidney points out (109), this claim originates with Aristotle’s  Poetics . Julius 
Caesar Scaliger’s  Poetices (1561) provides support for Sidney’s ideas. Inﬂ uential studies 
of humanist debates about the status of the arts include Panofsky’s  Idea  and Wein-
berg’s  History of Literary Criticism , vol. 1. 
 65. Bacon succinctly describes this project in “A Preparative to a Natural and 
Experimental History” (1620), in  OFB 11:448–73. The proposed  History of the Arts 
that was to culminate his plan refers to “mechanical arts” (463–65), which are equiv-
alent, not subordinate, to nature; cf.  The Advancement of Learning , in  OFB 4:64–65. 
 66.  Metaphysics , book E. See Gaukroger,  Emergence of a Scientiﬁ c Culture , 79, 400–
403. 
 67. In  De Consolatione Philosophiae  Boethius, who introduced the term  quadrivium 
in the early sixth century, famously acknowledged that the Wheel of Fortune held 
sway over human affairs. 
 68. Galileo proposed the law of falling bodies in a letter to Paolo Sarpi in 1604 
( Le opere,  10:115) and elaborated it in  Two New Sciences  (1638), which claims experi-
mental veriﬁ cation (though not the legendary test at Pisa). See also his early manu-
scripts  On Motion, and On Mechanics  (1590? 1600?). Koyré denied that Galileo had 
founded his theories on experiments: “All of Galileo’s experiments, at least all of the 

NOTES TO PAGES 217–219   279
real ones, those which resulted in measurements, in precise values, were falsiﬁ ed by 
his contemporaries”;  Galileo Studies , 107. But subsequent research has found evidence 
that many of Galileo’s experiments were in fact “real” and correct. The complex 
relations between those experiments and Galileo’s thought experiments are discussed 
by Dear,  Discipline & Experience , 124–50. 
 69. Louis Elzevir, “Printer to the Reader,” in  Two New Sciences , 8. Fletcher,  Time, 
Space, and Motion , considers this “perhaps the crucial ideological claim to be made in 
the coming of the modern age” (23), and extends the theme or metaphor of motion 
to drama, poetry, and metaphysics. 
 70.  Two New Sciences , 147. As Drake points out (xvii), the often-reprinted trans-
lation by Crew and de Salvio,  Dialogues concerning Two New Sciences , makes Galileo 
claim to have “discovered by experiment” some properties of motion, while the text 
says only “I ﬁ nd” ( comperio ). The translators’ insertion offended Koyré,  Galileo Stud-
ies , who doubted that Galileo’s new science had been based on actual experiments. 
 71. Plotnitsky and Reed argue that Galileo’s understanding of “science” involves 
many different ways of interpreting and discussing nature: “In this work mathematics 
and science, culture, rhetoric, and the strategies and the very textual construction of 
writing are practiced each with equal rigor and in all their mutually shaping interac-
tions”; “Discourse, Mathematics, Demonstration,” 64. 
 72. See chapter 4 above. 
 73. Each of these arguments is analyzed by Dear in  Discipline & Experience. 
 74.  New Atlantis . See chapter 8. 
 75. “It was  an individual  who had to have the experience, construct the proof, 
build the model, or use the machine. Essentially everything was based in and ulti-
mately dependent upon ﬁ rst-person activities, both cognitive and practical. It was 
the age of the Epistemic I, the ﬁ rst-person knower”; Machamer, introduction to 
 Cambridge Companion to Galileo , 14. 
 76. “That Galileo was in fact the most inﬂ uential person of all time—not the 
greatest, just the most inﬂ uential—is also easily proved”; Weidhorn,  Person of the Mil-
lennium , 140. 
 77. “The Romantic School” (1833), in  Prose Writings of Heinrich Heine , 116–17. 
 78. In June 2010 the Institute and Museum of the History of Science in Florence 
reopened as the Museo Galileo. It includes, along with telescopes and other scientiﬁ c 
displays, three of Galileo’s ﬁ ngers and a molar. Cf. Shorto,  Descartes’ Bones . 
 


281
 Bibliography
 Aarsleff, Hans.  The Study of Language in England, 1780–1860 . Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1967. 
 Abrams, M. H.  The Correspondent Breeze: Essays on English Romanticism . New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1984. 
 ——.  The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition . Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1953. 
 Acworth, Bernard.  The Cuckoo and Other Bird Mysteries . London: Eyre & Spottis-
woode, 1946. 
 Aczel, Amir D.  Descartes’ Secret Notebook: A True Tale of Mathematics, Mysticism, and the 
Quest to Understand the Universe . New York: Broadway Books, 2005. 
 Adorno, Theodor W. “Postludium” (1968) to “Ad vocem Hindemith: Eine Doku-
mentation.” In  Impromptus , in  Musikalische Schriften , ed. Rolf Tiedemann, 4:240. 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1982. 
 Aït-Touati, Frédérique.  Fictions of the Cosmos: Science and Literature in the Seventeenth 
Century . Trans. Susan Emanuel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011. 
 Albury, W. R. “Halley’s Ode on the  Principia  of Newton and the Epicurean Revival 
in England.”  JHI 39 (1978): 24–43. 
 Applebaum, Wilbur.  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution and the Foundations of Modern Science . 
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2005. 
 Ariès, Philippe.  The Hour of Our Death . Trans. Helen Weaver. New York: Knopf, 
1981. 
 Arnulf, Arwed. “Das Titelbild der Tabulae Rudolphinae des Johannes Kepler. Zu 
Entwurf, Ausführung, dichterischer Erläuterung und Vorbildern einer Wis-
senschaftsallegorie.”  Zeitschrift das Deutschen Vereins für Kunstwissenschaft  54/55 
(2000–2001): 176–98. 
 Artigas, Mariano, Rafael Martínez, and William R. Shea. “New Light on the Galileo 
Affair?” In  The Church and Galileo , ed. Ernan McMullin, 213–33. Notre Dame, 
Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 2005. 
 Ashworth, William B. “Natural History and the Emblematic World View.” In  Reap-
praisals of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution , ed. David C. Lindberg and Robert S. West-
man, 303–32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 Aubrey, John.  Brief Lives . Ed. Andrew Clark. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1898. 
 Aughton, Peter.  The Transit of Venus . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004. 
 Ault, Donald D.  Visionary Physics: Blake’s Response to Newton . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1974. 
 Austen, Gillian.  George Gascoigne . Woodbridge, UK: D. S. Brewer, 2008. 
 Babb, Lawrence.  Sanity in Bedlam: A Study of Robert Burton’s “Anatomy of Melancholy.” 
East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1959. 

282    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Bacon, Francis.  The Letters and the Life of Francis Bacon, including All His Occasional 
Works . 7 vols. Ed. James Spedding. London, 1868–90. 
 ——.  New Atlantis. A Worke unﬁ nished . London, 1627. 
 ——.  The Oxford Francis Bacon [ OFB ]. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1996–. 
 
Vol. 4,  The Advancement of Learning . Ed. Michael Kiernan. 2000. 
 
Vol. 11,  The “Instauratio magna” Part II: “Novum organum” and Associated Texts . 
Ed. and trans. Graham Rees with Maria Wakely. 2004. 
 
Vol. 12,  The “Instauratio magna” Part III: “Historia naturalis et experimentalis”: 
“Historia ventorum” and “Historia vitæ & mortis.”  Ed. and trans. Graham Rees 
with Maria Wakely. 2007. 
 
Vol. 15,  The Essayes or Counsels, Civill and Morall . Ed Michael Kiernan. 
2000. 
 ——.  Sylva Sylvarum, or A Natural History In ten Centuries . London, 1627. 
 ——.  The Works of Francis Bacon . Ed. James Spedding, Robert Leslie Ellis, and Doug-
las Denon Heath. 15 vols. London: Longmans, 1887–1901. 
 Baigrie, Brian S., ed.  Picturing Knowledge: Historical and Philosophical Problems concerning 
the Use of Art in Science . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1996. 
 Baillet, Adrien.  La vie de M. Descartes . 2 vols. Paris, 1691. 
 Baird, J. L.  Rossignol: An Edition and Translation . Kent, Ohio: Kent State University 
Press, 1978. 
 Bakewell, Sarah.  How to Live: Or a Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty 
Attempts at an Answer . New York: Other Press, 2010. 
 Banville, John.  Kepler . London: Secker & Warburg, 1981. 
 Barbour, Reid, and Claire Preston, eds.  Sir Thomas Browne: The World Proposed . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Barlow, Richard G. “Inﬁ nite Worlds: Burton’s Cosmic Voyage.”  JHI 34 (1973): 291–
302. 
 Barrett, Deirdre, and Patrick McNamara, eds.  The New Science of Dreaming . 3 vols. 
Westport, Conn.: Praeger Publishers, 2007. 
 Bayle, Pierre.  Various Thoughts on the Occasion of a Comet . Trans. Robert C. Bartlett. 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000. 
 Benjamin, Walter. “Theses on the Philosophy of History.” In  Illuminations , trans. 
Harry Zohn, 253–64. New York: Schocken Books, 1969. 
 ——. “To the Planetarium,” from  One-Way Street ( Einbahnstrasse , 1928). In  Reﬂ ec-
tions , trans. Edmund Jephcott. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978. 
 Bennett, Jim, Michael Cooper, Michael Hunter, and Lisa Jardine.  London’s Leonardo—
The Life and Work of Robert Hooke . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Benson, Michael. “What Galileo Saw.”  New Yorker , 8 September 2003, 38–43. 
 Bernstein, Jeremy. “Heaven’s Net: The Meeting of John Donne and Johannes 
Kepler.”  American Scholar 66 (Spring 1997): 175–95. 
 Bevis, John.  Aaaaw to Zzzzzd: The Words of Birds . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
2010. 
 Biagioli, Mario. “Did Galileo Copy the Telescope? A ‘New’ Letter by Paolo Sarpi.” 
In Van Helden et al.,  Origins of the Telescope, 203–30. 
 ——.  Galileo, Courtier: The Practice of Science in the Culture of Absolutism . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1993. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    283
 ——.  Galileo’s Instruments of Credit: Telescopes, Images, Secrecy . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2006. 
 Blake, William.  Milton a Poem . Ed. Robert N. Essick and Joseph Viscomi. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993. 
 Blumenberg, Hans.  The Genesis of the Copernican World . Trans. Robert M. Wallace. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1987. 
 Blumenfeld, Harold. “ ‘Ad Vocem’ Adorno.”  Musical Quarterly 70 (1984): 529–34. 
 Boklund-Lagopoulou, Karin.  “I have a yong suster”: Popular Song and the Middle English 
Lyric . Dublin: Four Courts, 2002. 
 Bonelli, M. L. Righini, and William R. Shea, eds.  Reason, Experiment, and Mysticism in 
the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . New York: Science History Publications, 1975. 
 Booth, Sara E., and Albert Van Helden. “The Virgin and the Telescope: The Moons 
of Cigoli and Galileo.” In Renn,  Galileo in Context, 192–216. 
 Boswell, James.  The Life of Samuel Johnson . Ed. G. B. Hill and L. F. Powell. 6 vols. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934–50. 
 Boyle, Robert.  The Works of Robert Boyle . Ed. Michael Hunter and Edward B. Davis. 
14 vols. London: Pickering & Chatto, 1999–2000. 
 Brahe, Tycho.  Astronomiæ instauratæ mechanica . Uraniborg, 1598. 
 ——.  Epistolarum astronomicarum libri . Uraniborg, 1596. 
 ——.  Astronomiæ instauratæ mechanica . Uraniborg, 1598. Revised English trans., 
 Instruments of the Renewed Astronomy . Ed. Alena Hadravova, Petr Hadrava, and 
Jole R. Shackelford. Prague: Koniasch Latin Press, 1996. 
 Bredekamp, Horst.  Galilei der Künstler: Der Mond—Die Sonne—Die Hand.  Berlin: 
Akademie Verlag, 2007. 
 ——, ed.  Galileo’s O . Vol. 1,  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius,”  ed. Irene Brückle and Oliver 
Hahn. Vol. 2, Paul Needham,  Galileo Makes a Book . Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 
2011. 
 ——. “Gazing Hands and Blind Spots: Galileo as Draftsman.” In Renn,  Galileo in 
Context, 153–92. 
 Broch, Hermann.  Hugo von Hofmannsthal and His Time: The European Imagination, 
1860–1920 . Trans. Michael P. Steinberg. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1984. 
 Brod, Max.  Tycho Brahe’s Path to God . Trans. Felix Warren Crosse. Evanston, Ill.: 
Northwestern University Press, 2007. 
 Brooke, John Hedley.  Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives . New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
 Brown, Sarah Annes.  Ovid: Myth and Metamorphosis . London: Bristol Classical Press, 
2005. 
 Browne, Thomas.  Christian Morals . Ed. S. C. Roberts. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1927. 
 ——.  Pseudodoxia Epidemica  (1646). Ed. Robin Robbins. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1981. 
 ——.  Religio Medici, and Other Works . Ed. L. C. Martin. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1964. 
 ——.  Works of Sir Thomas Browne . Ed. Geoffrey Keynes. 4 vols. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1964. 

284    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Bruhn, Siglind.  The Musical Order of the World: Kepler, Hesse, Hindemith . Hillsdale, N.Y.: 
Pendragon Press, 2005. 
 Bruno, Giordano.  The Ash Wednesday Supper  (1584). Trans. Stanley L. Jaki. The 
Hague: Mouton, 1975. 
 Burroughs, John.  Birds and Poets, with Other Papers . Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in, 1895. 
 Burton, Robert.  The Anatomy of Melancholy  (1632). Ed. Nicholas K. Kiessling, 
Thomas C. Faulkner, and Rhonda L. Blair. 6 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1989–2001. 
 Burtt, E. A.  The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science . New York: Har-
court Brace, 1925. 
 Bury, J. B.  The Idea of Progress: An Inquiry into Its Origin and Growth . New York: 
Macmillan, 1932. 
 Bush, Douglas.  Science and English Poetry: A Historical Sketch, 1590–1950 . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1950. 
 Butler, Todd.  Imagination and Politics in Seventeenth-Century England . Aldershot, UK: 
Ashgate, 2008. 
 Butterﬁ eld, Herbert.  The Origins of Modern Science, 1300–1800. Rev. ed. New York: 
The Free Press, 1965. 
 ——.  The Whig Interpretation of History . London: G. Bell and Sons, 1931. 
 Butts, Robert E. “Some Tactics in Galileo’s Propaganda for the Mathematization of 
Scientiﬁ c Experience.” In  New Perspectives on Galileo , ed. Robert E. Butts and 
Joseph C. Pitt, 59–85. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978. 
 Calvino, Italo. “Man, the Sky, and the Elephant” (1982). In  The Literature Machine , 
trans. Patrick Creagh. London: Secker and Warburg, 1987. 
 Campanella, Tommaso.  A Defense of Galileo, the Mathematician from Florence (1622). 
Trans. Richard J. Blackwell. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 1994. 
 Campbell, Mary Baine.  Wonder and Science: Imagining Worlds in Early Modern Europe . 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1999. 
 Canguilhem, Georges.  A Vital Rationalist: Selected Writings . Ed. François Delaporte. 
Trans. Arthur Goldhammer. New York: Zone Books, 1994. 
 Carey, John.  John Donne: Life, Mind and Art . London: Faber and Faber, 1990. 
 Caspar, Max.  Kepler (1948). Trans. C. Doris Hellman. New York: Dover Publica-
tions, 1993. 
 Chalker, John.  The English Georgic: A Study in the Development of a Form . Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1969. 
 Changeux, Jean-Pierre, and Paul Ricoeur.  What Makes Us Think? A Neuroscientist 
and a Philosopher Argue about Ethics, Human Nature, and the Brain . Trans. M. B. 
DeBevoise. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2000. 
 Chapman, Allan.  England’s Leonardo: Robert Hooke and the Seventeenth-Century Scien-
tiﬁ c Revolution . Bristol: Institute of Physics, 2005. 
 Cheney, Patrick.  Spenser’s Famous Flight: A Renaissance Idea of a Literary Career . 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1993. 
 Chester, Robert.  Loves Martyr, or, Rosalins Complaint  (1601). Ed. Alexander B. Gro-
sart. London: Trubner, 1878. 
 Chomsky, Noam.  Cartesian Linguistics: A Chapter in the History of Rationalist Thought . 
New York: Harper & Row, 1966. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    285
 Christianson, John Robert.  On Tycho’s Island: Tycho Brahe and His Assistants, 1570–
1601 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 Claeys, Gregory, ed.  Restoration and Augustan British Utopias . Syracuse: Syracuse Uni-
versity Press, 2000. 
 Clare, John.  John Clare by Himself . Ed. Eric Robinson and David Powell. New York: 
Routledge, 2002. 
 ——.  Poems of the Middle Period, 1822–1837 . Ed. Eric Robinson, David Powell, and 
P. M. S. Dawson. 4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998. 
 Clark, Stuart.  Thinking with Demons: The Idea of Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe . 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997. 
 Clarke, Arthur C.  Proﬁ les of the Future: An Inquiry into the Limits of the Possible . New 
York: Harper & Row, 1973. 
 Clarke, Desmond M.  Descartes: A Biography . New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2006. 
 ——.  Descartes’s Theory of Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Clavelin, Maurice.  The Natural Philosophy of Galileo: Essays on the Origins and Forma-
tion of Classical Mechanics . Trans. A. J. Pomerans. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1974. 
 Coelho, Victor, ed.  Music and Science in the Age of Galileo . Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
1992. 
 Coetzee, J. M.  Elizabeth Costello: Eight Lessons . London: Secker & Warburg, 2003. 
 Cofﬁ n, Charles M.  John Donne and the New Philosophy . New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1937. 
 Cohen, H. Floris.  How Modern Science Came into the World: Four Civilizations, One 
17th-Century Breakthrough . Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2010. 
 ——.  Quantifying Music: The Science of Music at the First Stage of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution, 
1580–1650 . Dordrecht: Reidel, 1984. 
 ——.  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution: A Historiographical Inquiry . Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1994. 
 Cohen, I. Bernard.  The Birth of a New Physics . New York: W. W. Norton, 1985. 
 ——.  Revolution in Science . Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press, 1985. 
 ——. “What Galileo Saw: The Experience of Looking through a Telescope.” In 
 From Galileo’s “Occhialino” to Optoelectronics , ed. Paolo Mazzoldi, 445–72. Sin-
gapore: World Scientiﬁ c, 1993. 
 Cohen, Ralph.  The Unfolding of “ The Seasons.”  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1970. 
 Cole, John R.  The Olympian Dreams and Youthful Rebellion of René Descartes . Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 1992. 
 Coleridge, Samuel Taylor.  Biographia Literaria or Biographical Sketches of My Literary 
Life and Opinions  (1817). Ed. James Engell and W. Jackson Bate. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1983. 
 Connor, James A.  Kepler’s Witch . San Francisco: HarperCollins, 2004. 
 Cooper, Lane.  Aristotle, Galileo, and the Tower of Pisa . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 1935. 
 Cooper, Michael.  “A more beautiful city”: Robert Hooke and the Rebuilding of London 
after the Great Fire . Stroud, UK: Sutton, 2003. 

286    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Cooper, Michael, and Michael Hunter, eds.  Robert Hooke: Tercentennial Studies . Alder-
shot, UK: Ashgate, 2006. 
 Copernicus, Nicholas.  On the Revolutions  (1543). Trans. Edward Rosen. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992. 
 Cottingham, John.  Cartesian Reﬂ ections: Essays in Descartes's Philosophy . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Coward, T. A., and J. A. G. Barnes.  Birds of the British Isles and Their Eggs . London: 
F. Warne, 1969. 
 Crashaw, Richard.  The Complete Poetry of Richard Crashaw . Ed. George Walton Wil-
liams. Garden City, N. Y.: Anchor Books, 1970. 
 Cressy, David.  Birth, Marriage, and Death: Ritual, Religion, and the Life-Cycle in Tudor 
and Stuart England . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. 
 Crowe, Michael J.  The Extraterrestrial Life Debate, 1750–1900 . Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1986. 
 Cunningham, Andrew, and Perry Williams. “De-centring the ‘Big Picture’:  The Ori-
gins of Modern Science  and the Modern Origins of Science” (1993). In Hellyer, 
 Scientiﬁ c Revolution, 218–46. 
 Curley, E. M.  Descartes against the Sceptics . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1978. 
 Curtius, Ernst Robert.  European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages . Trans. Willard 
Trask. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1953. 
 Cyrano de Bergerac.  Œuvres complètes . Ed. Madeleine Alcover. 3 vols. Paris: Honoré 
Champion, 2000. 
 Damasio, Antonio R.  Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain . New 
York: G. P. Putnam, 1994. 
 Danielson, Dennis.  The First Copernican: Georg Joachim Rheticus and the Rise of the 
Copernican Revolution . New York: Walker & Company, 2006. 
 D’Arblay, Madame [Frances Burney].  Diary and Letters of Madam D’Arblay . Ed. Aus-
tin Dobson. London: Macmillan, 1904. 
 Daston, Lorraine. “Science Studies and the History of Science.”  Critical Inquiry  35 
(2009): 798–813. 
 Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison.  Objectivity . New York: Zone Books, 2007. 
 Daston, Lorraine, and Katharine Park.  Wonders and the Order of Nature, 1150–1750 . 
New York: Zone Books, 2001. 
 Davies, John.  The Poems of Sir John Davies . Ed. Clare Howard. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1941. 
 Davis, J. C.  Utopia and the Ideal Society: A Study of English Utopian Writing, 1516–
1700 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
 da Vinci, Leonardo.  The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . Ed. Jean Paul Richter. New 
York: Dover Publications, 1970. 
 Dear, Peter.  Discipline & Experience: The Mathematical Way in the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 
 ——. “A Mechanical Microcosm: Bodily Passions, Good Manners, and Cartesian 
Mechanism.” In  Science Incarnate: Historical Embodiments of Natural Knowledge , 
ed. Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin, 51–82. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1998. 
 ——.  Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its Ambitions, 1500–1700 . 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2009. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    287
 Debus, Allen G. “Harvey and Fludd: The Irrational Factor in the Rational Science 
of the Seventeenth Century.”  Journal of the History of Biology  3 (1970): 81–105. 
 ——.  The Chemical Philosophy: Paracelsian Science and Medicine in the Sixteenth and 
Seventeenth Centuries . 2 vols. New York: Science History Publications, 1977. 
 ——.  Man and Nature in the Renaissance . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1978. 
 ——.  Robert Fludd and His Philosophical Key . New York: Science History Publica-
tions, 1979. 
 Debus, Allen G., and Michael T. Walton.  Reading the Book of Nature: The Other 
Side of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . Kirksville, Mo.: Sixteenth Century Journal 
Publishers. 
 Dekker, Thomas.  The Plague Pamphlets of Thomas Dekker . Ed. F. P. Wilson. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1925. 
 de Man, Paul.  Blindness and Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983. 
 DeMaria, Robert, Jr.  Johnson’s “Dictionary” and Language of Learning . Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1986. 
 Desaguliers, J. T.  A Course of Experimental Philosophy . London, 1734. 
 De Santillana, Giorgio.  The Crime of Galileo . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1955. 
 Descartes, René.  The Geometry of René Descartes . Trans. David Eugene Smith and 
Marcia L. Latham. Chicago: Open Court, 1925. 
 ——.  Œuvres de Descartes . Ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery. 13 vols. Paris: L. 
Cerf, 1897–1913. 
 ——.  The Philosophical Writings of Descartes . Trans. John Cottingham, Robert 
Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1984–91. 
 ——.  Principles of Philosophy . Trans. Valentine Rodger Miller and Reese P. Miller. 
Dordrecht: Reidel, 1983. 
 ——.  The World and Other Writings . Trans. Stephen Gaukroger. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1998. 
 Des Chene, Dennis.  Life’s Form: Late Aristotelian Conceptions of the Soul . Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press, 2000. 
 Dick, Steven J.  Plurality of Worlds: The Origins of the Extraterrestrial Life Debate from 
Democritus to Kant . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
 Digby, Kenelm.  A Late Discourse made in a Solemne Assembly of Nobles and Learned Men 
at Montpellier in France Touching the Cure of Wounds by the Powder of Sympathy . 
Trans. R. White. London, 1658. 
 Dijksterhuis, E. J.  The Mechanization of the World Picture . Trans. C. Dikshoorn. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961. 
 Dobbs, Betty Jo.  The Janus Faces of Genius: The Role of Alchemy in Newton’s Thought . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
 ——. “Newton as Final Cause and First Mover” (1993). In Osler,  Rethinking the 
Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 25–39. 
 ——. “Studies in the Natural Philosophy of Sir Kenelm Digby.”  Ambix 18 (1971): 
1–25. 
 Dobson, Mary J.  Contours of Death and Disease in Early Modern England . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. 

288    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Donne, John.  The Complete Poetry and Selected Prose . Ed. Charles M. Cofﬁ n. New 
York: Modern Library, 1952. 
 ——.  Ignatius His Conclave . Ed. T. S. Healey. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1969. 
 Drake, Ellen Tan.  Restless Genius: Robert Hooke and His Earthly Thoughts . New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1996. 
 Drake, Stillman.  Galileo at Work: His Scientiﬁ c Biography . Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1978. 
 ——. “Music and Philosophy in Early Modern Science.” In Coelho,  Music and Sci-
ence in the Age of Galileo , 3–16. 
 Drake, Stillman, and C. D. O’Malley, trans.  The Controversy on the Comets of 1618 . 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960. 
 Dubos, René.  Mirage of Health: Utopias, Progress, and Biological Change . New York: 
Harper, 1959. 
 Duhem, Pierre.  Études sur Léonard de Vinci . 3 vols. Paris: A. Hermann, 1906–13. 
 ——.  To Save the Phenomena: An Essay on the Idea of Physical Theory from Plato to Galileo 
(1908). Trans. Edmund Doland and Chaninah Maschler. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1969. 
 Dupré, Sven. “Galileo’s Telescope and Celestial Light.”  Journal for the History of 
Astronomy 34 (2003): 369–99. 
 Duran, Angelica.  The Age of Milton and the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . Pittsburgh: Duquesne 
University Press, 2007. 
 Dyson, Freeman. “Our Biotech Future.”  New York Review of Books , 19 July 2007. 
 Eamon, William.  Science and the Secrets of Nature: Books of Secrets in Medieval and Early 
Modern Culture . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1994. 
 Edgerton, Samuel Y. “Galileo, Florentine  disegno , and the ‘Strange Spottednesss of the 
Moon.’ ”  Art Journal 40 (1984): 225–32. 
 ——.  The Heritage of Giotto’s Geometry: Art and Science on the Eve of the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1991. 
 ——.  The Mirror, the Window, and the Telescope: How Renaissance Linear Perspective 
Changed Our Vision of the Universe . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
2009. 
 ——.  The Renaissance Recovery of Linear Perspective . New York: Basic Books, 1975. 
 Edwards, Karen L.  Milton and the Natural World: Science and Poetry in “Paradise Lost.” 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Eliot, T. S.  Selected Essays . New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1950. 
 Elton, William R.  “King Lear” and the Gods . San Marino, Calif.: Huntington Library, 
1966. 
 Empson, William.  Essays on Renaissance Literature . Ed. John Haffenden. 2 vols. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
 ——.  The Structure of Complex Words . London: Chatto & Windus, 1951. 
 Evelyn, John.  The Diary of John Evelyn . Ed. E. S. de Beer. 6 vols. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1955. 
 Fantoli, Annibale.  Galileo: For Copernicanism and for the Church . Trans. George V. 
Coyne. 3rd ed. Rome: Vatican Observatory Publications, 2003. 
 Fara, Patricia.  Newton: The Making of Genius . London: Macmillan, 2002. 
 Farrington, Benjamin.  The Philosophy of Francis Bacon: An Essay on Its Development 
from 1603 to 1609 with New Translations of Fundamental Texts . Liverpool: Liver-
pool University Press, 1964. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    289
 Fattori, M., and M. Bianchi, eds.  Spiritus . Roma: Edizioni dell’Ateneo, 1984. 
 Feingold, Mordechai.  The Newtonian Moment: Isaac Newton and the Making of Modern 
Culture . New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
 Ferguson, Kitty.  Tycho & Kepler: The Unlikely Partnership That Forever Changed Our 
Understanding of the Heavens . New York: Walker, 2002. 
 Ferrone, Vincenzo.  The Intellectual Roots of the Italian Enlightenment: Newtonian Science, 
Religion, and Politics in the Early Eighteenth Century . Trans. Sue Brotherton. 
Atlantic Highlands, N. J.: Humanities Press, 1995. 
 Ferrone, Vincenzo, and Massimo Firpo. “From Inquisitors to Microhistorians: A 
Critique of Pietro Redondi’s  Galileo eretico .”  Journal of Modern History  58 
(1986): 485–524. 
 Feyerabend, Paul.  Against Method . 3rd ed. London: Verso, 1993. 
 Field, J. V.  Kepler’s Geometrical Cosmology . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1988. 
 Findlen, Paula, ed.  Athanasius Kircher: The Last Man Who Knew Everything . New York: 
Routledge, 2004. 
 Finocchiaro, Maurice A.  The Galileo Affair: A Documentary History . Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1989. 
 ——.  Galileo and the Art of Reasoning: Rhetorical Foundations of Logical and Scientiﬁ c 
Method . Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980. 
 ——.  Retrying Galileo, 1633–1992 . Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005. 
 Flanagan, Owen.  Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams, and the Evolution of the Conscious Mind . 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 Fletcher, Angus.  Time, Space, and Motion in the Age of Shakespeare . Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2007. 
 Fludd, Robert.  Doctor Fludds Answer unto M. Foster, or, The Squesing of Parson Fosters 
Sponge, ordained by him for the wiping away of the Weapon-Salve . London, 1631. 
 ——.  Medicina Catholica, seu mysticum artis medicandi sacrum . Frankfurt, 1629–31. 
 ——.  Mosaicall Philosophy: Grounded upon the Essential Truth or Eternal Sapience . Lon-
don, 1659. 
 ——.  Robert Fludd: Essential Readings . Ed. William H. Huffman. London: The 
Aquarian Press, 1992. 
 ——. “Truth’s Golden Harrow: An Unpublished Alchemical Treatise of Robert 
Fludd” (1623). Ed C. H. Josten.  Ambix 3 (1949): 91–150. 
 ——.  Utriusque cosmi maioris scilicet et minoris metaphysica, physica atque technica historia . 
Oppenheim, 1617. 
 Force, James E., and Richard H. Popkin, eds.  Newton and Religion: Context, Nature, 
and Inﬂ uence . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1999. 
 Foucault, Michel.  Les mots et les choses: Une archéologie des sciences humaines . Paris: 
Gallimard, 1966. 
 ——.  The Order of Things . New York: Pantheon Books, 1971. 
 Fowler, W. Warde.  A Year with the Birds . Oxford: Blackwell, 1886. 
 Freedberg, David.  The Eye of the Lynx: Galileo, His Friends, and the Beginnings of Modern 
Natural History . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. 
 Freeman, Edmund. “A Proposal for an English Academy in 1660.”  Modern Language 
Review 19 (1924): 297–300. 
 Freud, Sigmund.  The Collected Papers of Sigmund Freud . Ed. Ernest Jones. 5 vols. Lon-
don: Hogarth Press, 1925. 

290    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Freudenthal, Gad.  Aristotle’s Theory of Material Substance: Heat and Pneuma, Form and 
Soul . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995. 
 Frye, Northrop.  Fearful Symmetry: A Study of William Blake . Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1947. 
 Fuller, Steve.  Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2000. 
 Gabbey, Alan, and Robert E. Hall. “The Melon and the Dictionary: Reﬂ ections on 
Descartes’s Dreams.”  JHI 59 (1998): 651–68. 
 Gal, Ofer, and Raz Chen-Morris.  Baroque Science . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2013. 
 Galilei, Galileo.  Dialogues concerning Two New Sciences . Trans. Henry Crew and 
Alfonso de Salvio. New York: Macmillan, 1914. 
 ——.  Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo . Trans. Stillman Drake. New York: Anchor 
Books, 1957. 
 ——.  Galileo on the World Systems . Trans. Maurice A. Finocchiaro. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1997. 
 ——.  Galileo’s “Sidereus Nuncius” or “A Sidereal Message.”  Trans. William R. Shea. 
Introduction and notes by William R. Shea and Tiziana Bascelli. Sagamore 
Beach, Mass.: Science History Publications, 2009. 
 ——.  Le opere di Galileo Galilei . Ed. Antonio Favaro. 20 vols. Florence: G. Barbèra, 
1890–1909. 
 ——.  On Motion, and On Mechanics . Trans. I. E. Drabkin and Stillman Drake. Madi-
son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1969. 
 ——.  Scritti letterari . Ed. Albero Chiari. Florence: F. Le Monnier, 1943. 
 ——.  Sidereus Nuncius or The Sidereal Messenger . Trans. Albert Van Helden. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1989. 
 ——.  Two New Sciences . Trans. Stillman Drake. Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1974. 
 Galilei, Galileo, and Christoph Scheiner.  On Sunspots . Trans. Eileen Reeves and 
Albert Van Helden. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010. 
 Gammon, Martin. “ ‘Exemplary Originality’: Kant on Genius and Imitation.”  Journal 
of the History of Philosophy 35 (1997): 563–92. 
 Garber, Daniel, and Michael Ayres, eds.  The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century 
Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
 Gardner, Howard.  Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences . New York: Basic 
Books, 1983. 
 Gardner, Martin.  Did Adam and Eve Have Navels? New York: W. W. Norton, 2000. 
 Garin, Eugenio.  Science and Civic Life in the Italian Renaissance . Trans. Peter Munz. 
Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1969. 
 Garrod, H. W.  The Profession of Poetry and Other Lectures . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1929. 
 Gascoigne, George.  The Complete Works of George Gascoigne . Ed. John W. Cunliffe. 
2 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910. 
 Gatti, Hilary.  Giordano Bruno and Renaissance Science . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University 
Press, 1999. 
 Gaukroger, Stephen.  The Collapse of Mechanism and the Rise of Sensibility: Science and the 
Shaping of Modernity, 1680–1760 . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2010. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    291
 ——.  Descartes: An Intellectual Biography . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995. 
 ——.  Descartes’ System of Natural Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002. 
 ——.  The Emergence of a Scientiﬁ c Culture: Science and the Shaping of Modernity, 1210–
1685 . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2006. 
 ——. “The Nature of Abstract Reasoning: Philosophical Aspects of Descartes’ Work 
in Algebra.” In  The Cambridge Companion to Descartes , ed. John Cottingham, 
91–114. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
 Gay, Peter.  The Enlightenment: An Interpretation; The Rise of Modern Paganism . New 
York: Knopf, 1966. 
 Geis, Gilbert, and Ivan Bunn.  A Trial of Witches: A Seventeenth-Century Witchcraft 
Prosecution . London: Routledge, 1997. 
 Gieser, Suzanne.  The Innermost Kernel: Depth Psychology and Quantum Physics; Wolfgang 
Pauli’s Dialogue with C. G. Jung . Berlin: Springer, 2005. 
 Giglioni, Guido. “The Hidden Life of Matter: Techniques for Prolonging Life in the 
Writings of Francis Bacon.” In  Francis Bacon and the Reﬁ guring of Early Modern 
Thought , ed. Julie Robin Solomon and Catherine Gimelli Martin. 129–44. 
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2005. 
 Gilbert, William.  On the Loadstone and Magnetic Bodies, and on the Great Magnet the 
Earth  (1600). Trans. P. Fleury Mottelay. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Edwards Broth-
ers,1938. 
 Gilder, Joshua, and Anne-Lee Gilder.  Heavenly Intrigue: Johannes Kepler, Tycho Brahe, 
and the Murder behind One of History’s Greatest Scientiﬁ c Discoveries . New York: 
Doubleday, 2004. 
 Gillispie, Charles Coulston.  The Edge of Objectivity: An Essay in the History of Scientiﬁ c 
Ideas . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1960. 
 Gingerich, Owen.  The Book Nobody Read: Chasing the Revolutions of Nicolaus Coperni-
cus . New York: Walker & Company, 2004. 
 ——. “The Curious Case of the M-L  Sidereus Nuncius .”  Galilæana  6 (2009): 
141–65. 
 ——. “ Dissertatio cum Professore Righini et Sidereo Nuncio .” In Bonelli and Shea,  Reason, 
Experiment, and Mysticism , 77–88. 
 ——.  The Eye of Heaven: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler . New York: American Institute 
of Physics, 1993. 
 ——.  The Great Copernicus Chase and Other Adventures in Astronomical History . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. 
 Gingerich, Owen, and Albert Van Helden. “From  Occhiale to Printed Page: The 
Making of Galileo’s  Sidereus Nuncius .”  Journal for the History of Astronomy  24 
(2003): 251–67. 
 Glanvill, Joseph.  Plus Ultra: Or the Progress and Advancement of Knowledge since the Days 
of Aristotle  (1668). Ed. Jackson I. Cope. Gainesville, Fla.: Scholars’ Facsimiles & 
Reprints, 1958. 
 Glassie, John.  A Man of Misconceptions: The Life of an Eccentric in an Age of Change . New 
York: Riverhead Books, 2012. 
 Gleick, James.  Isaac Newton . New York: Pantheon Books, 2003. 
 Godwin, Joscelyn.  Robert Fludd: Hermetic Philosopher and Surveyor of Two Worlds . Boul-
der, Colo.: Shambhala, 1979. 

292    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Golinski, Jan.  Making Natural Knowledge: Constructivism and the History of Science . 2nd ed. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005. 
 Goodman, Kevis.  Georgic Modernity and British Romanticism: Poetry and the Mediation 
of History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Gough, J. W.  The Rise of the Entrepreneur . New York: Schocken Books, 1969. 
 Gouhier, Henri.  Les premières pensées de Descartes: Contribution à l’histoire de l’Anti-
Renaissance . Paris: J. Vrin, 1958. 
 Gouk, Penelope.  Music, Science, and Natural Magic in Seventeenth-Century England . 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999. 
 Grant, Edward.  Much Ado about Nothing: Theories of Space and Vacuum from the Middle 
Ages to the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
 Gray, John.  The Immortalization Commission: Science and the Strange Quest to Cheat 
Death . New York: Allen Lane, 2011. 
 Grünbein, Durs.  The Bars of Atlantis: Selected Essays . Ed. Michael Eskin. New York: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010. 
 ——.  Descartes’ Devil: Three Meditations . Trans. Anthea Bell. New York: Upper West 
Side Philosophers, 2010. 
 Guicciardini, Niccolò.  Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method . Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2009. 
 ——.  Reading the “Principia”: The Debate on Newton’s Mathematical Methods for Natural 
Philosophy from 1687 to 1736 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Gunter, R. T., ed.  Early Science in Oxford . 14 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1920–45. 
 Hacking, Ian.  The Emergence of Probability: A Philosophical Study of Early Ideas about 
Probability, Induction and Statistical Inference . London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1975. 
 Hack-Molitor, Gisela.  On Tiptoe in Heaven. Mystik und Reform im Werk von Sir Thomas 
Browne (1605–1682) . Heidelberg: C. Winter, 2001. 
 Hakewill, George.  An Apologie of the Power and Providence of God in the Government of 
the World. Or an Examination and Censure of the Common Errour Touching Natures 
Perpetuall and Universall Decay . London, 1627. 
 Hall, A. Rupert.  From Galileo to Newton, 1630–1720 . New York: Harper & Row, 
1963. 
 ——.  Isaac Newton: Eighteenth-Century Perspectives . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999. 
 ——.  Philosophers at War: The Quarrel between Newton and Leibniz . Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1980. 
 ——.  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution, 1500–1800: The Formation of the Modern Scientiﬁ c Atti-
tude . London: Longmans, Green, 1954. 
 ——. “Two Unpublished Letters of Robert Hooke.”  Isis 42 (1951): 224. 
 Hall, Marie Boas.  Henry Oldenburg: Shaping the Royal Society . Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2002. 
 Hall, Thomas S.  Ideas of Life and Matter: Studies in the History of General Physiology, 600 
B.C.–1900 A.D. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969. 
 Halley, Edmond.  Correspondence and Papers of Edmond Halley . Ed. Eugene Fairﬁ eld 
MacPike. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1932. 
 Hallyn, Fernand, ed.  Les Olympiques de Descartes . Geneva: Librairie Droz, 1995. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    293
 ——.  The Poetic Structure of the World: Copernicus and Galileo . Trans. Donald M. Leslie. 
New York: Zone Books, 1990. 
 Harris, William V.  Dreams and Experience in Classical Antiquity . Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2009. 
 Harrison, John.  The Library of Isaac Newton . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1978. 
 Harth, Erica.  Cyrano de Bergerac and the Polemics of Modernity . New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1970. 
 Harvey, William.  The Anatomical Exercises  (1632). Ed. Geoffrey Keynes. New York: 
Dover Publications, 1995. 
 ——.  Anatomical Exercitations, Concerning the Generation of Living Creatures . London, 1653. 
 Havenstein, Daniela.  Democratizing Sir Thomas Browne: “Religio Medici” and Its Imita-
tions . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999. 
 Haycock, David Boyd.  Mortal Coil: A Short History of Living Longer . New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2008. 
 Hedrick, Elizabeth. “Romancing the Salve: Sir Kenelm Digby and the Powder of 
Sympathy.”  BJHS 41 (2008): 161–85. 
 Heidegger, Martin.  What Is Called Thinking?  (1954). Trans. Fred D. Wieck and J. Glenn 
Gray. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. 
 Heilbron, J. L.  Galileo . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
 Heine, Heinrich.  The Prose Writings of Heinrich Heine . Ed. Havelock Ellis. London: 
W. Scott, 1887. 
 Heller-Roazen, Daniel.  The Fifth Hammer: Pythagoras and the Disharmony of the World . 
New York: Zone Books, 2011. 
 Hellyer, Marcus, ed.  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution: The Essential Readings . Oxford: Black-
well, 2003. 
 Henry, John.  The Scientiﬁ c Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science . 2nd ed. New 
York: Palgrave, 2002. 
 Herbert, George.  The Works of George Herbert . Ed. F. E. Hutchinson. Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1941. 
 Hesiod.  Theogony and Works and Days . Trans. Catharine M. Schlegel and Henry 
Weinﬁ eld. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2006. 
 Hesse, Mary B. “Hooke’s Philosophical Algebra.”  Isis 57 (1966): 67–83. 
 Hindemith, Paul.  The Craft of Musical Composition . Trans. Arthur Mendel. 2 vols. 
New York: Associated Music Publishers, 1945. 
 Hirsh, John C.  Medieval Lyric: Middle English Lyrics, Ballads, and Carols . Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2005. 
 Hiscock, W. G., ed.  David Gregory, Isaac Newton and Their Circle . Oxford: Printed for 
the editor, 1937. 
 Hobbes, Thomas.  Leviathan  (1651). Ed. Richard Tuck. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1991. 
 Hobson, J. Allan.  Dreaming: An Introduction to the Science of Sleep . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002. 
 Hofmannsthal, Hugo von.  The Lord Chandos Letter and Other Writings.  Trans. Joel 
Rotenberg. New York: New York Review Books, 2005. 
 Holmes, Richard.  The Age of Wonder: How the Romantic Generation Discovered the Beauty 
and Terror of Science . New York: Pantheon Books, 2008. 

294    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Holton, Gerald.  The Scientiﬁ c Imagination: Case Studies . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1978. 
 Hooke, Robert.  An Attempt for the Explication of the Phænomena, Observable in an 
Experiment Published by the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE ,  Esq . London, 1661. 
 ——.  An Attempt to prove the Motion of the Earth from Observations . London, 1674. 
 ——.  The Diaries of Robert Hooke, The Leonardo of London, 1635–1703 . Ed. Richard 
Nichols. Lewes: Book Guild, 1994. 
 ——.  Micrographia: or Some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies Made by Magni-
fying Glasses. With Observations and Inquiries thereupon  (1665). Mineola: Dover 
Publications, 2003. 
 ——.  The Posthumous Works of Robert Hooke, M.D., S.R.S.  Ed. Richard Waller. Lon-
don, 1705. 
 Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno.  Dialectic of Enlightenment . Trans. John 
Cumming. New York: Herder and Herder, 1972. 
 Houlbrooke, Ralph.  Death, Religion, and the Family in England, 1480–1750 . New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1998. 
 Huff, Toby E.  Intellectual Curiosity and the Scientiﬁ c Revolution: A Global Perspective . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
 Huffman, William H.  Robert Fludd and the End of the Renaissance . London: Routledge, 
1988. 
 Hultsch, Henrike, and Dietmar Todt. “Learning to Sing.” In  Nature’s Music: The Sci-
ence of Birdsong , ed. Peter Marler and Hans Slabbekoorn, 80–107. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Academic, 2004. 
 Hume, David.  The History of England  (1762). 6 vols. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 
1983. 
 Hunter, Michael.  Establishing the New Science: The Experience of the Early Royal Society . 
Woodbridge, UK: Boydell Press, 1989. 
 ——.  Science and Society in Restoration England . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1981. 
 Huppert, George. “ Divinatio et Erudito : Thoughts on Foucault.”  History and Theory 
13 (1974): 191–207. 
 Hutchinson, Keith. “What Happened to Occult Qualities in the Scientiﬁ c Revolu-
tion?”  Isis 73 (1982): 233–53. 
 Iliffe, Robert. “ ‘Is he like other men?’ The Meaning of the  Principia Mathematica  and 
the Author as Idol.” In  Culture and Society in the Stuart Restoration , ed. Gerald 
MacLean, 159–78. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
 Iliffe, Robert, Milo Keynes, and Rebekah Higgitt, eds.  Early Biographies of Isaac New-
ton, 1660–1885 . 2 vols. London: Pickering & Chatto, 2006. 
 Inwood, Stephen.  The Forgotten Genius: The Biography of Robert Hooke, 1635–1703 . 
San Francisco: MacAdam/Cage, 2003. 
 Jacob, Margaret J. “The Truth of Newton’s Science and the Truth of Science’s 
History: Heroic Science at Its Eighteenth-Century Formulation.” In Osler, 
 Rethinking the Scientiﬁ c Revolution , 315–31. 
 Jacquot, Jean. “Harriot, Hill, Warner, and the New Philosophy.” In  Thomas Harriot: 
Renaissance Scientist , ed. John W. Shirley. 107–28. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1974. 
 Jama, Sophie.  La nuit de songes de René Descartes . Paris: Aubier, 1998. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    295
 Janiak, Andrew.  Newton as Philosopher . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2008. 
 Jardine, Lisa.  The Curious Life of Robert Hooke, the Man Who Measured London . New 
York: HarperCollins, 2004. 
 Jardine, Nicholas.  The Birth of History and Philosophy of Science: Kepler’s “A Defence of 
Tycho against Ursus” with Essays on Its Provenance and Signiﬁ cance . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
 Jesseph, Douglas M.  Squaring the Circle: The War between Hobbes and Wallis . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1999. 
 Johns, Adrian.  The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the Making . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1998. 
 Johnson, Samuel.  The Idler and The Adventurer . Ed. W. J. Bate, John M. Bullitt, and 
L. F. Powell. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1963. 
 ——.  The Lives of the Poets . Ed. Roger Lonsdale. 3 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
2006. 
 ——.  The Rambler . Ed. W. J. Bate and A. B. Strauss. 3 vols. New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 1969. 
 ——.  Rasselas and Other Tales.  Ed. Gwin J. Kolb. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 1990. 
 Jones, Richard Foster.  Ancients and Moderns: A Study of the Rise of the Scientiﬁ c Move-
ment in Seventeenth-Century England . 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mo.: Washington Uni-
versity Press, 1961. 
 Jonson, Ben.  Ben Jonson . Ed. Ian Donaldson. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985. 
 Kant, Immanuel.  Critique of Judgment  (1796). Trans. Werner S. Pluhar. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1987. 
 Kavey, Allison B., ed.  World-Building and the Early Modern Imagination . New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Kater, Michael H.  Composers of the Nazi Era: Eight Portraits . New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2000. 
 Keilen, Sean.  Vulgar Eloquence: On the Renaissance Invention of English Literature . New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006. 
 Kemp, Martin. “From ‘Mimesis’ to ‘Fantasia’: The Quattrocentro Vocabulary of Cre-
ation, Inspiration and Genius in the Visual Arts.”  Viator: Medieval and Renais-
sance Studies 8 (1977): 347–98. 
 ——.  Seen/Unseen: Art, Science, and Intuition from Leonardo to the Hubble Telescope . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. 
 Kepler, Johannes.  Epitome of Copernican Astronomy, Books IV and V . Trans. Charles 
Glenn Wallis. In  Great Books of the Western World , ed. Mortimer J. Adler, Clif-
ton Fadiman, and Philip W. Goetz. 16:839–1004. Chicago: W. Benton, 1952. 
 ——.  Gesammelte Werke . Ed. Walter von Dyck and Max Caspar. 20 vols. Munich: 
C. H. Beck, 1937–93. 
 ——.  The Harmony of the World . Trans. E. J. Aiton, A. M. Duncan, and J. V. Field. 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1997. 
 ——.  Kepler’s Conversation with Galileo’s Sidereal Messenger . Trans. Edward Rosen. 
New York: Johnson Reprint Corporation, 1965. 
 ——.  Kepler’s Somnium: The Dream, or Posthumous Work on Lunar Astronomy . Trans. 
Edward Rosen. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967. 

296    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 ——.  Mysterium Cosmographicum: The Secret of the Universe . Trans. A. M. Duncan. 
New York: Abaris Books, 1981. 
 ——.  New Astronomy . Trans. William H. Donahue. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1992. 
 ——.  A New Year’s Gift, or On the Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake . Ed. and trans. Colin Har-
die. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1966. 
 ——.  Optics: Paralipomena to Witelo Whereby the Optical Part of Astronomy Is Treated . 
Trans. William H. Donahue. Santa Fe, N.Mex.: Green Lion Press, 2000. 
 ——.  The Six-Cornered Snowﬂ ake: A New Year’s Gift . Trans. Jacques Bromberg. Phil-
adelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2010. 
 Ker, W. P.  English Literature Medieval . London: Williams & Norgate, 1912. 
 Keynes, John Maynard. “Newton the Man.” In  Newton Tercentenary Celebration, 
15–19 July 1946 . 27–34. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1947. 
 Killeen, Kevin.  Biblical Scholarship, Science and Politics in Early Modern England: Thomas 
Browne and the Thorny Place of Knowledge . Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2009. 
 Kilmister, Clive. “Genius in Mathematics.” In  Genius: The History of an Idea , ed. 
Penelope Murray, 181–95. Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1989. 
 Knight, G. Wilson.  Shakespearian Dimensions . Brighton: Harvester Press, 1984. 
 ——.  The Wheel of Fire: Interpretations of Shakespearian Tragedy with Three New Essays . 
London: Methuen, 1949. 
 Knott, John R., Jr. “Sir Thomas Browne and the Labyrinth of Truth.” In  Approaches 
to Sir Thomas Browne , ed. C. A. Patrides, 19–30. Columbia: University of 
Missouri Press, 1982. 
 Koestler, Arthur.  The Sleepwalkers: A History of Man’s Changing Vision of the Universe 
(1959). London: Arkana, 1989. 
 Kott, Jan.  Shakespeare Our Contemporary . Trans. Boleslaw Taborski. London: Methuen, 
1964. 
 Koyré, Alexandre.  From the Closed World to the Inﬁ nite Universe . Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1957. 
 ——.  Galileo Studies  (1939). Trans. John Mepham. Hassocks, UK: Harvester Press, 
1978. 
 ——.  Metaphysics and Measurement: Essays in Scientiﬁ c Revolution . Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1968. 
 ——.  Newtonian Studies . London: Chapman & Hall, 1965. 
 Koyré, Alexandre, and I. Bernard Cohen. “The Case of the Missing  Tanquam : Leib-
niz, Newton & Clarke.”  Isis 52 (1961): 555–66. 
 Kozhamthadam, Job.  The Discovery of Kepler’s Laws: The Interaction of Science, Philosophy, 
and Religion . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1994. 
 Kristeller, Paul Oskar. “The Moral Thought of Renaissance Humanism.” In  Renais-
sance Thought II: Papers on Humanism and the Arts , 53–56. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1965 
 Kuhn, Thomas S.  The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the Development of 
Western Thought . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957. 
 ——.  The Essential Tension: Selected Studies in Scientiﬁ c Tradition and Change . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1977. 
 ——. “Second Thoughts on Paradigms.” In  The Structure of Scientiﬁ c Theories , ed. 
Frederick Suppe, 459–82. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1974. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    297
 ——.  The Structure of Scientiﬁ c Revolutions . 3rd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1996. 
 Labrousse, Elisabeth.  Bayle . Trans. Denys Potts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1983. 
 Lambert, Ladina Bezzola.  Imagining the Unimaginable: The Poetics of Early Modern 
Astronomy . Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2002. 
 La Primaudaye, Pierre de.  The French Academie . 2 vols. Trans. T[homas] B[owes]. 
London, 1586, 1594. 
 Latour, Bruno.  On the Modern Cult of the Factish Gods . Durham, N.C.: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 2010. 
 ——.  We Have Never Been Modern . Trans. Catherine Porter. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1993. 
 ——. “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of 
Concern.”  Critical Inquiry 30 (2004): 225–48. 
 Leibniz, G. W., and Samuel Clarke.  Correspondence . Ed. Roger Ariew. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 2000. 
 Lerer, Seth.  Error and the Academic Self: The Scholarly Imagination, Medieval to Modern . 
New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. 
 Leroy, Maxime.  Descartes, le philosophe au masque . 2 vols. Paris: Rieder, 1929. 
 Lessing, Wolfgang.  Die Hindemith-Rezeption Theodor W. Adornos . Mainz: Schottverlag, 
1999. 
 Levine, Joseph M.  The Battle of the Books: History and Literature in the Augustan Age . 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1991. 
 ——. “Natural History and the History of the Scientiﬁ c Revolution.”  Clio 13 (1983): 
57–73. 
 Lewis, C. S.  The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964. 
 Libbrecht, Kenneth.  The Snowﬂ ake: Winter’s Secret Beauty . Stillwater, Minn.: Voyageur 
Press, 2003. 
 Lindorff, David.  Pauli and Jung: The Meeting of Two Great Minds . Wheaton, Ill.: Quest 
Books, 2004. 
 Lipking, Lawrence. “The Gods of Poetry: Mythology and the Eighteenth-Century 
Tradition.” In  Augustan Subjects: Essays in Honor of Martin C. Battestin , ed. Albert 
J. Rivero, 68–86. Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1997. 
 ——. “Inventing the Common Reader: Samuel Johnson and the Canon.” In  Inter-
pretation and Cultural History , ed. Joan H. Pittock and Andrew Wear, 153–74. 
London: Macmillan, 1991. 
 ——.  The Ordering of the Arts in Eighteenth-Century England . Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1970. 
 Locke, John.  An Essay concerning Human Understanding  (1689). Ed. Peter H. Nid-
ditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. 
 ——.  Some Thoughts concerning Education  (1693). Ed. John W. Yolton and Jean S. 
Yolton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989. 
 Lüthy, Christoph. “Where Logical Necessity Becomes Visual Persuasion: Descartes’s 
Clear and Distinct Illustrations.” In  Transmitting Knowledge: Words, Images, and 
Instruments in Early Modern Europe , ed. Sachiko Kusukawa and Ian Maclean, 
97–133. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. 

298    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Lynch, William T.  Solomon’s Child: Method in the Early Royal Society of London . Stan-
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2001. 
 Machamer, Peter, ed.  The Cambridge Companion to Galileo . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998. 
 Machamer, Peter, and J. E. McGuire.  Descartes’s Changing Mind . Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2009. 
 Mantel, Hilary.  Fludd . London: Viking Press, 1989. 
 Manuel, Frank E.  Freedom from History . New York: New York University Press, 1971. 
 ——.  Isaac Newton, Historian . Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1963. 
 ——.  A Portrait of Isaac Newton . Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1968. 
 ——.  The Religion of Isaac Newton . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979. 
 Marino, Giambattista.  L’Adone . Paris, 1623. 
 Marion, Jean-Luc.  Cartesian Questions: Method and Metaphysics . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1999. 
 Maritain, Jacques.  The Dream of Descartes . Trans. M. L. Andison. New York: Philo-
sophical Library, 1944. 
 Martens, Rhonda.  Kepler’s Philosophy and the New Astronomy . Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 2000. 
 Masterman, Margaret. “The Nature of a Paradigm.” In  Criticism and the Growth of 
Knowledge , ed. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, 59–89. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1970. 
 Mayr, Otto.  Authority, Liberty, and Automatic Machinery in Early Modern Europe . Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986. 
 Mazzeo, Joseph Anthony.  Renaissance and Seventeenth-Century Studies . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1964. 
 McEwen, Gilbert D.  The Oracle of the Coffee House: John Dunton’s “Athenian Mercury .” 
San Marino, Calif.: Huntington Library, 1972. 
 McGinn, Colin.  The Meaning of Disgust . New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
 McGuire, J. E., and P. M. Rattansi. “Newton and the ‘Pipes of Pan’.”  Notes and 
Records of the Royal Society of London 21 (1966): 108–43. 
 McKillop, Alan Dugald.  The Background of Thomson’s “Seasons.”  Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1942. 
 McMullin, Ernan. “Galileo on Science and Scripture.” In Machamer,  Cambridge 
Companion to Galileo , 271–347. 
 Meier, C. A., ed.  Atom and Archetype: The Pauli/Jung Letters, 1932–58 . Trans. David 
Roscoe. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2001. 
 Meli, Domenico Bertoloni.  Equivalence and Priority: Newton versus Leibniz . Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1993. 
 Merchant, Carolyn.  The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientiﬁ c Revolution. 
San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1980. 
 Merleau-Ponty, Maurice.  La prose du monde . Paris: Gallimard, 1969. 
 Merton, Robert K.  On the Shoulders of Giants: A Shandean Postscript . New York: Free 
Press, 1965. 
 Miller, Arthur I.  Deciphering the Cosmic Number: The Strange Friendship of Wolfgang 
Pauli and Carl Jung . New York: W. W. Norton, 2009. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    299
 Milton, John.  Areopagitica . London, 1644. 
 ——.  The Life Records of John Milton . Ed. J. Milton French. 5 vols. New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1949–58. 
 Montaigne, Michel de.  The Complete Essays of Montaigne . Trans. Donald M. Frame. 
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1958. 
 Montgomery, Scott. L.  The Moon and the Western Imagination . Tucson: University of 
Arizona Press, 1999. 
 ——.  The Scientiﬁ c Voice . New York: Guilford Press, 1996. 
 Mosley, Adam.  Bearing the Heavens: Tycho Brahe and the Astronomical Community of the 
Late Sixteenth Century . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Moss, Jean Dietz.  Novelties in the Heavens: Rhetoric and Science in the Copernican Con-
troversy . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993. 
 Nagy, Gregory.  Poetry as Performance: Homer and Beyond . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1996. 
 Nashe, Thomas.  The Works of Thomas Nashe . Ed. R. B. McKerrow. 5 vols. London: 
Sidgwick & Jackson, 1910. 
 Needham, Joseph.  A History of Embryology . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1959. 
 Newton, Isaac.  Correspondence . Ed. H. W. Turnbull. 7 vols. Cambridge: Royal Society, 
1959–77. 
 ——.  Isaac Newton’s Papers & Letters on Natural Philosophy . Ed. I. Bernard Cohen. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1958. 
 ——.  The Mathematical Papers of Isaac Newton . Ed. D. T. Whiteside. 8 vols. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967–81. 
 ——.  Opticks or A Treatise of the Reﬂ ections, Refractions, Inﬂ ections & Colours of Light . 4th ed., 
1730. New York: Dover Publications, 1979. 
 ——.  Philosophical Writings . Ed. Andrew Janiak. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004. 
 ——.  The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1687). Trans. I. Ber-
nard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1999. 
 ——.  A Treatise of the System of the World . 2nd ed., 1731. Ed. I. Bernard Cohen. 
Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications, 2004. 
 ——.  Unpublished Scientiﬁ c Papers of Isaac Newton . Ed. A. Rupert Hall and Marie Boas 
Hall. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962. 
 Nicholl, Charles.  The Chemical Theatre . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980. 
 Nicolson, Marjorie Hope.  The Breaking of the Circle: Studies in the Effect of the “New 
Science” upon Seventeenth Century Poetry . Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press, 1950. 
 ——.  Newton Demands the Muse: Newton’s Opticks and the Eighteenth Century Poets . 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1946. 
 ——.  Voyages to the Moon . New York: Macmillan, 1948. 
 Nisbet, Robert A.  History of the Idea of Progress . New York. Basic Books, 1980. 
 Nuland, Sherwin B.  How We Die: Reﬂ ections on Life’s Final Chapter . New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, 1994. 
 Ogilvie, Brian W.  The Science of Describing: Natural History in Renaissance Europe . Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2006. 

300    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Orgel, Stephen. “The Renaissance Artist as Plagiarist.”  ELH 48 (1981): 476–95. 
 Osler, Margaret J., ed.  Rethinking the Scientiﬁ c Revolution . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000. 
 Ovid.  Ovid’s “Metamorphosis” Englished, Mythologized, and Represented in Figures . 
Trans. George Sandys (1632). Ed. Karl K. Hulley and Stanley T. Vandersall. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1970. 
 Paganini, Gianni.  Skepsis: Le débat des moderns sur scepticisme; Montaigne, Le Vayer, Cam-
panella, Hobbes, Descartes, Bayle . Paris: J. Vrin, 2008. 
 Pagel, Walter.  Paracelsus: An Introduction to Philosophical Medicine in the Era of the 
Renaissance . 2nd ed. Basel: Karger, 1982. 
 Palisca, Claude V.  The Florentine Camerata: Documentary Studies and Translations . New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1989. 
 ——. “Was Galileo’s Father an Experimental Scientist?” In Coelho,  Music and Science 
in the Age of Galileo , 143–51. 
 Panofsky, Erwin.  Idea: A Concept in Art Theory  (1924). Trans. Joseph J. S. Peake. 
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1968. 
 ——.  Galileo as a Critic of the Arts . The Hague: Nijhoff, 1954. 
 Paracelsus.  The Hermetic and Alchemical Writings of Aureolus Philippus Theophrastus 
Bombast . Ed. Arthur Edward Waite. 2 vols. London: J. Eliot, 1894. 
 Park, Katharine. “The Organic Soul.” In Schmitt, Skinner, and Kestler,  Cambridge 
History of Renaissance Philosophy , 464–84. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988. 
 Park, Katharine, and Lorraine Daston. “Introduction: The Age of the New.” In  Early 
Modern Science: The Cambridge History of Science , 3: 1–18. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2006. 
 Parker, Blanford.  The Triumph of Augustan Poetics: English Literary Culture from Butler 
to Johnson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
 Parrett, Aaron.  The Translunar Narrative in the Western Tradition . Aldershot, UK: Ash-
gate, 2004. 
 Pascal, Blaise.  Œuvres complètes . Ed Michel Le Guern. 2 vols. Paris: Gallimard, 
1998. 
 Patterson, Annabel. “That Old Man Eloquent.” In  Literary Milton: Text, Pretext, Con-
text , ed. Diana Treviño Benet and Michael Lieb, 22–44. Pittsburgh: Duquesne 
University Press, 1994. 
 Patterson, Lee. “Court Politics and the Invention of Literature: The Case of Sir John 
Clanvowe.” In  Culture and History, 1350–1600: Essays on English Communities, 
Identities, and Writing , ed. David Aers, 7–41. Detroit: Wayne State University 
Press, 1992. 
 Pauli, Wolfgang. “The Inﬂ uence of Archetypal Ideas on the Scientiﬁ c Theories 
of Kepler.” In  The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche , trans. Priscilla Silz. 
171–72. New York: Pantheon Books, 1955. 
 Pavel, Thomas. “Literature and the Arts.” In  Descartes’ Discourse on Method and Medi-
tations on First Philosophy , ed. David Weissman, 349–70. New Haven, Conn.: 
Yale University Press, 1996. 
 Pemberton, Henry.  A View of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy . London, 1728. 
 Peterson, Mark A.  Galileo’s Muse: Renaissance Mathematics and the Arts.  Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    301
 Pfeffer, Wendy.  The Change of Philomel: The Nightingale in Medieval Literature . New 
York: P. Lang, 1985. 
 Pﬁ zenmaier, Thomas C.  The Trinitarian Theology of Dr. Samuel Clarke (1675–1729): 
Context, Sources, and Controversy . Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997. 
 Pliny.  Pliny’s “Natural History”: A Selection from Philemon Holland’s Translation (1601). 
Ed. J. Newsome. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964. 
 Plotnitsky, Arkady, and David Reed. “Discourse, Mathematics, Demonstration, and 
Science in Galileo’s  Discourses Concerning Two New Sciences .”  Conﬁ gurations  9 
(2001): 37–64. 
 Plutarch.  Moralia , vol. 12. Trans. Harold Cherniss. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1957. 
 Pollard, Alfred W., ed.  Records of the English Bible . London: H. Frowde, 1911. 
 Pollard, John.  Birds in Greek Life and Myth . London: Thames and Hudson, 1977. 
 Popkin, Richard H.  The History of Scepticism: From Savonarola to Bayle . Rev. ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Popper, Karl R.  Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientiﬁ c Knowledge . London: 
Routledge & K. Paul, 1963. 
 Pormann, Peter E., and Emilie Savage-Smith.  Medieval Islamic Medicine . Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 2007. 
 Poulet, Georges.  Studies in Human Time . Trans. Elliott Coleman. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1956. 
 Pound, Ezra.  Literary Essays of Ezra Pound . New York: New Directions, 1954. 
 ——.  Personæ: The Collected Shorter Poems of Ezra Pound . New York: New Direc-
tions, 1950. 
 Preston, Claire.  Thomas Browne and the Writing of Early Modern Science . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 Prouty, C. T.  George Gascoigne: Elizabethan Courtier, Soldier, and Poet . New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1942. 
 Purver, Margery.  The Royal Society: Concept and Creation . London: Routledge & K. 
Paul, 1967. 
 Putscher, Marielene.  Pneuma, Spiritus, Geist. Vorstellung vom Lebensantrieb in ihren 
geschichtlichen Wandlungen . Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1973. 
 Raven, Charles E.  English Naturalists from Neckam to Ray: A Study of the Making of the 
Modern World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1947. 
 ——.  John Ray, Naturalist: His Life and Works . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1950. 
 Ray, John.  The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of the Creation  (1691). 9th ed. 
London, 1727. 
 Redondi, Pietro.  Galileo Heretic . Trans. Raymond Rosenthal. Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1987. 
 Rees, Graham. “Bacon’s Speculative Philosophy.” In  The Cambridge Companion to 
Bacon , ed. Markku Peltonen, 121–45. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1996. 
 ——.  Francis Bacon’s Natural Philosophy: A New Source . Chalfont St. Giles: British 
Society for the History of Science, 1984. 
 Reeves, Eileen.  Galileo’s Glassworks: The Telescope and the Mirror . Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1998. 

302    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 ——.  Painting the Heavens: Art and Science in the Age of Galileo . Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1997. 
 Reiss, Edmund.  The Art of the Middle English Lyric: Essays in Criticism . Athens: Uni-
versity of Georgia Press, 1972. 
 Renn, Jürgen, ed.  Galileo in Context . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
 Repcheck, Jack.  Copernicus’ Secret: How the Scientiﬁ c Revolution Began. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 2007. 
 Revard, Stella P. “Apollo and Christ in the Seventeenth-Century Religious Lyric.” In 
 New Perspectives on the Seventeenth-Century Religious Lyric , ed. John R. Roberts, 
143–67. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1994. 
 Reynolds, Henry. “Mythomystes, wherein a short svrvay is taken of the natvre and 
valve of trve poesy and depth of the ancients above ovr moderne poets” (1632). 
In Spingarn,  Critical Essays of the Seventeenth Century , 1:141–79. 
 R. H.  New Atlantis. Begun by the Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans: and Continued by 
R. H. Esquire. Wherein is set forth a Platform of Monarchical Government. With a 
Pleasant intermixture of divers rare Inventions, and wholsom Customs, ﬁ t to be intro-
duced into all Kingdoms, States, and Common-Wealths . London, 1660. 
 Richards, I. A.  Practical Criticism: A Study of Literary Judgment . New York: Harcourt 
Brace, 1935. 
 Righini, Guglielmo. “New Light on Galileo’s Lunar Observations.” In Bonelli and 
Shea,  Reason, Experiment, and Mysticism , 59–76. 
 Rodis-Lewis, Geneviève . Descartes: His Life and Thought . Trans. Jane M. Todd. Ithaca, 
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1998. 
 Roger, Jacques.  The Life Sciences in Eighteenth-Century French Thought . Trans. Robert 
Ellrich. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1997. 
 Romanowski, Sylvie. “Cyrano de Bergerac’s Epistemological Bodies: ‘Pregnant with 
a Thousand Deﬁ nitions’.”  Science-Fiction Studies 25 (1998): 414–32. 
 Roos, Anna Maria E.  Luminaries in the Natural World: The Sun and the Moon in England, 
1400–1720 . New York: Peter Lang, 2001. 
 Rosen, Edward. “Kepler’s Attitude toward Astrology and Mysticism.” In Vickers, 
 Occult and Scientiﬁ c Mentalities , 253–72. 
 ——.  The Naming of the Telescope . New York: Henry Schuman, 1947. 
 Rosenﬁ eld, Leonora Cohen.  From Beast-Machine to Man-Machine: Animal Soul in 
French Letters from Descartes to La Mettrie . New York: Oxford University Press, 
1941. 
 Rossi, Paolo.  Francis Bacon: From Magic to Science . Trans. Sacha Rabinovitch. London: 
Routledge, 1968. 
 ——. “Hermeticism, Rationality, and the Scientiﬁ c Revolution.” In Bonelli and Shea, 
 Reason, Experiment, and Mysticism , 247–73. 
 ——.  Logic and the Art of Memory: The Quest for a Universal Language . Trans. Stephen 
Clucas. 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000. 
 Ryle, Gilbert.  The Concept of Mind . London: Hutchinson, 1949. 
 Sargent, Rose-Mary.  The Difﬁ dent Naturalist: Robert Boyle and the Philosophy of Experi-
ment . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 
 Sawday, Jonathan.  Engines of the Imagination: Renaissance Culture and the Rise of the 
Machine . London: Routledge, 2007. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    303
 Schaffer, Simon.  The Information Order of Isaac Newton’s “Principia Mathematica .” 
Uppsala: Tryck Wikströms, 2008. 
 Schmidle, Nicholas. “A Very Rare Book.”  New Yorker , 16 December 2013, 62–73. 
 Schmitt, Charles B., Quentin Skinner, and Eckhard Kestler, eds.  The Cambridge His-
tory of Renaissance Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
 Schmitt, Jean-Claude.  Ghosts in the Middle Ages: The Living and the Dead in Medieval 
Society . Trans. Teresa L. Fagan. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998. 
 Schorske, Carl E.  Fin-de-siècle Vienna: Politics and Culture . New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 1980. 
 Schouls, Peter S.  Descartes and the Possibility of Science . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2000. 
 Schubert, Giselher. “Disharmonie unterm Sternenzelt. Hindemiths Kosmos.”  Neue 
Zeitschrift für Musik 161, no. 6 (2000): 28–35. 
 Schwartz, Regina.  Remembering and Repeating: On Milton’s Theology and Poetics . Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1993. 
 Sebald, W. G.  After Nature . Trans. Michael Hamburger. New York: Random House, 
2002. 
 Sebba, Gregor.  The Dream of Descartes . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University 
Press, 1987. 
 Segre, Michael.  In the Wake of Galileo . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University 
Press, 1991. 
 Sepper, Dennis L.  Descartes’s Imagination: Proportion, Images, and the Activity of Thinking . 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 
 Settle, Thomas B.  Galileo’s Experimental Research . Berlin: Max-Planck Institute for the 
History of Science, 1996. 
 Sewell, Elizabeth.  The Orphic Voice: Poetry and Natural History . New Haven, Conn.: 
Yale University Press, 1960. 
 Seznec, Jean.  The Survival of the Pagan Gods: The Mythological Tradition and Its Place in 
Renaissance Humanism and Art . Trans. Barbara F. Sessions. New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1953. 
 Shadwell, Thomas.  The Virtuoso  (1676). Ed. Marjorie Hope Nicolson and David 
Stuart Rodes. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1966. 
 Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Third Earl of.  Characteristicks of Men, Manners, 
Opinions, Times (1711). 3 vols. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2001. 
 Shapin, Steven. “ ‘The Mind Is Its Own Place’: Science and Solitude in Seventeenth-
Century England.”  Science in Context 4 (1991): 191–218. 
 ——.  Never Pure: Historical Studies of Science as If It Was Produced by People with Bod-
ies, Situated in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for Credibility and 
Authority . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010. 
 ——.  A Social History of Truth: Civility and Science in Seventeenth-Century England . 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. 
 Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer.  Leviathan and the Air-Pump . Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1985. 
 Shapiro, Barbara.  Probability and Certainty in Seventeenth-Century England . Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1983. 
 Sharratt, Michael.  Galileo: Decisive Innovator . Cambridge: Blackwell, 1994. 

304    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Shea, William R. “Galileo and the Church.” In  God and Nature: Historical Essays on the 
Encounter between Christianity and Science , ed. David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. 
Numbers, 114–35. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. 
 ——.  Galileo’s Intellectual Revolution: Middle Period, 1610–1632 . 2nd ed. New York: 
Science History Publications, 1977. 
 ——.  The Magic of Numbers and Motion: The Scientiﬁ c Career of René Descartes . Canton, 
Mass.: Science History Publications, 1991. 
 ——. “Owen Gingerich’s Curious Case.”  Galilæana 7 (2010): 97–110. 
 Shea, William R., and Mariano Artigas.  Galileo in Rome: The Rise and Fall of a Trouble-
some Genius . New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Shirley, John.  Thomas Harriot: A Biography . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983. 
 Shorto, Russell.  Descartes’ Bones: A Skeletal History of the Conﬂ ict between Faith and 
Reason . New York: Doubleday, 2008. 
 Shuger, Debora. “The Laudian Idiot.” In Barbour and Preston,  Sir Thomas Browne , 
36–62. 
 Sidney, Philip.  An Apology for Poetry . Ed. Geoffrey Shepherd. Edinburgh: Nelson, 
1965. 
 ——.  The Poems of Sir Philip Sidney . Ed. William A. Ringler, Jr. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1962. 
 Silver, Victoria. “ ‘Wonders of the Invisible World’: The Trial of the Lowestoft 
Witches.” In Barbour and Preston,  Sir Thomas Browne , 118–45. 
 Simon, Gérard.  Kepler astronome astrologue . Paris: Gallimard, 1979. 
 Skeat, Walter W., ed.  Chaucerian and Other Pieces, Being a Supplement to the Complete 
Works of Geoffrey Chaucer . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1897. 
 Solomon, Julie Robin.  Objectivity in the Making: Francis Bacon and the Politics of Inquiry . 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998. 
 Solomon, Julie Robin, and Catherine Gimelli Martin, eds.  Francis Bacon and the Reﬁ g-
uring of Early Modern Thought . Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 2005. 
 Spadafora, David.  The Idea of Progress in Eighteenth-Century Britain . New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1990. 
 Spence, Joseph.  Observations, Anecdotes, and Characters of Books and Men Collected from 
Conversation . Ed. James Osborn. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1966. 
 Spenser, Edmund.  The Yale Edition of the Shorter Poems of Edmund Spenser . New 
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1989. 
 Spiller, Elizabeth.  Science, Reading, and Renaissance Literature: The Art of Making Knowl-
edge, 1580–1670 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Spingarn, J. E., ed.  Critical Essays of the Seventeenth Century . 3 vols. Oxford: Claren-
don Press, 1908–9. 
 Sprat, Thomas.  History of the Royal Society  (1667). Ed. Jackson I. Cope and Harold 
Whitmore Jones. St. Louis, Mo.: Washington University, 1958. 
 Spurgeon, Caroline F. E.  Shakespeare’s Imagery, and What It Tells Us . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1935. 
 Starobinski, Jean.  Montaigne in Motion . Trans. Arthur Goldhammer. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1985. 
 Stephenson, Bruce.  Kepler’s Physical Astronomy . New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987. 
 ——.  The Music of the Heavens: Kepler’s Celestial Music.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1994. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    305
 Sterne, Laurence.  The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman . Ed. James A. 
Work. New York: Odyssey Press, 1940. 
 Stone, Harriet.  Tables of Knowledge: Descartes in Vermeer’s Studio . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell 
University Press, 2006. 
 Summers, Joseph H.  George Herbert: His Religion and Art . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1954. 
 Svendsen, Kester.  Milton and Science . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1956. 
 Sweetman, Brendan, ed.  The Failure of Modernism: The Cartesian Legacy and Contempo-
rary Pluralism . Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1999. 
 Swerdlow, Noel M. “The Derivation and First Draft of Copernicus’s Planetary 
Theory: A Translation of the Commentariolus with Commentary.”  Proceedings 
of the American Philosophical Society 117 (1973): 423–512. 
 ——. “Galileo’s Discoveries with the Telescope and Their Evidence for the Coper-
nican Theory.” In Machamer,  Cambridge Companion to Galileo , 252–60. 
 Swerdlow, Noel M., and O. Neugebauer.  Mathematical Astronomy in Copernicus’s “De 
Revolutionibus.” New York: Springer-Verlag, 1984. 
 Swift, Jonathan.  The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift . Ed. Herbert Davis et al. 16 vols.   Oxford: 
B. Blackwell, 1939–74. 
 Symons, Dana M.  Chaucerian Dream Visions and Complaints . Kalamazoo, Mich.: 
Medieval Institute Publications, 2004. 
 Szpiro, George G.  Kepler’s Conjecture: How Some of the Greatest Minds in History Helped 
Solve One of the Oldest Math Problems in the World . Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2003. 
 Thomas, Keith.  Man and the Natural World: Changing Attitudes in England, 1500–1800 . 
London: Allen Lane, 1983. 
 ——.  Religion and the Decline of Magic . New York: Scribner’s, 1971. 
 Thomas, W. K., and Warren U. Ober.  A Mind For Ever Voyaging: Wordsworth at Work 
Portraying Newton and Science . Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1989. 
 Thomson, James.  The Seasons  (1726–46). Ed. James Sambrook. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1981. 
 Thoren, Victor E.  The Lord of Uraniborg: A Biography of Tycho Brahe . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 Thorne, Christian.  The Dialectic of Counter-Enlightenment . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 2009. 
 Thrale, Hester Lynch.  Thraliana: The Diary of Mrs. Hester Lynch Thrale . Ed. K. C. 
Balderston. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1942. 
 Thrower, Norman J. W., ed.  Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: A Longer View of 
Newton and Halley . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990. 
 Tolstoy, Leo.  Tolstoy on Shakespeare: A Critical Essay on Shakespeare . Trans. V. Tchert-
koff and I. F. M. New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1906. 
 Topsell, Edward.  The Fowles of Heauen or History of Birdes  (1613–14?). Ed. Thomas P. 
Harrison and F. David Hoeniger. Austin: University of Texas, 1972. 
 Toulmin, Stephen.  Cosmopolis: The Hidden Agenda of Modernity . New York: Free Press, 
1990. 
 Tracy, Clarence. “Johnson and the Common Reader.”  Dalhousie Review  57 (1977): 
405–23. 

306    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Treviranus, Gottfried Reinhold.  Biologie oder Philosophie der Lebenden Natur für Natur-
forscher und Aerzte . Göttingen, 1802–22. 
 Vailati, Ezio.  Leibniz & Clarke: A Study of Their Correspondence . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997. 
 Valéry, Paul.  Masters and Friends . Trans. Martin Turnell. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1968. 
 ——.  Œuvres . Ed. Jean Hytier. Paris: Gallimard, 1957. 
 Van Helden, Albert. “Galileo and the Telescope.” In Van Helden et al.,  Origins of the 
Telescope , 183–201. 
 Van Helden, Albert, Sven Dupré, Rob van Gent, and Huib Zuidevaart, eds.  The Ori-
gins of the Telescope . Amsterdam: KNAW Press, 2010. 
 Vartanian, Aram.  Diderot and Descartes: A Study of Scientiﬁ c Naturalism in the Enlighten-
ment . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1953. 
 Vergil, Polydore.  On Discovery  (1499). Trans. Brian P. Copenhaver. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. 
 Vicari, E. Patricia.  The View from Minerva’s Tower: Learning and Imagination in “The 
Anatomy of Melancholy.” Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1989. 
 Vickers, Brian. “Frances Yates and the Writing of History.”  Journal of Modern History 
51 (1979): 287–316. 
 ——, ed.  Occult and Scientiﬁ c Mentalities in the Renaissance . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1984. 
 Voelkel, James R.  The Composition of Kepler’s “Astronomia Nova.”  Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2001. 
 Voltaire.  The Elements of Sir Isaac Newton’s Philosophy . Trans. John Hanna. London, 
1738. 
 ——.  Letters on England  (1733). Trans. Leonard Tancock. Harmondsworth, UK: 
Penguin Books, 1980. 
 von Franz, Marie-Louis. “The Dream of Descartes.” Trans. Andrea Dykes and Eliza-
beth Welsh. In  Timeless Documents of the Soul , ed. Helmuth Jacobsohn. Evan-
ston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1968. 
 Walker, D. P. “Francis Bacon and  spiritus .” In  Science, Medicine and Society in the Renais-
sance , ed. Allen G. Debus, 2:121–30. New York: Science History Publications, 
1972. 
 ——.  Studies in Musical Science in the Late Renaissance . London: Warburg Institute, 
1978. 
 Warton, Thomas.  The History of English Poetry, from the Close of the Eleventh to the Com-
mencement of the Eighteenth Century . 3 vols. London, 1774–81. 
 Watson, Richard.  Cogito, Ergo Sum: The Life of René Descartes . Boston: David R. 
Godine, 2002. 
 Watson, Robert N.  Back to Nature: The Green and the Real in the Late Renaissance . 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006. 
 Wear, Andrew.  Knowledge and Practice in English Medicine, 1550–1680 . Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 Weber, Max. “Science as a Vocation.” In  The Vocation Lectures , ed. David Owen and 
Tracy B. Strong, trans. Rodney Livingstone. 1–31. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2004. 
 Webster, Charles.  The Great Instauration: Science, Medicine and Reform, 1626–1660 . 
London: Duckworth, 1975. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY    307
 ——.  Paracelsus: Medicine, Magic, and Mission at the End of Time . New Haven, Conn.: 
Yale University Press, 2008. 
 Webster, John.  The White Devil  (1612). Ed. F. L. Lucas. London: Chatto & Windus, 
1958. 
 Weeks, Andrew,  Paracelsus: Speculative Theory and the Crisis of the Early Reformation . 
Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997. 
 Weidhorn, Manfred.  The Person of the Millennium: The Unique Impact of Galileo on 
World History . Lincoln, Neb.: iUniverse, 2005. 
 Weinberg, Bernard.  A History of Literary Criticism in the Italian Renaissance . 2 vols. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961. 
 West, William N. “Brownean Motion: Conversation within  Pseudodoxia Epidemica ’s 
‘Sober Circumference of Knowledge’.” In Barber and Preston,  Sir Thomas 
Browne , 168–87. 
 Westfall, Richard S.  The Construction of Modern Science: Mechanisms and Mechanics . 
New York: Wiley, 1971. 
 ——.  Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1980. 
 ——. “Newton and His Biographer.” In  Introspection in Biography: The Biographer’s 
Quest for Self-Awareness , ed. Samuel H. Baron and Carl Pletsch, 175–89. Hill-
sdale, N.J.: Analytic Press, 1985. 
 ——. “The Scientiﬁ c Revolution Reasserted.” In Osler,  Rethinking the Scientiﬁ c Revo-
lution , 41–55. 
 Westman, Robert S. “Nature, Art, and Psyche: Jung, Pauli, and the Kepler-Fludd 
Polemic.” In Vickers,  Occult and Scientiﬁ c Mentalities , 177–229. 
 Whitaker, Ewan A. “Galileo’s Lunar Observations and the Dating of the Com-
position of  Sidereus Nuncius .”  Journal for the History of Astronomy  9 (1978): 
155–69. 
 ——. “Selenography in the Seventeenth Century.” In  Planetary Astronomy from the 
Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics , pt. A,  Tycho Brahe to Newton . Ed. René 
Taton and Curtis Wilson. 119–43. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1989. 
 White, Alan R.  The Language of Imagination . Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1990. 
 White, Michael.  Isaac Newton: The Last Sorcerer . London: Fourth Estate, 1997. 
 Whitehead, Alfred North.  Science and the Modern World . New York: Macmillan, 1925. 
 Whiteside, D. T. “Newton the Mathematician.” In  Contemporary Newtonian Research , ed. 
Zev Bechler, 109–28. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1982. 
 Wilding, Michael.  Dragon’s Teeth: Literature in the English Revolution . Oxford: Clar-
endon Press, 1987. 
 Willey, Basil.  The Seventeenth Century Background . London: Chatto & Windus, 1934. 
 Williams, Bernard.  Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry . Hassocks, UK: Harvester 
Press, 1978. 
 Willughby, Francis.  The Ornithology of Francis Willughby . . . In Three Books, Wherein 
All the Birds Hitherto Known, Being reduced into a Method sutable to their Natures, 
are accurately described, translated into English with Three considerable discourses, by 
John Ray . London, 1678. 
 Wilson, Catherine.  The Invisible World: Early Modern Philosophy and the Invention of the 
Microscope . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995. 

308    BIBLIOGRAPHY
 ——. “Soul, Body, and World: Plato’s  Timaeus and Descartes’  Meditations .” In  Pla-
tonism at the Origins of Modernity: Studies on Platonism and Early Modern Phi-
losophy , ed. Douglas Hedley and Sarah Hutton, 177–91. Dordrecht: Springer, 
2008. 
 Wilson, Curtis.  Astronomy from Kepler to Newton: Historical Studies . London: Variorum 
Reprints, 1989. 
 Wilson, Edward O.  Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge . New York: Knopf, 1998. 
 Wimsatt, W. K.  The Prose Style of Samuel Johnson . New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1941. 
 Winkler, Mary G., and Albert Van Helden. “Representing the Heavens: Galileo and 
Visual Astronomy.”  Isis 83 (1992): 195–217. 
 Wittgenstein, L.  Lectures & Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology and Religious Belief . 
Ed. Cyril Barrett. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972. 
 Wootton, David.  Galileo: Watcher of the Skies . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University 
Press, 2010. 
 Yates, Frances A.  The Art of Memory . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. 
 ——.  Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1964. 
 ——. “The Hermetic Tradition in Renaissance Science.” In  Art, Science, and History 
in the Renaissance , ed. Charles S. Singleton, 255–74. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1967. 
 ——.  The Rosicrucian Enlightenment . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1972. 
 ——.  Theatre of the World . London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1969. 
 Yolton, John W.  John Locke and the Way of Ideas . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968. 
 Zagorin, Perez.  Francis Bacon . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998. 

309
 Addison, Joseph,  251 n 85  
 Adorno, Theodor,  53 ,  54 ,  278 n 58  
 air, as vital element,  104  –  5 ,  255 n 49  
 Aït-Touati, Frédérique,  241 n 8 ,  271 n 26  
 Aldrovandi, Ulisse,  71 
 Anaximenes,  103 ,  105 
 ancients and moderns,  148  –  49 ,  183 
 archetypes,  56 –  57 
 Archimedes,  5 ,  130 ,  233 n 16  
 Ariosto, Ludovico,  11  –  12 ,  31  –  32 
 Aristotle,  4 ,  5 ,  69 ,  103 ,  117 ,  120 ,  128 ,  183 , 
 204 –  5 ,  216 
 Ashworth, William,  72 ,  246 nn 17 , 23 
 astrology,  51  –  52 
 
 Bacon, Francis,  18 ,  76  –  78 ,  137 ,  140  –  42 , 
 215 –  16 ,  217 ,  247 n 43 ,  261 n 26 ; on 
Copernicanism,  xii ,  231 n 11 ; on genius, 
 171 –  72 ; on idols,  4 ,  7 ,  69 ,  94 ,  96 ,  115 , 
 199 ; on life and death,  93 –  98 ,  100 , 
 105 ,  255 n 60 ; on natural history,  69 –  71 , 
 73 –  74 ,  216 ; on spirits,  94  –  97 ,  99 , 
 253 n 14 ; on words,  68 –  71 ,  73  –  74 
 —works of:  Advancement of Learning,   69 , 
 72 –  75 ,  215 –  16 ;  Great Instauration,  10 ,  69 , 
 173 ,  178 ;  History of Life and Death,   94  –  97 , 
 100 ;  History of the Winds,   105 ; “Mascu-
line Birth,”  69  –  70 ;  New Atlantis,  
 95 –  96 ,  141 ,  172 –  74 ,  218 ,  253 n 16 ; 
 Novum Organum,   77 ;  Sylva Sylvarum,   95 ; 
 Wisdom of the Ancients,  93 
 Baigrie, Brian,  258 n 31 ,  259 n 48  
 Baillet, Adrian,  111 –  12 ,  114 ,  256 n 5  
 Bayle, Pierre,  150  –  51 
 Beeckman, Isaac,  113 ,  127 
 Benjamin, Walter,  39 ,  55 
 Benson, Michael,  ix 
 Bentley, Richard,  191 ,  198 
 Biagoli, Mario,  21 ,  237 n 19 ,  274 n 2  
 biology,  93 ,  252 n 10  
 Blake, William,  xi ,  43 ,  90 ,  198 ,  199 
 Boyle, Robert,  4 ,  16 ,  174  –  75 ,  177 ,  181 ,  191 , 
 232 n 10 ,  235 n 61  
 Brahe, Tycho,  43 ,  45 ,  60  –  62 ,  64 ,  167  –  70 , 
 182 ,  216 ,  244 n 59 ,  245 n 65  
 Bredekamp, Horst,  238 n 48 ,  239 nn 51 , 53 
 Boyle, Robert,  103 ,  191 ,  214 ,  217 ,  255 n 49  
 Brod, Max,  245 n 65  
 Browne, Thomas,  140 ,  151 ,  153  –  57 , 
 255 n 56 ,  265 nn 88 , 94 ,  266 n 96 ; as 
amphibium,  143 –  45 ,  156 ; on idolatry, 
 145  –  46 ; on truth and error,  142  –  49 
 —works of:  Christian Morals,   142  –  43 ; 
 Pseudodoxia,  143 ,  145  –  49 ,  154 ;  Religio 
Medici,   143  –  45 ,  154  –  56 
 Bruno, Giordano,  4 ,  48 ,  98 ,  206 ,  232 n 12  
 Bunyan, John,  150 
 Burton, Robert,  147 ,  208  –  10 ,  260 n 12 , 
 276 n 30  
 Bush, Douglas,  76 
 Butterﬁ eld, Herbert,  210  –  14 
 
 Calvino, Italo,  247 n 32  
 Camerarius, Joachim,  71 ,  73 
 Campanella, Tommaso,  11 ,  234 n 43  
 Canguilhem, Georges,  160 
 Caspar, Max,  58 ,  243  –  44 n 45 ,  244 n 52  
 Cavendish, Margaret,  16 
 cave life,  95  –  96 
 Charles  II ,  172  –  74 
 Chen-Morris, Raz,  231 n 9 ,  237 n 21  
 Chomsky, Noam,  121 
 Ciampoli, Giovanni,  22 
 Cigoli, Ludovico,  28 ,  33 
 Clare, John,  90 
 Clarke, Samuel,  194 
 Coetzee, J. M.,  68 ,  245 n 2  
 Cohen, H. Floris,  232 n 5 ,  243 n 39 ,  277 n 42  
 Cohen, I. Bernard,  x ,  195 ,  276 n 38  
 Cole, John,  113 
 Coleridge, Samuel Taylor,  90 ,  130 ,  251 n 86  
 comets,  15 ,  21 ,  151 ,  168 ,  194 ,  335 n 66  
  Index 

310    INDEX
 Conant, James B.,  277 n 48  
 Connor, James A.,  58 
 constructivism,  213  –  14 
 Copernicanism,  38 ,  40 ,  49 ,  61  –  62 ,  165  –  67 , 
 169 ,  203 –  4 
 Copernicus, Nicolaus,  52  –  53 ,  64 ,  165  –  68 , 
 204 ,  207 
 correspondence theory,  70 ,  72  –  73 ,  76  –  79 
 Cowley, Abraham,  141 ,  218 
 Crashaw, Richard,  250 n 74  
 cuckoo,  79 ,  82 –  83 ,  86  –  90 ; as cuckold, 
 85 ; “Cuckoo and the Nightingale,”  81 , 
 248 nn 56 , 57 ; “Cuckoo song,”  80  –  81 , 
 248 n 52  
 Cyrano de Bergerac,  11 ,  124  –  26 
 
 Daedalus,  178 
 Dal Pozzo, Cassiano,  71 
 Dante Alighieri, ix –x,  2 ,  11  –  12 ,  36 ,  138  –  39 , 
 231 n 3  
 Daston, Lorraine,  232 nn 4  –  5 ,  267 n 28  
 Davies, John,  102 –  3 ,  246 n 9 ,  254 n 41  
 Dear, Peter,  142 ,  213 
 death watch,  92 –  93 
 Deists,  15 ,  198 ,  235 n 67  
 Della Porta, Giambattista,  49 ,  203 , 
 242 n 23  
 DeMaria, Robert,  154 
 Descartes, René,  xiii ,  5 ,  9 –  10 ,  13  –  14 , 
 93 ,  99 –  100 ,  151 ,  190 ,  192 ,  214  –  16 , 
 235 nn 58 , 61 ,  240 n 2 ,  253 n 22 , 
 264 –  65 n 77 ; on animals,  5 ,  99 ,  120 ,  126 ; 
dreams,  110  –  16 ,  126  –  30 ,  225  –  29 ;  
 dualism,  120 –  21 ,  258 n 37 ; images, 
 117 –  21 ,  258 n 31 ; imagination,  114  –  19 ; 
magnet,  122 –  25 ; mathematics,  122 , 
 187 –  88 ; on poetry,  114 –  15 ,  128  –  29 ; 
 vortex,  117  –  18 ,  122 
 —works of:  Discourse on Method,   110  –  11 , 
 114 ,  126 ;  Meditations,   115  –  16 ,  119 ,  120 ; 
 Olympica,  111  –  15 ,  225  –  29 ;  Passions,  116 ; 
 Principles,   13 ,  117 ,  122  –  24 ,  129 ,  187 ; 
 World,   116  –  19 ,  129 ,  189 ,  191  
 deuteroscopy,  145  –  46 ,  156 
 Digby, Everard,  92 
 Digby, Kenelm,  141 ,  155 ,  262 n 31  
 disegno,   9 ,  28 ,  240 n 62  
 disenchantment of nature,  1 –  4 ,  137 ,  
 232 n 6  
 Dobbs, Betty Jo,  211 
 Donne, John,  6 ,  17 ,  52  –  53 ,  78 ,  92 ,  137 , 
 205 –  7 ,  243 n 32 ,  275  –  76 nn 23 , 25 , 26 
 Don Quixote,   74 –  75 
 Drake, Stillman,  30 
 dreams: interpretations of,  112  –  15 ,  127 ; 
kinds of,  256 nn 6 ,8.  See also under 
 Descartes 
 Duhem, Pierre,  237 n 14  
 Duns Scotus, Johannes,  92 
 Dunton, John,  264 n 69  
 Dyson, Freeman,  46 
 
 eclipses,  66  –  67 
 Edgerton, Samuel Y.,  34 ,  231 n 1 ,n 4 ,  237 n 27  
 Einstein, Albert,  159 –  60 
 Eliot, T. S.,  76 ,  83 ,  266 n 9  
 Empson, William,  102 
 Epicurus,  159 
 epigenesis,  144 ,  263 n 44  
 error: as heresy,  136 ,  138  –  40 ; as literal-
mindedness,  145  –  47 ,  156 ; as misjudg-
ment,  151 –  53 ; as superstition,  140  –  41 , 
 147 ,  151 ; as wishful thinking,  154  –  56 
 equivocal generation,  97 ,  139 ,  261 n 20  
 Euclid,  188 
 Evelyn, John,  143 
 extraterrestrials,  11 ,  32 ,  51 ,  206 ,  209 ,  219 , 
 234 n 45 ,  275  –   76 n 23  
 
 Fara, Patricia,  273 nn 62 , 77 
 Finch, Anne,  87 
 Fludd, Robert,  104 ,  131  –  37 ,  140  –  41 , 
 142  –  43 ,  216 ,  255 n 57 ,  261 n 26 ,  262 n 38 ; 
 Doctor Fludds Answer,  132  –  37 ; quarrel 
with Kepler,  56  –  58 .  See also truth, tests 
of; weapon-salve 
 formatrix,   43  –  44 
 Foster, William,  132  –  36 
 Foucault, Michel,  72  –  75 ,  93 ,  246 nn 19  –  23 , 
 252 n 9  
 Freud, Sigmund,  108 ,  112 
 
 Gal, Ofer,  231 n 9 ,  237 n 21  
 Galen,  103 ,  135 
 Galilei, Galileo,  8 ,  9 ,  12 ,  162 ,  170 ,  182 ,  187 , 
 201  –  3 ,  205 ,  211 ,  213 ,  214 ,  216  –  17 ,  218 , 
 219 ; circular forms,  37 ,  48 ,  239  –  40 n 60 ; 
defective vision,  30 ,  39 ; fable of sound, 
 20  –  28 ,  179 ,  221  –  23 ; indictment,  23  –  24 , 
 27 ,  137 ; moon, descriptions of,  32  –  33 ; 
moon, drawings of,  28  –  30 ,  33  –  34 ; 
moon, etchings of,  34  –  36 ; on motion, 
 x ,  216 –  17 ,  278 nn 68  –  70 ; prose style,  31 ; 
relations with Kepler,  x ,  47  –  50 ,  201  –  2 , 
 242 n 21  
 —works of:  Assayer,   20  –  27 ;  Dialogue 
on World Systems,   23  –  24 ,  31 ;  Letters on 
Sunspots,   39 ;  Two New Sciences,  39  –  40 , 

INDEX    311
 217 ,  278 –  79 nn 68  –  70 . See also  Sidereus 
Nuncius 
 Galilei, Vincenzio,  21 ,  236 n 2  
 Gassendi, Pierre,  4 ,  64 ,  134 ,  151 ,  205 
 Gaukroger, Stephen,  257 nn 18 , 24 
 genius, deﬁ nitions of,  164  –  65 ,  170  –  71 ,  185 , 
 195 ,  197 –  99 ,  267 n 30 .  See also Brahe, 
Copernicus, Hooke, Newton 
 Giglioni, Guido,  96 
 Gilbert, William,  36 ,  99 ,  132 ,  148 ,  205 
 Gilbourne, Nicholas,  132 
 Gillispie, Charles,  55 ,  141 ,  261 n 30  
 Gingerich, Owen,  37 ,  239 n 51  
 Glanvill, Joseph,  141 
 Gleick, James,  159 
 Golinski, Jan,  213 ,  278 n 52  
 Grassi, Orazio,  21 ,  24 –  25 ,  27 
 gravity,  180 ,  184 ,  187 ,  192  –  95 ,  198 , 
 271 n 34  
 Great Chain of Being,  11 ,  127 ,  159 ,  197 
 “Great Tradition,”  55 –  56 ,  161 ,  243 n 39 , 
 267 n 16 ,  277 n 42  
 Gregory, David,  192 –  93 
 Grünbein, Durs,  257 n 19  
 
 Hacking, Ian,  133 
 Hakewill, George,  207 ,  264 n 62  
 Hales, Thomas C.,  46 
 Halley, Edmond,  158 –  59 ,  161 ,  190 ,  266 n 3  
 Hall of Fame,  173  –  74 ,  186 
 harmony,  53  –  54 ,  56 ,  134  –  37 
 Harriot, Thomas,  36 ,  47 ,  182 ,  205 ,  242 n 16 , 
 254 n 41  
 Harvey, William,  104  –  5 ,  135 ,  144 ,  148 , 
 263 n 44  
 Hebenstreit, J. B.,  63 
 Heilbron, J. L.,  240 n 67  
 Heine, Heinrich,  219 
 Heller-Roazen, Daniel,  244 n 61  
 Herbert, George,  77 –  78 
 heresy,  24 ,  27 ,  136 –  40 
 Hermes Trismegistus,  143 ,  262 n 38  
 hermeticism,  56  –  58 ,  105  –  6 ,  136 ,  141 , 
 195  –  96 
 Hindemith, Paul,  53 –  55 
 Hobbes, Thomas,  99 ,  119 ,  121 ,  130 ,  150 , 
 151 ,  214 ,  235 n 61 ,  252 n 8  
 Hofmannsthal, Hugo von,  68  –  70 ,  79 
 Hooke, Robert,  xiii ,  171 ,  174  –  76 , 
 240 –  41 n 2 ,  269 nn 69 , 70 , 72 , 73 ; genius 
of,  181  –  86 ,  200 ; and Leonardo,  177  –  78 ; 
and Newton,  171 ,  180  –  81 ,  184 ; and 
Royal Society,  175  –  76 ,  179  –  82 ,  185  –  86 , 
 269 nn 69  –  70 ,  271 n 32  
 —works of:  Micrographia,  175  –  76 ;  “Sys -
tem of the World,”  184  –  85 ,  271 n 26  
 Hooke’s Law,  177 
 Horkey, Martin,  202 
 Hume, David,  153 ,  162 
 humors,  76 ,  135 
 Huygens, Christiaan,  11 ,  162 ,  163 , 
 181  –  82  
 hypotheses, in Descartes,  116  –  19 ,  129 ,  187 , 
 191 ,  272 n 40 ; in Newton,  129 ,  190  –  92 
 
 imaginatio,  7 ,  233 n 23  
 imagination: creative,  165 ; distrust of,  7  –  9 , 
 14 ,  94 ,  115  –  16 ; as  mode of under-
standing,  10 ,  14  –  19 ,  119 ; primary and 
 secondary,  130 
 
 Jama, Sophie,  113 
 Jardine, Nicholas,  60 
 John Paul  II ,  24 
 Johns, Adrian,  150 ,  239 n 54 ,  261 n 21 , 
 269 n 63 ,  270 n 16  
 Johnson, Samuel,  2 ,  77 ,  153  –  57 ,  158 , 
 164 ,  170 –  71 ,  189 ,  265 nn 84 , 88 , 92 , 94 , 
 270 n 19 ,  274 n 79  
 Jonson, Ben,  207 ,  248 n 49  
 Jonston, Joannes,  74 
 Jung, Carl,  56  –  57 
 
 Kant, Immanuel,  130 ,  185 
 Keats, John,  xi ,  17 ,  59 
 Keilen, Sean,  249 n 66  
 Kepler, Johannes,  x ,  xi ,  4 ,  9 ,  16 ,  32 ,  168 –  69 , 
 205 ; Laws,  43 ,  45 ,  55 ,  59 –  60 ,  190 ;  magical 
thinking,  43 –  44 ,  55 –  58 ; quarrel with 
Fludd,  56 –  58 ,  142 ; relations with Galileo, 
 x ,  47 –  52 ,  201 –  2 ,  242 n 21  
 —works of:  Conversation,   47  –  53 ; 
 Dioptrice,  49 ;  Epitome,   62 ;  Harmony of the 
World,  45 ,  56 ,  58  –  59 ,  60  –  61 ,  241 n 15 ; 
 New Astronomy,  43 ,  50 ;  Optics,   50 ,  66  –  67 ; 
 Rudolﬁ ne Tables,   61  –  65 ,  168 ,  170 ;  Secret of 
the Universe,   44 ,  48 ;  Six-Cornered Snow-
ﬂ ake,   41  –  47 ;  Somnium,   10 ,  51 ,  58 ,  66  –  67 
 Kepler’s Conjecture,  46 ,  60 
 King Lear : on life and death,  91  –  92 , 
 100  –  102 ,  105  –  9 ; wind in,  103 –  4 
 Knight, G. Wilson,  102 
 Koestler, Arthur,  59  –  60 ,  241 n 3 ,  268 n 38  
 Kott, Jan,  102 
 Koyré, Alexandre,  37 ,  212 ,  243 n 39 ,  277 n 47 , 
 278  –  79 n 68  
 Kuhn, Thomas,  165  –  66 ,  167 ,  212  –  13 , 
 243 n 42  

312    INDEX
 Labrousse, Elisabeth,  264 n 65  
 Lagrange, J. L.,  189 
 Lambert, Ladina Bezzola,  238 n 43  
 Lazarus syndrome,  92 
 Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm,  111 ,  114 ,  122 , 
 160 ,  193 –  94 ,  256 n 4 ,  272 n 42  
 Leonardo da Vinci,  9 ,  33 ,  177  –  78 ,  239 n 50  
 Libbrecht, Kenneth,  241 n 12  
 life: deﬁ nitions of,  97  –  98 ,  253 nn 21  –  22 ; as 
wind or air,  102 –  5 
 Linceans, Academy of,  22 ,  31 ,  71 
 Locke, John,  121 ,  152  –  53 ,  163 ,  264  –   65 n 77 , 
 267 n 26  
 Lower, William,  36 
 Lucretius,  xiii ,  44 ,  148 ,  159 
 
 Machamer, Peter,  279 n 75  
 Magini, Giovanni,  201  –  2 
 magnetism,  58 ,  122 –  25 
 Manuel, Frank,  273  –  74 n 78  
 mapmaking,  36 –  37 
 Marino, Giambattista,  12 ,  218 
 Marion, Jean-Luc,  256 n 11  
 Maritain, Jacques,  110 ,  119 
 Mars, theory of,  43 ,  59 
 Marvell, Andrew,  100 
 mathematics, as language of science,  5 , 
 25  –  26 ,  122 ,  186 –  89 ,  211 ,  216  
 Maxwell, James Clerk,  266 n 11  
 Mazzeo, Joseph,  79 
 mechanical philosophy,  4  –  5 ,  214 
 Medici, Cosimo de,  38 ,  240 n 63  
 Merchant, Carolyn,  251  –  52 n 93  
 Mersenne, Marin,  133  –  34 ,  136 ,  205 
 Mezentius,  96 
 Milton, John,  162 ,  197 ; “C HRISTS Nativity,” 
 1 –  3 ,  9 ,  231 n 1 ; “Il Penseroso,”  86 ;  Para-
dise Lost,  12 –  13 ;  Paradise Regained,   196 ; 
Sonnet  1 ,  85 –  86 
 Montaigne, Michel de,  7 ,  204  –  5 
 Montgomery, Scott,  238 n 43 ,  239 n 57  
 moon: representations of,  32  –  38 ; voyages 
to,  10  –  11 
 Mosley, Adam,  170 
 music, theories of,  21 ,  25  –  26 ,  53  –  54 , 
 56 –  57 ,  236 n 2  
 mustard seed,  77  –  78 
 Napier, John,  62 
 natural history: deﬁ ned,  74 ; ideas of,  69 –  75 , 
 88 ; and poetics,  79 ,  86  –  90 
 natural magic,  72 –  73 ,  82 ,  203 
 Nature: as book,  128  –  30 ; deﬁ nitions of,  2 ; 
as goddess,  2 ,  100  –  101 ; as hieroglyphics, 
 70 ; as living system,  88 –  90 
 Needham, Joseph,  264 n 63 ,  277 n 42  
 Needham, Paul,  239 nn 51  –  52 
 New Atlantis Continued,  172  –  74 ,  178 
 Newton, Isaac,  5 ,  15 ,  18  –  19 ,  87 ,  118 ,  122 , 
 129 ,  158 –  64 ,  171 ,  176 ,  180  –  82 ,  185 ,  213 , 
 217 ; apple,  161 ,  196 ,  197 ,  211 ,  267 n 15 ; 
genius of,  158  –  63 ,  185 ,  189 ,  193 , 
 195  –  200 ; and Hooke,  171 ,  176 ,  180  –  81 , 
 184 ,  186 ;  Principia,  129 ,  158 ,  161 ,  163 , 
 182 ,  186 –  87 ,  192  –  93 ;  System of the World,  
 129 ,  184 ,  186  –  87 ,  190  –  95 ,  199 ,  218 , 
 251 n 81  
 Nicholl, Charles,  105  –  6 
 Nicolson, Marjorie,  10 ,  76  –  78 ,  251 n 81  
 nightingale, songs of,  81 –  90 ,  249 nn 63  –  65 , 
 250 n 74  
 Nosce te ipsum,  70 ,  246 n 9  
 Nuland, Sherwin,  252  –  53 n 12  
 nuncius,   48 
 
 objectivity,  141 ,  261  –  62 n 30  
 Oldenburg, Henry,  181  –  82 ,  270 nn 13 , 14 
 Olympias,  43 
 Oregius, Augustinus,  23 
 originality,  182  –  83 ,  185 ,  270 n 19  
 Orpheus,  93 
 orrery,   4 
 Osiander, Andreas,  166 
 Ovid,  83 
 
 Pagel, Walter,  98 
 Panofsky, Erwin,  32 
 Paracelsus,  44 ,  93 ,  98 ,  105 ,  128 , 132 
 “paradigm,”  212 ,  277 n 49  
 paragone,  31 
 Park, Katharine,  232 nn 4  –  5 ,  233 n 23 , 
 267 n 28  
 Parker, Samuel,  150 
 Pascal, Blaise,  5 ,  8 ,  14  –  15 ,  217 
 Patterson, Lee,  248 –  49 n 57  
 Pauli, Wolfgang,  56 –  58 ,  141  –  42 ,  244 n 46  
 “people, the,”  146 –  47 ,  149  –  50 
 phantasia,  7 ,  19 ,  119 ,  233 n 23  
 Philomela (Philomena),  82  –  86 , 
 249 nn 61 , 63 –  65 ,  250 n 67  
 philosopher’s stone,  131 
 Plato,  103 ,  216 
 Platonic solids,  16 ,  44 ,  47  –  48 ,  202 ,  241 n 9  
 Pliny the Elder,  74 ,  83 ,  92 ,  94 
 plus ultra,  141 ,  261 n 28  
 Plutarch,  49 ,  242 n 26  
 pneuma,  103 ,  255 n 47  
 poetry, history of,  75  –  77 
 Polydore Vergil,  203 
 polyphony,  60  –  61 ,  244 n 61  

INDEX    313
 Pope, Alexander,  76 ,  127 ,  199 ,  250 n 75 ; 
 epitaph for Newton,  2 ,  161  –  62 ,  198 
 Popper, Karl,  157 
 Poulet, Georges,  256 n 11 ,  257 n 16  
 Pound, Ezra,  76 ,  248 n 52  
 print culture,  139  –  40 ,  149  –  50 ,  219 
 priority disputes,  180  –  84 ,  193 
 procreation, theories of,  97 ,  148  –  49 , 
 253 n 19  
 progress, ideas of,  52 –  55 ,  60  –  67 ,  183 ,  198 , 
 214 ,  270 n 21  
 Ptolemy,  166  –  67 ,  169 ,  204 
 Ralegh, Sir Walter,  133 
 Raven, Charles,  73 ,  260 n 15  
 Ray, John,  16 –  17 ,  86 –  88 ,  246 n 27  
 Redondi, Pietro,  27 ,  237 n 23  
 Rees, Graham,  97 ,  253 n 20  
 Reeves, Eileen,  238 nn 30 , 44 
 “Revolution,”  210  –  12 ,  276 n 38  
 Reynolds, Henry,  247 n 28  
 R. H. Esquire,  172  –  74 ,  269 n 67  
 Rheticus, G. J.,  166  –  68 
 Riccardi, Niccolò,  22 ,  236 n 4  
 Richards, I. A.,  265 n 79  
 Ridley, Robert,  140 ,  261 n 22  
 Rilke, Rainer Maria,  90 
 Royden, Matthew,  84 –  85 
 Rossi, Paolo,  8 ,  73 
 Ryle, Gilbert,  121 
 
 Salomon’s House,  172  –  74 
 Satan,  12 –  13 ,  147 –  49 ,  157 ,  196 
 “save the phenomena,”  22 ,  24 ,  27 ,  237 n 14  
 science, deﬁ nitions of,  xii ,  3 ,  6 ,  9 ,  93 , 
 156 –  57 ,  211 –  12 ,  216 ,  233  –  34 n 32 , 
 279 n 71  
 Scientiﬁ c Revolution, interpretations of, 
 3 –  7 ,  163 –  65 ,  210 –  15 ,  232 nn 4  –  5 
 Scudéry, Madeleine de,  126 
 Sebald, W. G.,  90 
 Sebba, Gregor,  112 –  13 
 secondary light (“earthshine”),  33  –  34 
 Seneca,  209 –  10 
 Shadwell, Thomas,  183 
 Shaftesbury, 3rd Earl of,  88 
 Shakespeare, William,  78 ,  85 ,  91  –  92 ,  94 , 
 150 . See also  King Lear 
 Shapin, Steven,  134 ,  210 ,  213 ,  214 ,  266 n 97  
 Shelley, P. B.,  199 ,  236 n 71 ,  267 n 33 ,  274 n 87  
 Sidereus Nuncius,   2 ,  30  –  38 ,  47  –  52 ;  
 reception,  x ,  201 –  4 ,  274 nn 1  –  2 
 Sidney, Philip,  84 ,  215 ,  250 n 69  
 signatures,  72 –  73 
 Sizzi, Francesco,  202  –  3 
 skepticism,  203  –  10 
 snowﬂ akes,  41  –  47 ,  240  –  41 nn 2 , 8 , 12 
 solar system,  x ,  42  –  43 ,  117  –  18 ,  124 ,  147 , 
 192 ,  264 n 58  
 soul,  97  –  100 ,  206  –  7 ,  276 n 25 ; three orders 
of,  99 ,  120 
 sounds, sources of,  20  –  21 ,  26 ,  40 ,  240 n 71  
 Spedding, James,  69 
 Spenser, Edmund,  84 ,  139  –  40 
 Spinoza, Baruch,  120 
 spirits,  103  –  5 ,  120 ; vital and mortal,  94 –  97 
 Sprat, Thomas,  172 ,  177  –  78 
 Starobinski, Jean,  275 n 13  
 Stevens, Wallace,  37 
 sun, as image of God,  43 ,  45 ,  52 
 sunspots,  39 
 Swift, Jonathan,  149 ,  183 ,  271 n 30  
 
 Tasso, Torquato,  31 –  32 
 Tate, Nahum,  91 ,  108 
 telescope,  30 –  31 ,  168 ,  202 ,  203 ,  274  –  75 n 3  
 Telesio, Bernardino,  104 
 Temple, William,  149 ,  183 
 Tereus,  82  –  84 ,  249 n 64  
 Thomas, Keith,  138 
 Thomson, James,  87  –  90 ,  162 
 Tooke, Horne,  121 
 tools,  170  –  72 
 Topsell, Edward,  71 ,  82 ,  249 n 59  
 Tristram Shandy,   152  –  53 
 truth, tests of: authority,  131  –  33 ,  156  –  57 ; 
coherence (harmony),  134  –  36 ,  141 ; 
ﬁ delity,  136  –  40 ; gentility,  133 –  34 
 Tycho.  See Brahe 
 Tyndale, William,  140 
 
 Urban VIII (Maffeo Barberini),  22  –  24 , 
 236 n 7  
 Ursus (Nicholas Reimer),  60 ,  244 n 59  
 vacuum,  13 –  14 ,  235 nn 57  –  58 , 61 
 Valéry, Paul,  126 ,  259 n 58  
 Verdugo,  173 ,  174 ,  184 
 Vesalius, Andreas,  xiii 
 Virgil,  45 ,  241 n 10 ,  250 n 80  
 Viviani, Vincenzio,  28 ,  218 
 Voltaire,  162 ,  194 
 “vulgar and common,”  146  –  47 ,  149  –  52 
 
 Wacker, Johannes Matthäus,  41 ,  47  –  48 
 Wallenstein, Albrecht,  51 
 Waller, Richard,  177 ,  180 
 Wallis, John,  215 
 Ward, John,  92 
 Ward, Seth,  261 n 26  

314    INDEX
 Warton, Thomas,  17 ,  75 
 weapon-salve,  132  –  37 ,  141 ,  148 ,  196 , 
 261 n 26  
 Weber, Max,  4 ,  17 ,  137 ,  232 n 6 ,  236 n 70  
 Webster, John,  106 –  7 
 Westfall, Richard S.,  158  –  59 ,  200 
 Whitehead, A. N.,  160  –  61 ,  164  –  65 ,  199 
 Whyte, Lancelot Law,  46 
 Wilding, Nick,  239 n 51  
 Wilkins, John,  11 ,  174 ,  209 
 Willey, Basil,  138 ,  147 ,  262 n 34  
 Willis, Thomas,  174 
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig,  113 
 wonder,  163 ,  267 n 28  
 words and things,  68  –  75 ,  86  –  87 
 Wordsworth, William,  6 ,  90 ,  121 ,  130 ,
  189 
 Wren, Christopher,  185 
 
 Yates, Frances,  8 ,  57 ,  141 ,  195 

