2
“What Islamic Devils?!”: Power
Struggles, Race, and Christian
Transnationalism
Pentecostalism’s incursion into the political arena has been a well-
documented part of the contests by Islam and Christianity, the
dominant religions in Nigeria.1 With an almost equal number of adher-
ents distributed across the nation, the two forces counterbalance each
other’s excesses.2 Their long histories within the country means they
shaped the foundations of modern Nigeria, and the nation’s structures
have
calibrated
their
relational
terms
as
permanent
mutual
contestants.3 By mutually acting as foils, both have situated themselves
as political constituencies whose forces are equally interpenetrated by
geospatial politics. Their reciprocal tensions and politics of encounter
have shaped their trajectories.4 Both Islam and Christianity, in a cycle
of perennial contest for dominance, mutually appropriate each other’s
techniques of worship.5 Driven by the conversion impulse, they both
also confer religious leaders with political legitimacy (and vice versa)
and ultimately blur the boundaries between faith and politics.
Pentecostalism would not have been as impactful as a mainstream
practice if, as religious studies scholar Matthews Ojo submitted, it had
not presented itself to Pentecostals “as an alternative centre of power to
solving human needs.”6 But, over time, as the message imbricated into
the normative order, its practices also intertwined with the hegemonic
formation in society. As the Pentecostal movement raised a vast army
of the Lord’s redeemed, they inevitably attracted social and political
actors who needed their cultivated legitimacy to extend spheres of
power and authority. Political leaders, seeing a blossoming site ﬁlled
1 Falola, Violence in Nigeria; Kenny, “Sharı¯a and Christianity in Nigeria”; Kukah,
“Religion, Politics and Power in Northern Nigeria”; Rasmussen, “Christian-
Muslim Relations in Africa.”
2 Adogame, “Politicization of Religion and Religionization of Politics in Nigeria.”
3 Vaughan, Religion and the Making of Nigeria.
4 Akinade, “Cross Meets Crescent.”
5 Obadare, “The Muslim Response to the Pentecostal Surge in Nigeria.”
6 Ojo, “Pentecostalism and Charismatic Movements in Nigeria.”
66
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

with people whose religious impulses could be readily corralled into
political gains, moved in to appropriate the charismatic authority of
pastors.7 Astute Pentecostal leaders fraternized with politicians to realize
the dominion theology they preached and prayed about in their
churches. This symbiotic relationship where pastors consecrated govern-
ment decisions and the government ofﬁcials, in turn, conferred political
legitimacy on pastors and inevitably ran them against the forces of Islam,
another political faith practice equally invested in political power.
In Chapter 1, I indicated that both 1993 and 1998/9 are signiﬁcant
dates in the political history of postwar Nigeria. Here, my study in
Pentecostal political theology notes that 2015 was equally signiﬁcant
because a rupture occurred in the political ecology Pentecostal leaders
had steadily built over a sixteen-year period. After a Muslim candidate
defeated a Christian president who was backed by many Pentecostal
pastors in the 2015 elections, political alliances changed and the net-
work of power they had enjoyed was disrupted. For all the much-
vaunted theo-political inﬂuence of Pentecostal pastors and for which
they have been canonized as “Africa’s big man,”8 and a shadow polit-
ical institution,9 the 2015 electoral outcome showed the limits of their
inﬂuence. The election marked a time when Pentecostal power and
inﬂuence was vigorously contested along with the general election.
The “Christian” presidential candidate lost the election to a Muslim,
and that meant a redistribution of political power among the new cadre
of winners. Having lost the direct access to the highest political author-
ity, they switched to the other mode of performing power—the
marginal and oppressed.
For those who had openly supported the Christian candidate, the
electoral loss also meant the rollback of some of the gains they had
made as a dominant social group in the country. Considering that the
politics of spirituality in Nigeria is also intertwined with ethnic identity,
the loss of democratic inﬂuence that followed the loss of the election was
double-layered for those who committed to a side based on religious and
7 This political elites’ appropriation of a social order built through religious
ethos is not quite new. In colonial era, the British took a similar turn with Islam
and in northern Nigeria to extend their rights to rule the colonized country.
Here, I defer to Wariboko’s exploration of religious relations in Nigeria and
how their politics engendered state formation processes. Wariboko, Dynamics
of Muslim Worlds.
8 McCauley, “Africa’s New Big Man Rule?” Also see Adelakun, “Pastocracy.”
9 McCauley, “Pentecostalism as an Informal Political Institution.”
“What Islamic Devils?!”
67
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ethnic identities. The years of implanting their Pentecostal values into the
social ecosystem suffered a setback. One of the ways they reoriented
their desire for power was support for Donald Trump, the forty-ﬁfth US
“Christian” president. He was seen as a centripetal ﬁgure of Christian
institutional forbearance, the one around whom people could anchor
their political spirituality and identity politics pending reascendance to
political power in their own country. Their turn to Trump is signiﬁcant
for exploring how power identity seeks out other means to maintain its
dominance even while inhabiting the position of the embattled. One of
the ways they have gone about this has been to look outside their
national shores for the dominant power.
There is a growing genre of literature that investigates political the-
ology in the age of Trump, a president whose alliance with US evangel-
icals negates the doctrine of the constitutional separation of church and
state. These studies locate the Christian support for Trump as an impera-
tive of white nationalism. One of such accounts is Katherine Stewart’s
investigative study of the Christian Religious Right in the USA, The
Power Worshippers. Her study reveals a political movement that com-
prises a network of interests converge around the political vision of
reinstating America’s Christian origins. She describes the movement as
“Christian nationalism” to capture the overlapping sentiments of polit-
ics and religion that drive those involved. According to her, Christian
nationalism is a political ideology that,
promotes the myth that the American republic was founded as a Christian
nation. It asserts that legitimate government rests not on the consent of the
governed but on adherence to the doctrines of a speciﬁc religion, ethnic and
cultural heritage. It demands that our laws based not on the reasoned
deliberation of our democratic institutions but on particular, idiosyncratic
interpretations of the Bible. Its deﬁning fear is that the nation has strayed
from that once made it great. Christian Nationalism looks backward on
a ﬁctionalized history of America’s allegedly Christian founding. It looks
forward to a future in which its version of the Christian religion and its
adherents, along with their political allies, enjoy positions of exceptional
privilege and power in government and in law.10
This group’s ambition of domination, of course, predates Trump and
like Nigerian Pentecostals, what they too want is power. If power is the
ability to make things happen, people who seek to take over power in
10 Stewart, The Power Worshippers.
68
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the name of religion also understand the necessity of (re-)arranging the
world order in the image of their faith. Achieving this means effective
organizing, and liaisons with other power brokers to ensure their
representatives are plugged into strategic public positions to inﬂuence
the social ethos. These efforts do not stay within their national borders,
rather they spill over into other places where their inﬂuence extends
through their missionary activities, media houses, and outreach
programs.11 Through these networks, they spread not just the message
of Christ but a conservative agenda, an instance which resulted in the
harsh “kill the gay” law in Uganda.12 With modern media technology,
the circulation of their conservative ideas has become much easier.
Following Stewart, I call this relationship between evangelical
Christian
nationalists
in
the
USA
and
Nigerian
Pentecostals
“Christian transnationalism” and it describes a shared devotion to
keep America Christian as it supposedly was at its founding, and for
Christians in both countries to continuously enjoy privileged positions
and power. Donald Trump is a node that connects this mutual desire.
The public sphere where both meet consists of a carved out moral
space – the Internet – that, in generating an ethos of support for their
candidate, also abjures complex nuances of identity politics in their
respective countries and center conversations around Christian polit-
ical power. For Nigerian Pentecostal Christians, having someone who
represents them in power is crucial to maintaining their power identity.
If nothing else, a “Christian” president triumphing, albeit in another
11 In episode four of The Family, an American web television miniseries that
examines a conservative Christian group – known as the Family or the
Fellowship – with prominent inﬂuence on American politics, one of their
members talked about traversing Africa to evangelize as representative of
Christianity and American government. Rep. Mark Siljander (R-MI) met with
Libyan’s dictator, Muammar Ghaddaﬁ. Senator James Inhofe (R-Oklahoma)
also talked about meeting Nigeria’s brutal dictator, Sani Abacha, in 1997, and
telling him that Jesus loved him. With the soft power of Christianity, these
evangelical representatives eased the way for political relations and subsequent
inﬂuence on those African leaders. Also, see Marishane’s article on religious
right and US foreign policy; “Prayer, Proﬁt and Power.”
12 Kapya Kaoma has written about the ways US evangelical right-wingers
ideologically mentored Ugandans to write the bill. See, for instance, www
.pri.org/stories/2013-11-15/how-american-evangelicals-made-life-unbearable-
gays-uganda; www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/12/uganda-
passes-law-punishes-homosexuality-life-imprisonment/356365/
“What Islamic Devils?!”
69
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

country, alleviates the shame of being tied down by their nation’s
leadership failures, activates the fantasy of being a chosen people of
God, and overall, nurtures their identity of power.
Trump’s claims of fulﬁlling a vision of Christian domination deﬁes
his country’s secularism and liberalism to offer them a representation
of their faith in the highest political ofﬁce in the world. One writer
explains the Christian investment in US politics saying,
America is the leading supporter of Christian missions in the world today.
While the American government may not invest a dollar in missions, the
Evangelical community in America does. In fact they invest massively in
mission outreaches to various communities and countries in Africa and
whatever affects them will ultimately affect us. If the liberal ideologies of
the Democratic Party take over America today, that nation would be sold to
unrighteousness and the words of scriptures would be fulﬁlled on them:
righteousness exalts a nation and sin is a reproach to its people (Proverbs
14:34). It is righteousness that brought America to where she is today and sin
will bring her down. If America goes down, mission support to African
countries will deplete also and this will affect outreaches to unreached
areas here. So America’s politics is our own politics also.13
Such sentiments demonstrate a vicarious realization of power identity
through Trump.
In forthcoming sections, I will track the historical patterns of Nigerian
politics at key historical junctures to show how the politics of the
Nigerian Pentecostal Republic is not contained within provincial
national borders. With globalized modern technology having facilitated
congregating across previously impenetrable borders, Pentecostals’ per-
formance of their religious politics far more readily crosses the Atlantic.
The face of Christianity might have long changed from that of the white
European to encompass the humans of other worlds,14 but there are also
non-whites in other parts of the world protective of maintaining
Christianity’s whiteness due to the efﬁcacies of its accrued power. In
their engagement, they look beyond whiteness as color to engage with it
as a trope that corresponds with political and spiritual power.
At this point, a caveat is necessary. Not all Pentecostals/Christians or
people of southern Nigerian heritage are Trump supporters. There are
always signiﬁcant differences in the politics of faith and the allure of
13 Deji Yesufu, http://mouthpiece.com.ng/evangelicals-support-of-donald-trump/
14 Sanneh & Carpenter, The Changing Face of Christianity.
70
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

political personality. However, it is a fact that Trump has a following in
Nigeria, and it is connected to the ethnic and religious politics of the
2015 election. Nigerians supporting Trump is particularly ironical
because while majority of native black Americans perceive Trump
and his white followers as irredentists, some black Africans adore
him and this perplexes many Western commentators who think his
demeaning comments toward them should have discouraged their
partisanship. What these Western writers miss is that Trump is also
a beneﬁciary of Nigerian Pentecostals’ resentment against former presi-
dent Barack Obama. These Christian classes have not only historically
identiﬁed with the American evangelical establishment, but also jointly
saw Obama’s liberalism – for instance, his support for same-sex mar-
riage (and the subsequent Supreme Court victory for the LGBTQ
groups that advocated their right to marry), bathroom culture wars,
and what they perceived as his pandering to the Muslim countries and
communities in the USA – as a threat to Christianity, whiteness, and the
civilizing force they have always associated with these identity categor-
ies. These Nigerians are empathetic members of the Republican Party
in the USA, and anyone who visits the comment pages of social media
sites of media like CNN; the social media pages of the White House and
Donald Trump; right-wing media, Breitbart and others, will typically
ﬁnd them echoing the denunciation of the evils of “liberals,”
Democrats, and the “fake news” of mainstream media. On the 2020
Election Day, some of them held a rally for Trump in Nigeria. An elated
Trump tweeted the video saying, “A parade for me in Nigeria, a great
honor!”15
To clearly narrate the formation of these dynamics, I go back a little
to chart the Nigerian political terrain, and how sentiments and sens-
ibilities build up along other identity axes such as Pentecostalism. I start
with a quotation by one of the pastors of the biggest churches in
Nigeria, Bishop David Oyedepo, the presiding pastor of Living Faith
Church (aka the Winners’ Chapel). It is an excerpt from a previous
sermon and prayer charge on Islam and Boko Haram terrorism held
months before the crucial 2015 election. He said,
All the northern forces that are sponsoring these uprising and killings,
I decree the curse of God upon them.
15 https://punchng.com/us-election-trump-hails-parade-in-nigeria-says-great-
honour/
“What Islamic Devils?!”
71
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Come on, pray in the spirit everybody! Pray in the spirit, open ﬁre, call
down the Holy Ghost ﬁre to descend on the camp of the enemy! Enough is
Enough!
What demonic devils! What Islamic demons!
If Nigeria waits for the church to rise, Nigeria will disappear as a nation.
I was even told from report that they were targeting this church. I said
what? Even if I was asleep, if you see anybody here kill him! Kill him and spill
his blood on the ground. I am saying that to you! What nonsense! What devil!
You think our God is an idol? I declare their collaborators cursed. I decree
their sponsors cursed!
Must the north continue to rule? What devils!
God has anointed me to lead a revolution against the Islamic jihadists and
as the Lord liveth and as the anointing of Jeru-Baal that’s on me, we declare
them extinct in the name of Jesus! Amen!
You catch anyone that looks like them, kill him! There is no reporting to
anybody. Kill him! Pull off his neck! And we spill his blood on the ground.
What nonsense!
Every agent of destruction in Government today, call ﬁre down on their
head, call ﬁre down on their head.
Everyone sponsoring evil against the nation, let your ﬁre fall on him!
They said why Christians should say they could defend themselves.
Hold it! What stupid statement.
Why shouldn’t Christians say they could defend themselves? So, they
should watch for you to put a knife to their necks? You think we are
dummies?
Don’t mistake only those in politics as in power.
The anointed in the Lord are the ones in power. By divine ordination, don’t
mistake that. There was a king in the land, but Elijah was determining the
events of the nation.
If I say it will not rain here for three years, it will not drop.
What nonsense!16
Islam as the Devil Synonym, and the Politics of Deliverance
Despite the shifts in Pentecostals’ fortunes, diabolization never goes
away. The specter of imminent demonic attack is regularly conjured to
wage spiritual battles, enact practices that contest power, and conﬁrm
power identity. Demonic specters are a teleo-affective use of language
16 www.premiumtimesng.com/news/top-news/220482-living-faith-church-reacts-
video-showing-founder-oyedepo-urging-members-kill.html
72
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and imagery that fuels bipolar narratives and enforces borders when
religious faith ventures into other spheres such as politics or popular
culture. The image of the devil ﬁgure, now universalized by religious
and nonreligious actors, is a timeless resort for Christians who want to
confront an existential threat within an era and legitimize a favorable
social order.17 The naming of the demon itself is accusative, rhetoric
that activates a persecution complex by instantly framing a polarizing
identity of good “us” vs. bad “them.”18 What might evolve with time is
the dramatization of exorcism from the social body or the Christian’s
physical body. The drama of the eventual expulsion of the devil tells us
what fear haunts the people at present and the kinds of rituals they are
amenable to collectively carry out to expel the agents metaphorized as
demonic from their union. Demons are “forged in the crucible of
collective weaknesses, misshapen by national ambivalence toward the
political system . . . readily projected toward external sources which are
then conjured as evil and deﬁned as public enemy.”19 The rhetoric of
demonization is thus an important indicator of the resentment building
in the society and the level of instigation of violence possible with the
people.20
The aforementioned sermon by Oyedepo on Muslims in Nigeria as
devils and demons vividly illustrates the politics of demonization. It
demonstrates the ﬂexible uses to which the demonic can be rendered in
a context where majority religious authorities are ﬁghting for the
control of state power. Diabolizing Islam, as both political theorist
Ruth Marshall and religious studies scholar Matthews Ojo show us,
is not entirely new in Nigeria’s political history. In her study of
Nigerian Pentecostalism, Marshall copiously demonstrates how the
fear of the demon of an “Islamized government” has always haunted
the nation, and “both the Born-Agains and Muslim reformers conjure
the devil in the name of each other.”21 Oyedepo’s describing political
contenders as “Islamic devils” that ought to be defeated was similar
mobilization agenda. The church assembly is about the most political
17 Kotsko, The Prince of This World.
18 Normand, Demonization in International Politics.
19 Ivie & Giner, “Hunting the Devil.”
20 Dawson, “Black Power in 1996 and the Demonization of African Americans”;
Smiley & Fakunle, “From ‘Brute’ to ‘Thug.’”
21 Marshall, Political Spiritualities; Ojo, “Pentecostal Movements, Islam and the
Contest for Public Space in Northern Nigeria.” Also see Ogbu Kalu’s narration
of these intertwined histories: Kalu, Power, Poverty, and Prayer.
Islam as the Devil Synonym
73
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

space for this kind of manipulation because that is where pastors can
“provide interpretative maps for understanding cause, effect, and pos-
sibility in the world.”22 Given the context of Boko Haram terrorism
Nigeria was facing – bombs going off in some parts of the country and
killing people – the sermon alerts his congregation to the precarity of
Christian life in the Nigerian political order. When replayed in the
context of the 2015 election, it was an urge to weaponize their ballots.
For the Nigerian context, personifying a rival other as the devil is
rather signiﬁcant because belief in the dark, foreboding, and possessive
transcendental force of evil is not merely metaphoric but familiar and
instinctive to the church audience that regularly congregates to pray
against its activities. Due to the experiential nature of Pentecostal
belief, temporal events acquire a sacred import and secular history is
rendered through the registers of spirituality and the radical evil of
demonic activity.23 As Pentecostals negotiate the contradictory
impulses to love their neighbors as themselves and also survive antag-
onistic social conditions, they are caught in the throes of eternal vigi-
lance of their neighbors’ true nature.24 Within the social context of
Nigeria where religious differentiation could become a matter of life
and death, the theology of loving and being at peace with one’s neigh-
bor clashes with the reality of survival. Therefore, the Nigerian
believer, “forever scans her neighbors for a detailed reading of their
true spiritual state.”25 Labeling them as demons is the judgment of the
x-ray: they are a radical, resident evil due for destruction. With a name
and a silhouette in the minds of the congregation, the enemy is rendered
“visible,” “monstrous,” and a “full-ﬂedged resistance of the mind,
spirit, and body,” is enabled.26
The auditorium where he preached that sermon, Faith Tabernacle,
sits a huge congregation of 50,000.27 In the middle of the church is an
expansive altar on which Oyedepo walked back and forth as he
addressed his congregation, priming their feelings with reminders of
the country’s historical injustices. The church, now on their feet, segued
to the prayer session where Oyedepo’s voice over the lavalier
microphone – sometimes throaty and sometimes raised to a high
pitch as he exhorts the congregation with a metaphorization of Islam
22 McClendon & Riedl. From Pews to Politics.
23 Bloch, Visionary Republic.
24 Wariboko, Nigerian Pentecostalism.
25 Ibid. 267.
26 Portier-Young, Apocalypse against Empire.
27 http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/542154.stm
74
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

as demonic – called for violence against Islamic terrorists. He roused
their psychic energies toward action. Oyedepo, a well-known preacher
of dominion theology, interspersed his political commentary in the
prayer session with tongue-speaking and prophetic declarations,
a code-switching that suggests crossing natural and supernatural
realms as he spoke to the church. The bishop’s characteristic animated
manner of speaking to the church, plus the urgency of the situation he
was describing, and in the context of prayer, combined to prime the
congregation to be amenable to the rendering of Islam and terrorism as
thoroughly inhuman enemies who must be destroyed.
Prayer, especially the one of spiritual warfare that Oyedepo enjoins
his audience to unleash, makes militants out of otherwise loving
Christians.28 It is,
an exercise by which Pentecostals vigorously summon spiritual powers from
the Holy Spirit to “violently” attack every enemy and obstacle blocking their
progress or causing any form of suffering in their lives. It is executed with the
dedication of warfare, creating an enactment or performance of the struggle
for higher levels of human ﬂourishing . . . Spiritual warfare is the discourse
that in praying about something also prays on the fact that it is praying about
the ongoing prayer itself. Spiritual warfare manifests prayer and, at the same
time, itself.29
An intensely psychic and physical activity, spiritual warfare prayer
works on the minds and the body of the congregant. In the intensely
focused moment of spiritual exertion where the vivid image of God
vanquishing the forces of evil is conjured by a massive congregation
such as the one Oyedepo superintends, people’s convictions are aligned
with a stated or underlined political agenda. Prayers are spiritual means
of accessing power; the sheer physicality makes the body a channel to
both draw and exercise power.
More than a corporeal activity, the components of the message is also
signiﬁcant.Heframesthenarrativeasanurgentcontestforthefuturefrom
the grip of totalizing Islam. The message went viral in 2015, before the
general elections in which the stakes of victory had been raised so high it
subsumed all other issues of social development under the binary of
Christian vs. Muslim, and northern vs. southern Nigeria. The sense of
28 Marshall, “Destroying Arguments and Captivating Thoughts.”
29 Wariboko, “Pentecostalism in Africa.”
Islam as the Devil Synonym
75
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

urgency that underwrote the message was not only in objective terms, but
messianic as well. The Pentecostal conception of messianic time, based on
the idea of how much time they have left before the second coming of the
messiah, infuses their activities with a sense of urgency as they approach
end-time.30
The sermon combined messianic time with objective time, and made
general elections urgent, one in which the fate of Christians would be
decided. By asking, “Must the north continue to rule?” he dredged up
lingering sentiment about the history of northern Islamic hegemony and
their dominance of spheres of power before Pentecostals became
a competitor. Using biblical registers, he could describe Islam as
a monstrosity in ways that would instinctively tell his listeners that
they were dealing with an opponent with an exceptional capacity for
destruction. He instigated them to see their prayers as a call for justice
denied through the instruments of juridical power and calling for graphic
violence inscribes this vividly. Asking them to pray was also urging them
to see how much the moral responsibility to save the country from the
grip of Satan rests on their spiritual and civic participation.
Framing political issues around demonic paradigms was not without
basis in material reality. He was also speaking to extant reality and
potently politicizing it so that his congregation could make sense of the
oppressive powers whose confounding brutality and lust for power,
seemed to have transcended human capabilities. By 2015, Nigeria had
been badly depressed by insecurity. The devastating forces of Boko
Haram terrorists were routinely carrying out terrible violence, bomb-
ing churches (and later, mosques too) and other public places. They
ransacked villages, murdered people, and went as far as capturing
Nigerian territories for themselves and planting their ﬂags on them. It
did not help the country that the national security crisis happened
under the watch of president Goodluck Jonathan, whose administra-
tion lacked the efﬁciency to curtail the crisis and chalked down its
helplessness to an insidious Islamic agenda by those who had lost
power in the previous election, 2011, and who swore to make the
country “ungovernable” for him.31 Oyedepo’s message resonated
30 Marshall, Political Spiritualities.
31 For a study on Boko Haram, please see: Adenrele, “Boko Haram Insurgency in
Nigeria as a Symptom of Poverty and Political Alienation”; Akinola, “Boko
Haram Insurgency in Nigeria”; Awortu, “Boko Haram Insurgency and the
Underdevelopment of Nigeria”; Bappah, “Nigeria’s Military Failure against the
76
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ahead of a critical national election where the political forces of
Christianity and Islam were aligned against each other, and the victory
could determine who owned the soul of the nation.
As I outlined in the Introduction, due to the evil the autocrats
wreaked on both the polity and the body of its inhabitants, particu-
larly during the repressive years of the military that comprised on
northern Muslim leaders, people forged imaginative links between
political power, evil forces, and Islam. As most of the religious vio-
lence in Nigeria happened in the northern part of Nigeria (and with
near-zero consequences for the perpetrators), the idea of Islam as
a form of malevolence supported by ofﬁcial power is engraved in the
mind of the Christian public. With their rule and domination over
Nigeria’s politics for a long time, Muslims have formed an almost
impenetrable fraternity around their intersecting ethnic and religious
identities such that political power became metonymized with
“northern Muslim.”
When the last military dictator, Sani Abacha, died in 1998, one of his
political captives, Olusegun Obasanjo, a former military ruler, was
released from jail. He left prison publicly proclaiming to have become
a born-again Christian. He won the presidential election the
following year. The myth of his trajectory from prison to palace was
similar to that of Joseph in the Bible. His handlers correlated this
coincidence of Bible narratives and unfolding biography to create
a “theocratic class” around Obasanjo; they packaged him as
a “Pentecostal president.”32 As president, Obasanjo dutifully per-
formed rituals such as building up the chapel in Aso Rock (the presi-
dential villa) and naming pastors as his spiritual advisers.33 Obasanjo
also
publicly
associated
with
organizations
like
the
Christian
Association of Nigeria, Pentecostal Fellowship of Nigeria, and made
several pilgrimages to the “Redemption Camp” of the Redeemed
Christian Church of God, one of the largest regular gathering of
Christians in the world.34 By publicly reckoning with Pentecostal
Boko Haram Insurgency”; Comolli, Boko Haram; Gilbert, “Prolongation of
Boko Haram Insurgency in Nigeria”; Okoli, Chukwuma & Iortyer, “Terrorism
and Humanitarian Crisis in Nigeria”; Weeraratne, “Theorizing the Expansion
of the Boko Haram Insurgency in Nigeria.”
32 Obadare, “Pentecostal Presidency?”
33 https://allafrica.com/stories/201011220110.html
34 Ukah, “Pentecostalism, Religious Expansion and the City.”
Islam as the Devil Synonym
77
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

pastors and their congregation in the eight years of his presidency, he
helped Pentecostals to also inscribe their ethos into the political sphere
and roll back the many years that Islam had done the same while in the
seat of power. Christianity, or speciﬁcally, Pentecostal culture, became
the deﬁning paradigm for the nation’s “vision for moral leadership,
a form of public inﬂuence that is shaped by ethics and faith while also
being powerful and respected.”35 Having inhabited the presidential
villa, Pentecostal culture also percolated to other public spaces where
its values could create meanings that rule social life. By centering
famous Pentecostal preachers in his governance, he also created the
conditions that made it possible for Pentecostal culture to demarcate
the boundaries of politically symbolic activities and frame the contours
of collective subjectivity. With such gloriﬁcation, the rituals of their
faith practices became the loom through which their habits, values,
visions, ideas, ideals, and ethics were woven into the fabric of daily life.
The Muslims, concerned they would be upstaged in public life, quickly
moved to counterbalance the rising Pentecostal inﬂuence. In 1999, one
after the other, governors of the states in the northern regions of the
country launched Sharia law in where they held sway.36
By 2003, Obasanjo’s presidential term was rounding off. He fol-
lowed the unwritten law of alternation in Nigerian politics that, for
instance, a southern Christian would be succeeded by a northern
Muslim. Obasanjo campaigned vigorously for Umaru Yar’Adua, the
candidate who not only fulﬁlled these criteria but with whose family
dynasty he also had a relationship. The incumbency factor helped
Obasanjo muscle Yar’Adua into power through an election fraught
with massive irregularities. With the ascendance of Yar’Adua, the
Muslims were back in power, although it was not to last. Yar’Adua,
it turned out, had a terminal illness. Elsewhere, a president with such
a debilitating condition would have walked away from the ofﬁce to give
his country a chance to move on without him. However, in Nigeria,
relinquishing power was to deprive a geopolitical zone and a religious
bloc of their turn in public ofﬁce. The crass level of shenanigans that
Yar’Adua’s inner caucus resorted to keep his dying body in the ofﬁce at
all costs showed the ridiculous extent political actors in Nigeria would
35 Lindsay, Faith in the Halls of Power.
36 Kalu, “Sharia and Islam in Nigerian Pentecostal Rhetoric, 1970–2003”; Kalu,
“Saﬁyya and Adamah.”
78
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

go to retain power. As Yar’Adua’s handlers fought to preserve his
presidency, others began to look forward to a possible conclusion to
a bizarre tale. Their eyes rested on the vice president, a Christian from
southern Nigeria, whose name, ironically, was “Goodluck Jonathan.”
The name “Goodluck” encoded the myth of Jonathan’s political
trajectory. He was a deputy governor in oil-rich Bayelsa state in south-
ern Nigeria when the governor, Diepreye Alamayeseigha, was removed
from ofﬁce for corruption, thus paving the way for him to become
governor. In 2003, this unassuming character, self-effacing to the point
of self-negation, was selected as a nonthreatening counterpart to
Yar’Adua, who was equally lacking in charisma. Jonathan was hand-
picked because power brokers thought he would not usurp the
president.37 The arrangement worked well enough until fate – and
good luck – decided otherwise. Yar’Adua died in 2010, and Jonathan
became the president. This development upset the pattern of presidency
alternating between northern and southern regions of Nigeria.
Now thrust into an arena he would probably never have dared to
enter on his own strength, Jonathan became a ﬁgure of Biblical myths:
the archetypal David the shepherd boy whom God chose as king ahead
of his older and more experienced brothers. The myth of the name
“Goodluck” (and his wife’s name was Patience) proved irresistible for
mythmakers and Christian religious leaders who touted the miracle of
his rise from being a lowly deputy governor in a backwater state in
southern Nigeria to occupying the most powerful ofﬁce in the land. His
ascent became stuff of legends and church sermons. Beyond the realm
of myths, however, was also the management of political realities.
Jonathan came into power by chance. He had neither clout nor god-
fathers, and his unassertive demeanor did not help. To survive the
treacherous waters of Nigerian politics, Jonathan turned to one con-
stituency whose visibility in the public sphere, economic strength, and
moral backing could become a viable source of support: Pentecostal
leaders.
To a lesser degree, Jonathan also had to hold on to an ethnic identity
to survive. He was known to be Ijaw from the south-south region of
37 In a sense, Jonathan was also what Wariboko called a “counterfoil choice,” one
where the custodian of a society includes in a set of choices to delimit
possibilities and manage collective identity. By showing someone a negative,
they enhance the motive for choosing what they have deemed as the “positive”
choice. Wariboko, “Counterfoil Choices in the Kalabari Life Cycle.”
Islam as the Devil Synonym
79
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Nigeria, the fourth largest ethnic group (but which gets swallowed up
by the triune dominant ones: Hausa/Fulani, Igbo, and Yoruba), so his
handlers conferred an honorary Igbo identity on him by calling him
“Azikwe” after Nnamdi Azikwe, the African nationalist who was Igbo.
They gave him the name to expand his ethnic identity to cover more
regions in southern Nigeria.38 For southeasterners (mostly Christians)
who adopted Jonathan as “Igbo,” the politics of identity is also layered
with ethnic sentiments that encompass survivalism and memory-
making in post–civil war Nigeria. Jonathan took the template of
a religionized political identity even further by building his public
identity around being Pentecostal. As the 2011 election approached
and he signiﬁed his intention to run, he cultivated a more acute
Pentecostal identity. Like Obasanjo before him, he visited the
“Redemption Camp” where he not only requested prayers so he
could govern with divine wisdom, but for the ﬁrst time in the history
of Nigeria, a president knelt before the pastor for those prayers. The
image of President Jonathan, humbled before God and a man of God,
splashed on the front pages of almost every national newspaper the
following day. For a multicultural nation where, for some, kneeling is
part of a tradition of respect to an authority ﬁgure and for others,
kneeling before a fellow human is virtually forbidden, his act generated
some furor. However, the differences were moderated by a shared
Christian identity and the biblical frame of reference that kneeling is
a symbolic act of humility, self-surrender before divine authority, and
consecration. Thus he became the “anointed candidate,” the one God
had chosen to be president.39 Although there were other contributing
38 His middle name was also Ebele, a name borne by the Igbos of southeastern
Nigeria. The mistake of assuming that because he had a name that was common
among Igbos, that he had to be Igbo, is one of the ways ethnic identity gets
weaponized in Nigeria for the sake of power.
39 In the Bible, to be “anointed” was to be doused on the head with oil as a ritual of
consecration by God either for priesthood or kingship, but the term has crept
into Nigeria’s political lexicon. Appropriated from Pentecostals’ use of it to
describe divine consecration, “anointed” is now the go-to terminology for
describing a political candidate favored by power brokers to hold a public
position. Interestingly, the term has become so normative that scholars deploy it
in academic texts without either contextualizing it or even acknowledging the
irony. Fawole, “Voting without Choosing”; Mudasiru, “Ethnicity and the
Voting Pattern in Nigeria’s 2015 General Elections”; Omenma, Onu &
Omenma, “Factors Limiting Nomination of Women Candidates for Elections in
Nigeria”; Omotola, “Godfathers and the 2007 Nigerian General Elections”;
80
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

factors, such as the power of incumbency, Jonathan handily won the
election and would go on to become another “Pentecostal president”
after Obasanjo.
Once in ofﬁce, Jonathan sought ways to establish himself as a hero of
a national myth, to develop a second body – a la Ernst Kantorowicz –
that would fuse his physical body into the ethical realm of national
life.40 To achieve this transcendence entailed suffusing the nation with
Christian symbolism especially as propagated by Pentecostals. As the
myths are already available in the social imagination, Jonathan needed
only to repurpose them to the body politic. For instance, in
September 2011, months after he had won his ﬁrst election and had
been sworn in, he attended an interdenominational church service in
the nation’s capital where he marked the ﬁfty-ﬁrst independence anni-
versary. By then, he was already being criticized for his slow approach
to government, and conﬁdence in the man that would bring good luck
to the country was fast eroding. Jonathan responded to critics of his
methods saying,
You have been praying for us but others will not even want us to move an
inch, especially those of us who are politicians. But one prayer I will continue
to request because if you listen to Nigerians or read their statements, some
Nigerians still want the President of this country to be a lion or a tiger,
somebody that has that kind of strength and force and agility to make things
happen the way they think. Some others will want the President to operate
like an army general or my Chief of Army Staff commanding his troop.
Incidentally, I am not a lion, I am not also a general. Somebody will want
the president to operate like the Kings of Syria, Babylon, Egypt, the pharaoh,
all the powerful people that you read about in the Bible. They want the
president to operate that way, the characters of the Goliath, unfortunately
I am not one of those.
But God knows why I am here even though I don’t have any of those
attributes, or those kinds of characters I have used as an example. But
through your prayers God placed me here. The only thing I ask you to do
for me and that is the prayer I pray every time, is for God to use me to change
this country. I don’t need to be a lion, I don’t need to be Nebuchadnezzar,
I don’t need to operate like the Pharaoh of Egypt, I don’t need to be an army
general but I can change this country without those traits . . . . Somebody was
Sule, Mohd Sani & Mat, “Godfatherism and Political Party Financing in
Nigeria.”
40 Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies.
Islam as the Devil Synonym
81
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

asking, is Nigeria on an auto pilot? Meaning a plane without a pilot and I say
Nigeria is being piloted by God himself.
It is not going to be easy because . . . there are Goliaths everywhere; very
terrible Goliaths; the ones that can even kill their father and mother and even
their children in order to stop government. So, we have these terrible
Goliaths that are trying to frustrate us but surely with God we will conquer
them . . . every Goliath has an exposed forehead. God will expose their
foreheads to the stone of David.41
Jonathan’s public performance of faith was over-the-top and he report-
edly made more high-proﬁle visits to churches than hospitals and
schools; he became the president who made churches his site of policy
enunciation.42 At some point, it was announced that he would lead
30,000 pilgrims to Israel for holy pilgrimage, the ﬁrst Nigerian presi-
dent to visit the Christian holy land.43 On the trip, photographs of him
and other political ofﬁcials who accompanied him praying at several
sacred sites appeared in several newspapers and blogs. Christianity
Today, the American evangelical ﬂagship magazine founded by Billy
Graham, noted that he undertook the pilgrimage to pray for peace
between Christians and Muslims in his country, sign an agreement with
Israeli leaders on international ﬂight schedules, among other matters to
be discussed.44 To also appease his Christian constituents who were
repulsed by the debates about same-sex marriage debates taking place
in the USA, he signed the notorious Nigerian “gay bill,” composed of
laws so harsh that they are hard to implement properly.
While the “anointed candidate” narrative might have propelled
Jonathan to ofﬁce, it did not help him when the challenges of public
ofﬁce arose. During his tenure, Nigeria’s economic fortunes from the
boom in global oil prices – Nigeria’s major export – did not translate to
tangible gains for the majority.45 Much of the gain was misappropri-
ated by the elite political class that surrounded Jonathan, people whose
incorrigible tendency toward corruption made it impossible for what-
ever policy conceived at the federal level to percolate to the people.
41 www.vanguardngr.com/2011/09/we-ll-conquer-goliaths-jonathan/
42 Ukah, “The Midwife or the Handmaid?”
43 www.algemeiner.com/2013/10/15/nigerian-president-to-lead-30000-christian-
pilgrims-to-israel/
44 www.christianitytoday.com/news/2013/october/nigeria-president-israel-
pilgrimage-jonathan-goodluck.html
45 Adetula, “Nigeria’s Rebased Economy and Its Role in Regional and Global
Politics”; Nwanosike et al., “Economic Development Dynamics in Nigeria.”
82
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

While most Nigerians remained as poor as ever, political actors, includ-
ing known Pentecostal pastors, became richer and ﬂaunted their wealth.
It was an era in which the prosperity gospel became self-conﬁrming.
While pastors claimed the wealth with which they procured their private
jets came from heaven above, people were not blind to how their
association with politicians favored them. Pastors allegedly used their
high-proﬁle connections to political power for their ends. As Jonathan’s
administration became enmeshed in several high-proﬁle corruption
scandals and allegations of ﬁnancial mismanagement,46 pastors’ conduct
and relationship with him ultimately sped up their loss of credibility.
They tanked their power to inﬂuence the public by once again anointing
his candidature for a second term.
Again, there were other contributing factors to the angst against
Jonathan. One of the major ones was the Boko Haram national crisis
under his watch. Although the problem predated Jonathan’s presidency,
the situation peaked during his tenure. By the time the Chibok girls’
kidnapping happened in 2014, and the incident became global news
especially after Michelle Obama helped propagate the news with her
photograph bearing the “bring back our girls” placard, Jonathan’s
failings became stuff for global headlines. His opponents weaponized
every one of those foreign media reports against him. By the 2015
elections, when Oyedepo was openly riling up his congregation by
urging them to pray against “Islamic devils” and their penchant for
perpetuating themselves in power, the political terrain had changed so
much that the political weapons of warfare wielded by Pentecostal
pastors were not as effective as before. While the problem of Boko
Haram might have been seen as part of an Islamic agenda by those
who cannot survive without political power, the failure to quell it – as
well as other economic failures and the problem of corruption – was also
placed at the feet of the Christian president. The political agenda of
demonization of Islam around the elections – a campaign run by pastors
who had parleyed with politicians – had become indistinguishable from
the devil they sought to exorcize, and was not quite as effective.
Again, a caveat: While there is a degree of opposition to Nigerian
Pentecostal leadership’s angling to be a part of the inner machinery of
the government and the corrupt exchanges that are perpetrated there,
these ecclesiastical authorities are still highly respected by their
46 Ojo, “Looting the Looters.”
Islam as the Devil Synonym
83
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

members. They are Christianity’s ringside tickets to the arena where the
dividends of democracy are distributed. As the “men of God,” they
embody the idea of the “man of the people” – in the way provincial
representatives in the executive and the legislative arms of government
never can – because they represent a constituency of people who
identify by their faith in a supreme being. That puts the pastorate
well above politicians who are supposed to represent all and sundry,
and that also contributes to making pastors a sacred vehicle for the
moral refurbishment of a debilitated polity. Even their fraternization
with elite politicians and corrupt bigwigs is considered to have spiritual
efﬁcacy, a viable means of expanding God’s kingdom in a world full of
the threatening other.
When it turned out that Jonathan’s opponent in the 2015 election
was going to be Muhammadu Buhari, a Muslim from northern Nigeria
and a former military dictator (1983–5) who had thrice run for the
presidency (including in 2011 when Jonathan defeated him), the cam-
paign for the Christian president became an urgent one that urged
people to vote to stave off an impending “Islamization agenda.”47
Buhari was perceived to be an Islamic bigot once reported to have
told fellow Muslims in northern Nigeria to never vote for a non-
Muslim (one of the several reasons he had never been popular outside
his northern enclave). He was also seen as a northern Muslim revanch-
ist who would complete the Islamization agenda begun by two former
Nigerian military dictators, also Muslims from northern Nigeria,
Generals Ibrahim Babangida and Sani Abacha.48 The autocratic lead-
ership of the duo of Babangida and Abacha, and their unapologetic
pandering to northern Muslim interests, had long propagated senti-
ments of cynicism, distrust, and disaffection against Buhari and the
religious/ethnic ideologies he embodied.49
The anti-Buhari campaign took on a transnational dimension as
well. The Islamists’ threats and terrorism were taking place in
Nigeria and also in the traditional Christian stronghold like the
47 Onapajo, “Politics and the Pulpit.”
48 Babangida upgraded Nigeria’s status in the Organization of Islamic Countries
from “observer” to full membership in 1986 while Abacha, in 1997, made
Nigeria a member of the D-8 Organization for Muslim Co-operation. Faseke,
“Nigeria and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”; Obinna, “Violence in
the Name of God.”
49 Falola, Violence in Nigeria.
84
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

USA.50 Nigerians plugged into right-wing narratives about Obama
being a secret Muslim who was yielding to Islamists in the Middle
East. When Obama invoked the Leahy Law to refuse to sell
ammunition to Nigeria to prosecute the Boko Haram war, they
imagined he wanted Islam to thrive in Nigeria at the expense of
Christianity. They also echoed the grudges of American Christians
who claimed they were losing the moral grounds of their faith
because of the legalization of same-sex marriage, gender-inclusive
bathroom wars, legal battles about baking cakes for gay weddings,
the accusations that people were no longer free to say “Merry
Christmas,” and overall, that the tyrannical reign of political cor-
rectness being used to censure dissenting opinion. These percep-
tions oversimpliﬁed the complex ideological issues at stake in
American culture wars. Still, these Nigerians bought wholly into
the distress of American evangelicals who complained that the
Christian ethos, integral to the founding of America, was being
erased.
Nigerian Churches not only resounded the campaign against the said
looming “Islamization agenda,” they became some of the strongest
political evangelists as the election date drew closer. One pastor,
Bosun Emmanuel, a member of Christian Association of Nigeria,
made and distributed tapes where he had narrated how countries like
Turkey and Syria used to be Christian territories but are now domin-
ated by Muslims due to lack of vigilance by the Christians who once
occupied these places.51 His conclusion was that a similar fate awaited
Nigerians if Buhari was allowed to win. The scare-mongering about
a looming Christian displacement on the political scene met with a lot
of pushback from Buhari’s supporters who were, by now, no longer
just
northerners
but
southerners
and
Christians
(including
Pentecostals) who said they could no longer stomach Jonathan’s
incompetence.52 Buhari’s support gradually extended to cover the
southwest, a region that had roughly an equal number of Christians
50 For instance, the terrorist attack in San Bernadino in 2015; Chattanooga in
2015; Boston bombing in 2013; Fort Hood attacks in 2009; Little Rock killing
in 2009.
51 www.youtube.com/watch?v=5FhYpKBKusQ
52 www.pmnewsnigeria.com/2015/04/18/pastor-bosun-buharis-jihad-and-
christianity-in-nigeria/; www.vanguardngr.com/2014/11/pastor-bosun-
emmanuel-political-red-herring/
Islam as the Devil Synonym
85
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and Muslims, and also concentrated almost all the mega Pentecostal
churches in its territory. While a quantiﬁable number of Christians in
the southwest stayed with Jonathan, an appreciable number of
Muslims devolved toward Buhari partly because of religious sentiment.
Among the many fracture lines the election exploited and deepened was
the religious divide in southern Nigeria, and the ethnic divide with
northern Nigeria. Most religious leaders did not declare their religious
interests upfront, but by directly or subtly encouraging their members
to vote for a candidate, they indicated their partisanship alliances. The
southwest region was also where the swing votes were going to come
from, and, therefore, it was targeted heavily for religious manipulation
by various interested groups. The masterstroke came when Buhari
selected as his running mate, Yemi Osinbajo, a pastor with RCCG,
and also a lawyer and a professor. Thus, Buhari undercut the specter of
“Islamization agenda” that had hung over his imminent presidency. He
gradually became acceptable to Christian constituencies and some of
their leaders who began to endorse him.53 By the time President
Goodluck Jonathan announced to the country that he would be visiting
a different church every Sunday to the election, it was too late. He had
lost a chunk of the Christian/southwestern votes to his opponent who
chose a pastor as his vice-presidential candidate.
A few days before the election, Obama made a video urging Nigeria
to vote wisely in their elections and shun violence. Even though he did
not commit to any candidate in the video, his intervention was inter-
preted as using his moral authority to subtly urge Nigerians to change
their incumbent government.54 Therefore, when Jonathan lost the
elections, the ﬁrst time in Nigerian history where the incumbent was
unseated, Obama took part of the blame for foisting a northern Muslim
on Nigerians.55 Buhari, now the new president, turned out to be
equally incompetent in ﬁghting the corruption he promised to tackle.
His cardinal campaign agenda – to combat insecurity, refurbish the
53 www.christianitytoday.com/news/2015/april/christian-case-for-nigeria-new-
muslim-president-buhari.html
54 www.politico.com/story/2015/02/nigeria-presidential-election-goodluck-
jonathan-muhammadu-buhari-115190; www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2018/
mar/21/cambridge-analyticas-ruthless-bid-to-sway-the-vote-in-nigeria; www
.premiumtimesng.com/news/159014-governor-nyako-accuses-jonathan-
administration-genocide-northern-nigeria.html
55 www.pulse.ng/news/local/fani-kayode-ex-minister-writes-on-john-kerrys-
unadulterated-garbage/fbrp3rd
86
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

economy, and reduce corruption – barely scratched the surface of
Nigeria’s problems. Under his watch, Nigeria became the country
with the highest number of poor globally. A nepotistic leader, Buhari
ran a divisive government, and accusations of an Islamic agenda picked
up again as Buhari appointed his northern Muslim kin to “juicy” public
positions.56 Despite his posturing about being an ex-general who
understood the tactics of war, he did not have an answer for Boko
Haram either. The violence and massacres continued, and the public
resigned to the fact that the perennial war against terrorism was merely
an excuse for the corrupt political elite to siphon funds out of public
pocket. The anger and disappointment of Jonathan’s supporters at
their loss extended to Obama, who they believed must have despised
Nigerians so much that he imposed an incompetent Buhari on them.
When the Nigerian economy started tanking and Nigerians became
massively impoverished for reasons that included both the dynamics of
global economic forces and sheer ineptitude on Buhari’s part, Jonathan
supporters became Trump supporters in Nigeria and ascribed part of
the blame of the nation’s misfortune to Obama’s meddlesomeness and
supercilious attitude toward Africa.57 Had he not jinxed the country
with his subtle support for Buhari, they reasoned, they would be better
off.58 When another round of insecurity problems arose in the form of
herdsmen believed to be of Fulani ethnicity engaged in ethnic cleansing
56 In Nigerian parlance, a “juicy” public ofﬁce is a bureaucracy that controls large
ﬁnances and, as such, gives room for ﬁnancial mismanagement and corruption.
57 Obama was also disliked for the way he was perceived to have treated Africa
with disdain. As the US president, he visited Ghana (and not Nigeria) and much
of his speech was to lecture African leaders in a manner they consider berating.
His “gay agenda,” constantly raising the issue of LGBTQ rights, was also
irritating to them because they found it infantilizing.
58 There were also other minor contributing issues such as the role that former
Obama campaign manager, David Axelrod, and his political consulting ﬁrm
played in changing Buhari’s image from that of a ruthless dictator to an
appealing one. https://qz.com/368219/how-nigeria-challenger-buhari-went-
from-ruthless-dictator-to-weak-leader/; www.buzzfeednews.com/article/rosie
gray/ﬁrm-founded-by-david-axelrod-worked-in-nigerian-election-as Also, in
August 2016, when Obama’s secretary of State, John Kerry, visited Nigeria, he
pointedly ignored Christians and southerners. Instead, he met with President
Buhari and the governors of the states in the northern regions. The meeting was
hosted by the Sultan, the topmost Muslim political leader. The Christian
described his meeting with a section of the country, many of them Muslims, as
discriminatory and divisive: www.newsweek.com/nigeria-christian-group-rails-
against-john-kerry-divisive-visit-493796
Islam as the Devil Synonym
87
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of rural communities, it was perceived to be part of the foretold
Islamization agenda.59
When Trump emerged on the scene and proposed “a Muslim ban,”
a policy that would restrict Muslims from some countries from enter-
ing the USA, his Nigerian followers were as excited as their American
counterparts. Trump dredged up their resentment against the liberal
values “browning” America, and which had culminated in the legal-
ization of same-sex marriage. The eight years of the Obama govern-
ment had given rise to nostalgia for a country where the religion of
Americanism – a composite identity that subsumes all other categories
and whose patriotic ideals are tested on loyalty to whiteness,
Christianity, patriarchy, capitalism, and conservative ideologies –
would recover from its seemingly waning inﬂuence. This longing for
a return of Christian nationalism – deﬁned as a cultural framework
that encapsulates the “myths, tradition, symbols, narratives and value
systems . . . that idealizes and advocates a fusion of Christianity with
American civic life . . . assumptions of nativism, white supremacy,
patriarchy, and heteronormativity along with divine sanction for
authoritarian control and militarism . . . ethnic as it is religious”60 –
that gripped Americans also resonated in other places that had cul-
tural and spiritualties to the USA. Like these Christian nationalists,
other Christians elsewhere who subscribe to the “founding myth” –
the tale and tradition invented in the late nineteenth, early twentieth
century that America was founded as a Christian country and has
grown precisely because of its Christian identity – ﬁnd themselves
equally invested in the future of the Christian faith in the USA.61
When in January 2016, Trump complained in a campaign speech
that Christianity was “under tremendous siege,” Christians were
not pulling their weight enough, and if he were elected president, he
59 Just like several Nigerian ethnic groups, Fulanis are not a monolith and they
have Christians among them but such nuances are easily eroded in the
oversimpliﬁcation of politics where the elites among them like Buhari become
symbolic devils. Also, the case of Libya – the aftermath of the Arab Spring and
the US invasion that led to the death of Muammar Ghaddaﬁ– bred another
round of resentment. Often the story of the US invasion of Libya gets
sequestered from the context of the Arab Spring and becomes emblematized as
another instance of Obama’s malevolence against African stability.
60 Whitehead & Perry. Taking America Back for God.
61 Hall, Did America Have a Christian Founding; Seidel, “The Founding Myth.”
88
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

would represent Christians better and “Christianity will have
power,” they were all listening intently.62
“Don’t Mistake Only Those in Politics as in Power!”:
Christian Transnationalism and the Pentecostal Republic
When historians sketch American political history along the axis of
evangelical inﬂuence, they tend to think of these issues as self-contained
within the USA. The rise of Trump supporters in Nigeria and a few
other places in Africa challenges this assumption. Nigerian Christians
too, particularly those whose ethnic identities intersect their politico-
religious afﬁliation, constitute a following for Trump. This Pentecostal
Christian transnationalism partly goes back to the alliances Nigerian
churches and American Christians forged as far back as the 1970s
when white American Pentecostal preachers started coming to Africa
to evangelize.63 While the relationship has largely waned since
Nigerian Pentecostalism came into its own, Nigerians still take the
outreach of their American counterparts as well-meaning. They are
invested in America remaining “Christian” because the moral force of
US evangelicals impacts Christianity in Africa. Christian congregations
on the continent could – and would – continue to draw oxygen from the
USA as long as Christianity thrives there.64 Oyedepo’s words provides
a clear insight into this mindset of vicarious empowerment by those for
whom power is an identity: it is not only those in politics that are in
power. Not everyone has to occupy a political position to be part of the
network of power. Some will be in power through their faith, and as
faith is a social identity, their performing their faith will be potently
political.65
One Nigerian-based church leader, citing the scriptures, told me they
support Trump because God uses the basest tools to fulﬁll his agenda so
he could confound people already assured of their methods. God does
not look for perfect people, he said. If God did, what would result
would be a triumph of secular competence over divine agenda. He said
Trump was God’s way of using the “undesirable element” to achieve
62 www.nytimes.com/2020/08/09/us/evangelicals-trump-christianity.html?smid=f
b-share
63 Corten & Marshall-Fratani. Between Babel and Pentecost.
64 Deji Yesufu, http://mouthpiece.com.ng/evangelicals-support-of-donald-trump/
65 Wald & Calhoun-Brown, Religion and Politics in the United States.
“Don’t Mistake Only Those in Politics as in Power!”
89
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

His perfect plan on earth. That way, the invisible hand of God at work
would be more obvious. To choose someone more reﬁned would
undermine the glory of conquest that was supposed to go to God solely.
Those like this pastor who were on the Trump train during electioneer-
ing because they saw a potential victory for Christianity shrugged off
his excesses and even chalked it down to part of divine agenda. The
morning after Trump won the election, one of Nigeria’s well-known
pastors, the Senior Pastor of The Covenant Nation and Convener of
The Platform Nigeria, Poju Oyemade tweeted, “I have read it in
scriptures but now I have seen it; a united church in prayer governs
world affairs. Evangelicals were united for Trump.”66 It was, to them,
a Christian victory, a resurgence of their earnest beliefs on a much
bigger and shinier stage.
Since Trump won, the people of the Nigerian Pentecostal republic
who repatriated moral citizenship to the USA have taken it upon
themselves to be the defenders of his presidency in the same manner
they would have done for a Christian president at home. For instance,
they are the ones – going by their distinct Nigerian (sur)names – most
likely to be found in the comments section of the social media pages of
news network such as CNN declaring their blackness before registering
their support for Trump. Some would preface their comments with, “I
am black, but I support Trump because . . .” My reading of these
supporters’ conscious and contingent identiﬁcation with blackness is
that they are partly familiar with the American discourse of race and
also aware of Trump’s low popularity among native blacks in his own
country. Therefore, their foregrounding their comments with their
racial identity is to make Trump transcend the provinciality of white
identity politics and give him legitimacy that spreads across races and
nations.
Like American evangelicals, Nigerian Christians saw Trump as
a repudiation of every demon that Obama had come to symbolize –
multiculturalism and accommodation of Islam, the triumph of liberal
values over conservative Christianity, the forfeiture of ground for
whiteness and its closely allied Christian identity. To them, liberalism
is a rearrangement of the moral order and they owe it to themselves to
restructure the world to sustain free expression of the Christian faith as
they have always known it. The invading forces of liberalism – Islam,
66 https://twitter.com/pastorpoju/status/796295987010617344
90
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

secularism, multiculturalism, socialism, abortion, homosexuality, anti-
family values – are all threats to Christianity. If allowed without
pushback, it would culminate in a dystopic world where their faith
and power identity would be relegated to the background. The
Nigerian Christian demographic who wanted Trump to beat Hillary
Clinton also wanted it because it would be a defeat of Obama himself,
an erasure of his legacy, and pushback against what they saw as forces
of Islamism exploiting western liberalism to inscribe their ethics on
dedicated western/Christian soil. They were concerned about Islam in
Nigeria, and also in western societies which they identify as Christian
civilizations. Most of those I interviewed were also convinced that
Trump was appointed by God to reverse Roe v. Wade and cancel gay
marriage in the USA. One of them said to me, “Obama really set back
Christianity in America by approving gay marriage and because of his
love for Muslims. God has appointed Trump to correct all of it.”67
Trump won the heart of these Nigerians because they want their
Christian values to remain etched in the public sphere, particularly
those from south-south and southeast regions of Nigeria where
Jonathan came from, and who also consider the loss of the presidency
as part of a historical agenda of diminishing them. For the southeast
region comprising Igbos particularly, the loss hit hard, and it also
formed the basis for renewed agitation to separate from Nigeria.
Buhari got to ofﬁce in 2015, and he did not move to heal the wounds
that resulted from that election. His divisiveness spurred people from
the southeast to explore the option of breaking away from Nigeria like
they tried to do in the 1960s. This time, they were led by Nnamdi Kanu,
who started the Indigenous People of Biafra Movement (IPOB). Kanu
was charged with treason and detained by the Nigerian government
even after a court had granted him bail. While in jail, he wrote a letter to
Trump (shortly after he won the election in 2016) asking him to
intervene in their self-determination cause and “liberate enslaved
nations” in Africa.68
Kanu and his supporters saw Brexit – which Trump supported – as
proof of his moral investment in the self-determination of a people, and
they thought he would extend the courtesy to them as well.69 Although
67 Personal interview.
68 https://dailypost.ng/2016/11/11/us-election-nnamdi-kanu-writes-open-letter-
trump/
69 www.voanews.com/africa/nigerias-biafra-separatists-see-hope-trump
“Don’t Mistake Only Those in Politics as in Power!”
91
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Trump has never spoken about Biafra or even about his foreign policy
to any African country speciﬁcally, they continue to invoke Trump’s
name in their activities.70 By engineering such illusions of international
support for their cause, they hold their supporters together and also stir
their people to support Trump as both a potential helper of their cause,
and a guarantor of the endurance of Christianity which most of the
people from that region of Nigeria practice. An evangelist from south-
eastern Nigeria that I sampled for this research told me that he has
written more than 200 prayer points for Trump, and he posts them on
a WhatsApp and Facebook prayer fora that comprises of Nigerians
both living in Nigeria and in the USA. He said to me,
Trump has interests in protecting Christians from all over the world,
particularly in Nigeria. I am of the Igbo tribe, the tribe that fought the
Civil War from 1967–1970. Ever since then, we have been under oppres-
sion. Right now, the Fulanis, the leaders of this country, the militant and the
Boko Haram, have stationed themselves in all the eastern parts of Igbo land
and they are ready that the moment Donald Trump loses the election, they
will come out and kill all the Christians. Donald Trump has warned the
Nigerian president against killing Christians and that is why they are on
a break now. That is why many people from this part of the country have
a burden to pray for Trump. Every Sunday evening, many believers gather
from 4–7pmn to pray for him. Sometimes we speak in tongues for two
hours.71
To all the Christian supporters of Trump in Nigeria, regardless of
their ethnic group, Jonathan was not the only one who lost the election:
the Christianity that he represented lost too. That displacement of the
ethical order that a Christian president embodies worries them, and
they cling to what Trump does as the hope that their faith did not lose
out entirely. The things Trump has been doing became a conﬁrmation
that God had selected him for the moral restoration of the USA. For
70 For example, when Trump had a rally in Iowa in February 2020, IPOB shared
a picture of Kanu sitting at the venue with a cap on which had been inscribed,
“Make American Great Again.” Then they commended the leadership of the US
Republican Party in Iowa for extending a VIP invitation to Kanu to attend the
event, noting that he sat in “the VIP section of the arena reserved for the top
echelon of the Republican Party in the state including the Iowa State Governor
Kim Reynolds whom he met brieﬂy.” www.vanguardngr.com/2020/02/ipob-
commends-us-over-kanus-vip-invitation-to-trumps-rally-says-leader-not
-a-terrorist/
71 Personal interview.
92
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

instance, after Trump declared Jerusalem the capital of Israel, some of
these Christians saw the development as the hastening of biblical
prophecy and celebrated it as such. Mike Bamiloye (see previous chap-
ter) shared on his Facebook page, a commentary that I reproduce below
unedited.
DOES ANYONE TAKE NOTICE OF THE TRENDING WORLD
NEWS?
JERUSALEM WAS DECLARED CAPITAL OF ISRAEL, BY DONALD
TRUMP.
THE WHOLE OF ARAB NATIONS ARE NOW BOILING IN
PROTEST . . ..
THE ARABS ARE CLAIMING THE OWNERSHIP OF THE CITY OF
JERUSALEM.
We are in a time when we need to pay more attention to Current news:
Trump approved Jerusalem as the capital of Israel today, December 6, 2017.
Note: Both Israel and Palestine claim Jerusalem to be their Capital.
Truth: Jerusalem has been the Capital of the Jews from the time of King
David in the Bible, until around Ad 35 to 70, when all Jews were forced to ﬂee
from Jerusalem to other countries.
What to Look out for in this Period:
There is going to be more increase of intifada, war of Muslim countries
against the Jews and against America.
The Jews need to build the Last Temple Prophesied in the Bible . . .
The Temple whose building material has already been prepared could only
be built in Jerusalem, the exact place of the Dome of the Rock, which the
Muslims see as the only SURVIVING Share (shrine) of the Muslims in the
Middle East.
Anything could happen between now and the end of Trump’s Presidency.
12 Major Events to Watch out For After This Meeting:
1. Moving Israel’s Capital To Jerusalem.
2. Building of the Last Temple in Jerusalem.
3. Rapture of the Church
4. The Great Tribulation
5. The Physical Manifestation of the AntiChrist
6. The 2 Prophets and Their Ministry.
7. The War of Armageddon.
8. The 1000 years millennial reign of Christ with the saints
9. Final Judgement of the dead and the living . . . total destruction of this
sinful world and Satan & his kingdom
10. Emergence of the new heaven and the new earth
“Don’t Mistake Only Those in Politics as in Power!”
93
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

11. Believers being with God forever enjoying the presence and the glory of
God forever
12. Believers Walking the streets of Gold . . . eat the fruit of the tree of life . . .
while sinners (unsaved) spend eternity in hell ﬁre with gnashing of teeth
forever and ever . . ..
(Please note that these events are not written in strict sequential order ie
order of occurrence)
There is no time to waste so Let me start with you . . ..
Beloved, you have heard it all. Win souls and turn them from destruction.
Search yourself, examine your life and walk in line with the scriptures. See if
there are areas in your life where you have gone astray, make amends and
follow the word.
The end is at the door! Therefore, please share, it could save a life. God
bless you!72
In the Nigerian Pentecostal performance of this transnational soli-
darity with a supposedly Christian president, African Americans some-
times become the battering ram of bigoted sentiments. The Nigerian
Christians who spend a lot of time on the media pages of right-wing
websites and news blogs that support conservative values eventually
absorb and echo racist white people who claim black people vote for
the Democratic Party – rather than the Republican Party that freed the
slaves – so they could get everything free. They parrot some of these
racist narratives in their support for Trump because they have only
a superﬁcial knowledge of the complex dynamics of race in America.
Again, this is where the incoherence of logic and paradox of partisan-
ship comes in: even though some of the these Christians in Nigeria and
the USA frequently hold up the Republican Party as pro-black because
Abraham Lincoln, a Republican, supposedly freed the slaves, they also
jump over that inconvenient part of history where the racial compos-
ition of both Democratic and Republican party changed because of the
signing of the Civil Rights Act by President Lyndon Johnson. Some of
my respondents said the Republican Party is better for black people in
the USA because, “Were they not the ones that freed the slaves? Where
were the Democrats to free the slaves? How come they are voting
Democratic Party now?” These convenient elisions of history have
72 www.facebook.com/MIKEBAMILOYE/posts/10154880867671831, accessed
July 9, 2020. At the time, the posts had 1.4k reactions, 2.7k shares, and 327
comments. Most of his followers on the page acquiesced with this position.
94
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

been a useful weapon to tout in their defense of their “Christian
president” against the countervailing forces of Islam, liberalism, secu-
larism, and the Democrats whom they perceived as anti-Christianity.
They faithfully display their partisan support on social media, either
their private spaces or others’ spaces, performing their Pentecostal
citizenship within the limits of the possibilities available to them. By
contributing to the idea that any attempts to hold this president respon-
sible for any moral or political infraction – the impeachment episode,
for instance, was deemed a liberal cum “mainstream” news network
agenda against God’s chosen president – they uphold a social ecology
that presumes the infallibility of a politician, and which ultimately
creates an atmosphere for abuse of power.
After months of studying how Nigerians display their partisanship
on Facebook, I also noticed that when media houses like CNN share
news reports that are not favorable to Trump on their social media
pages, they join other Trump supporters to vehemently attack news
sites as “fake news.” Some of these commenters get a lot of “likes” and
“loves” as they participate in the transnational politics of Christianity
on news media pages. When I click on the proﬁle of such a person on
the social media pages of the news networks they comment on and scan
their pages, most of the time, their posts are pretty consistent in their
pro-Trump and anti-Buhari (their home president) sentiment. They
criticize their home president and complain about the political systems
of the country that produced such an incompetent leader. Often, I click
“follow” on their proﬁle page to keep tabs on their public comments
over time. As a rule, I do not contribute to the discussions on their page.
I merely observe their public narration of self through their posts, and
these do not always have to do with politics although their religious
sentiments come up frequently. After a while, I ﬁnd that they have
accrued other followers whose proﬁle pages say or show they live in the
USA. These Nigerians and the Americans mostly do not seem to have
mutual friends, so there is a high likelihood that they became “friends”
and followers the same way I did: by following the comments of those
Nigerians on globally accessible news pages to become their social
media followers. When I run through the proﬁle pages of those in the
USA too, I ﬁnd they are mostly white people whose pages are splashed
with
pro-Christian,
pro-Trump,
pro-guns,
pro-capitalism,
anti-
abortion,
anti-socialism,
anti-immigrants,
anti-liberal,
anti-
mainstream
news,
anti-Democrats
and,
during
the
COVID-19
“Don’t Mistake Only Those in Politics as in Power!”
95
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

pandemic, anti-mask rhetoric. These Americans, as I observe in their
interactions with Nigerians, regularly show up on posts that have to do
with Trump (especially during the impeachment saga), Democrats vs.
Republicans, and Christianity (no, they do not interfere in issues of
local politics when these Nigerians criticize their leaders). Their contri-
bution to discussions usually ranges from bashing Obama and Hillary
and their fellow “globalists,” liberals and liberalism, and even praising
God for Trump who now guarantees Christianity for them.
On this world’s largest playground (the Internet, that is), where they
have found one another, the dynamics of their interactions makes it
hard to track where the pro-Christianity sentiment stops and where the
tendency toward clout-chasing – especially one that aligns strange
white people looking for like-minded black people to reassure them-
selves of their racial liberalism – stops. Nevertheless, they jointly play
politics of debating to ultimately generate an atmosphere favorable to
Trump. American Christians who seek out these Nigerians seem to
appreciate their stumbling on the right kind of black people who “get
it,” who are not trying to immigrate to America , and whose solidarity
for Trump satiates their own desire for transnational alliance as well.
This sentiment particularly served them well during the impeachment
saga when these Nigerians were some of the loudest voices in support of
Trump. They prayed for him and denounced the Democrats in caustic
language for daring to work against divine agenda.
Even when confronted with the possibility that Trump, now as
president, could not single-handedly revoke same-sex marriage and
abortion laws without recourse to established instruments of jurispru-
dence, my respondents did not waver in their faith. They remained
adamant that he would set America back on a path of righteousness. If
he had enough power and time – and, according to someone, “If only
the liberals will just let him be!” – he would achieve the divine plan. Not
much else mattered than him winning back the ground that
Christianity supposedly lost in the Obama years. When Trump over-
looked the Leahy law and sold weapons to Buhari to prosecute the
Boko Haram war, it only conﬁrmed Obama’s malevolence rather than
Trump’s lack of moral concern with internal violence in Nigeria. They
get ecstatic when images of pastors standing with Trump in the White
House are circulated. They excitedly share media reports of Trump
attending anti-abortion rallies, his grandiloquent acts of signing super-
ﬂuous laws that would “return” prayer to schools, and so on. They
96
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consider these moves an afﬁrmation of Christian resurgence in “God’s
own country.” Interestingly, some privately think abortion should be
a personal decision, but they also publicly support revoking Roe
v. Wade to provide a valid moral basis for their Trump support. Not
all, however, were simply deluded by religionized politics. Some say
they are quite aware Trump is neither born-again nor even a model of
Christian ethics, but as long as his presidency services the Christian
cause, and keeps Islamic violence at bay in Nigeria and the USA, that is
enough for them. To some degree, their inﬂexibility on issues of, for
instance, returning prayers to school, is practical politics. African
Christians’ experiences have taught them such consensual politics and
privatized Christianity is a strategic error.73 To be open and liberal is to
risk their faith and social ethos being subsumed by the forces of
secularism.
Ayelujara: Power Identity and Globalization
The Yoruba word for “Internet” is ayelujara. Like many local words
for modern artifacts and gadgets, it describes people’s encounters with
modern realities and their grasp of its essence. Ayelujara considers the
world as a unit where things seep into each other from the holes bored
into its components. It is an image that is useful for thinking of the
present globalized era, the internet technology as a part of the organ-
ization of the present world order, and how politics crosses the bounds
of the nation-state to seep out at another end in ecstatic bursts of
partisan support. This ongoing network of anxieties manages to set
aside the exotic differences of race and nationality, the complicated and
nuanced history of global anti-blackness, and the political realities of
white nationalism invested in the idolized ﬁgure of Trump. As their
ongoing histories, desires, and other similar proclivities seep out and
are mutually absorbed, they become embodied performances through
which they each inﬂuence cultural ecology and local politics. Thus, the
performance of power identity forges connections that sustain the
ethos of their power identity.
This support for a Christian president across the transnational divide
feeds into two streams of sensibilities: one, it gives Nigerian
Pentecostals still pained from losing power an anchor, a moral bearing,
73 Sanneh, Whose Religion Is Christianity?
Ayelujara
97
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to stabilize despite their devastating loss of territory at home and
central politics in 2015 until 2023. This stretch of time is because
Buhari also won a second term in 2019 despite the efforts of
Christians who supported his opponent (Atiku Abubakar, also
a Muslim northerner but whose putative cosmopolitanism and stra-
tegic alliance with southern Christians could have overturned Buhari’s
government).74 Support for a US president whose public conduct can
be insalubrious grounds its moral and ethical validation in policies such
as anti-abortion, LGBTQ issues, and Christian values, and projects it
on partisan and primal politics. The Internet has been particularly
invaluable in forging these links, because it has provided a meeting
room and deliberative spaces for people who would otherwise not have
met. In the two forthcoming chapters, I will explore more of the roles
internet technology has played in evolving the power conﬁguration of
Pentecostal leadership and what that development has meant for the
people who see pastors, especially given the public role they play, as
a repository of their power identity.
Now ubiquitous, the Internet brings Christians together from across
the world to feed off each other’s strength and jointly mobilize against
all the forces that stand against their faith – liberalism, Islam, and any
other factors that impede the expansion and continuous realization of
Christianity along with the identity complexes, be it race in the USA or
ethnic validation in Nigeria. While people manage to live in peace with
their neighbor, Islam and its potential for numbing violence is never far
from their minds. The many histories of Islamic violence directly link to
Nigeria’s political history where Muslim leaders and powerbrokers
allow these acts of impunity to go unpunished. For Nigerians who
have been imperiled by Islamic violence in all its forms, the assurance
that an external moral ﬁgure protects Christians is invaluable. Also,
such a leader’s close identiﬁcation with power means they retain their
power identity even when their local national Christian representative
is not in power. There is perhaps also the understanding that
Christianity will be anchored in the global south in the years to come,
and they are already preempting that.75 Nigeria, given its expansive
population of putative 200 million people and still growing, will play
a major role in this relocation of Christianity’s empire to the global
74 www.thecable.ng/oyedepo-why-i-accompanied-atiku-to-obasanjos-residence
75 Jenkins, The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity.
98
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

south. In some ways, both sides are looking into a mirror, seeing the
moral and human resources both represent for Christianity, construing
each other as the future mecca of global faith, and building a global
identity of power.
Second, as I stated earlier, political Islam is imagined as demonic, and
this is a politically potent aesthetic that depicts evil in its most mon-
strous form imaginable. By using a religious-related image that claws
into the past and portends the future, a preacher like Oyedepo could
adequately divine a vivid image of a malevolent power with an excep-
tional capacity for ruinous mischief. Through the horror its visage
evokes, destructive political powers can be rendered as implacable
and nothing short of annihilation or suppression would do. Those
Nigerians invested in seeing America remain Christian fear that the
liberalism that has already embraced Islam and homosexuality will
diminish Christianity. For them, the threat of the devil is not
a metaphor, it is reality. At some point though, it is pertinent to ask,
as Achille Mbembe did, when “the demonic through which people
divine the terror of their condition and state their desire for redemption
becomes an indication of the dark politics of vengeance, suicide, and
the ecstasy of score settling?”76 Pastors who whip up demonic specters
have personal interests in characterizing Islam as demonic. The demons
work for their identity-building agenda, and that is why their liturgical
activities need to be read against the wider grain of contemporary
politics.
Another reason demonization works in cultural contexts where its
myth is powerful is that it also helps instigate people to be willing to go
as far as possible to exorcise the demons possessing the physical body
and also manifest evils in the social body. They build, channel, and
exercise their power identity through prayers of spiritual warfare with
which they try to expel the devil. Beyond attacking demonic forces in
prayers, people sometimes demonstrate ﬂexibility in their identity pol-
itics to the point that the anti-blackness of white nationalism does not
bother them. One of my respondents told me that he had no problems
with white nationalism; after all, black and African people have had
their own versions of nationalism. “Why can’t there be a white nation-
alism? Why discriminate against white people?” Another one said that
he could empathize with the anti-immigrant rhetoric of Trump
76 Spivak, “Religion, Politics, Theology.”
Ayelujara
99
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

supporters because “too many black and brown people in America will
just stain their country and destroy everything white people there have
achieved.”77 This shocking reductionism of history and the unaware-
ness of the complexity of the racial identity politics that makes a black/
African person consider fellow black (and brown) people as a blemish
on “the clean ediﬁce of white supremacy”78 is troubling for those who
live in a culture where race is an everyday reality. However, for these
people who relativize racial relations with their own ethnic identity
struggles, racial nationalism is only practical politics; that is, they insist
America has the right to maintain control over its means of meaning-
production by closing in on itself. By pushing back against liberal
secular forces, they believe it would coherently fuse its myths into one
that bespeaks the power and enduring authority of Christianity. To be
an open-ended society where inconstant factors are being relentlessly
introduced through immigration is to open the door to ideologies that
militate against Christianity even if they have to resort to anti-
blackness.
Deﬁnitely not the sole reason, but protecting Christianity is a key
factor in the joint “possessive investment in whiteness”79 through
Nigerians and (white) American evangelical Christians who network
their support for Trump, the emperor of a political order that stabilizes
what could have been a drift in identity performance. For Nigerians
particularly, proximity to whiteness in forms of identifying with the
Republican Party, Christianity, and actual white people means they
could also be pliant tools in the hands of murky racialized politics. For
instance, when the Trump administration announced an immigrant
visa ban on Nigerians, his biggest supporters on the decision were
these Nigerians. For those who reacted with joy at the development,
the ban was schadenfreude – it would only affect the elites who are the
ones who could travel abroad anyway – while some others were appre-
ciative of the development because it fed into the narrative they wanted
to see happen: that Buhari the Muslim president was so incompetent,
Nigerians were banned from the USA while he was president. Even
when CNN analyst, Fareed Zakaria made a report on the visa ban
saying that Nigerians were the perfect kind of immigrants that Trump
should want in the USA for their level of educational expertise and
77 Private interviews.
78 Gilroy, Against Race.
79 Lipsitz, The Possessive Investment in Whiteness.
100
“What Islamic Devils?!”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

work ethic, this set of people remained insistent that Trump did the
right thing. On the CNN news pages on Facebook, they were the ones
vehemently arguing that Zakaria’s position was not borne out of love
for Nigeria but simply a demonstration of the network’s anti-Trump
stance.
In wrapping up this chapter, I want to restate note that the politics of
Christian transnationalism is the fallout of an era in Nigerian politics
marked by religious and political grudges and also a reﬂection of how
ideologies of culture wars transcend the bounds of nation-state in
recent times. Facilitated by modern technological opportunities, these
people mine global discourses of race for political exigencies through
contingent racial identiﬁcation politics that provides “black” support
for Trump. Justiﬁcation of white nationalist politics demonstrates
a blindness to how racial politics has featured in global formations of
power. For them, they are working to preserve a global Christian
identity that feeds triumphantly on power and domination on the
world stage. In the networking tactics that help sustain their power
identity, they tend to downplay the complexity of race and racial
situations in the USA. As long as the USA exists in their imagination
as a global headquarters of Christianity, they will invest their energies
in protecting it from secularizing forces. Respective Christians in Brazil
and South Korea might not have much in common with Nigerian
Pentecostals, but they understand and jointly relate to the universal
symbolism
of
American
evangelicalism.
Because
the
Nigerian
Pentecostals are joined by faith with others everywhere else through
the USA, its president is treated as deserving of their (black) fealty. They
offer it even when he denigrates their countries. As far as they are
concerned, he is warding off the demons of Islamism, multiculturalism,
secularism, socialism, and any other -isms that threaten their moral
vision of both the USA and Nigeria, and his actions stabilize the threats
to their power identity.
Ayelujara
101
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108923194.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

