
CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Preface
Chapter 1: When Machines Do Everything
Like It or Not, This Is Happening
Digital That Matters
Playing the New Game
But Will I Be Automated Away?
Getting AHEAD in the Age of the New Machine
Chapter 2: From Stall to Boom: We've Been Here Before
When Machines Do Everything, What Happens to Us?
But Haven't Our Computers Made Us More Productive?
Carlota's Way
Riding the Waves
Three Big Reasons Why a Boom Is About to Occur
From Stall to Boom, a Time of Optimism
Chapter 3: There Will Be Blood
Predictions of Massive Job Losses via AI
Manual vs. Knowledge Labor: As Goes the Factory, So Goes the Office?
Don't Confuse Jobs with Tasks
Don't Overlook the Job-Growth Story
The Pace of This Transition
Getting AHEAD in a Time of Churn
Chapter 4: The New Machine: Systems of Intelligence
Defining the New Machine
Meet the Machine: Anatomy of a System of Intelligence
Systems of Intelligence in Action

What Does “Good” Look Like? Attributes of a Successful System of
Intelligence
From Vapor to Value
Chapter 5: Your New Raw Materials: Data Is Better than Oil
Turning Data from a Liability into an Asset
Managing the Data Supply Chain
Business Analytics: Turning Data into Meaning
If It Costs More than $5, and You Can't Eat It, Instrument It!
The Home-Field Advantage of Big Companies
Data Is Job One
Chapter 6: Digital Business Models: Your Five Ways to Beat Silicon Valley
Hybrid Is the New Black
Avoiding the Four Traps
Five Ways to Mine Gold from the New Machines
The Management Opportunity of a Generation
Chapter 7: Automate: The Robots Aren't Coming; They're Here
Automation Is Not Optional
Software Should Be Eating Your Core Operations
What to Do on Monday? Flick Your Automation-On Switch
Automation Is a Means, Not an End
Chapter 8: Halo: Instrument Everything, Change the Game
Every “Thing” Is Now a Code Generator
Become a “Know-It-All”
What to Do on Monday? Capitalize on Code
Digits over Widgets: The Next Age of Business and Technology
Chapter 9: Enhance: Amplify Human Performance with the New Machine
Stone Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age…Digital Age
Enhanced Jobs Will Be Protected Jobs
Smart Robots Make Smarter Hands
What to Do on Monday? Partner with Systems of Intelligence
You + New Tools = Enhancement

Chapter 10: Abundance: Finding Your 10X Opportunities with the New
Machine
What to Do on Monday? Find Abundance in Your Organization
Increasing Prosperity by Lowering Prices
Chapter 11: Discovery: Manage Innovation for the Digital Economy
R&D Without AI Is No R&D at All
Discovery Is Hard, but Not as Hard as Being Irrelevant
What to Do on Monday? Don't Short Human Imagination
Create Your Own Budding Effect
Chapter 12: Competing on Code: A Call to Action from the Future
AI for Pragmatists
The Digital Build-Out Is Here
Align the Three M's
Move AHEAD
Courage and Faith in the Future
Acknowledgments
Photo Credits
Disclaimers
Index
End User License Agreement
List of Illustrations
Figure 1.1
Figure 2.1
Figure 2.2
Figure 2.3
Figure 2.4
Figure 2.5
Figure 2.6

Figure 2.7
Figure 3.1
Figure 4.1
Figure 4.2
Figure 4.3
Figure 5.1
Figure 5.2
Figures 6.1
Figure 6.3
Figure 6.4
Figure 7.1
Figure 7.2
Figure 7.3
Figure 7.4
Figure 7.5
Figure 8.1
Figure 8.2
Figure 9.1
Figure 9.2
Figure 9.3
Figure 9.4
Figure 11.1
Figure 12.1

What to Do When Machines Do
Everything
How to Get Ahead in a World of AI, Algorithms, Bots,
and Big Data
Malcolm Frank,
Paul Roehrig, and Ben Pring

Cover image: Kirill_makarov/Shutterstock.com 
Cover design: theBookDesigners
Copyright © 2017 by Cognizant Technology Solutions U.S. Corporation. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-
8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com . Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed
to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-
6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions .
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If
this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you purchased, you may
download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com . For more information about Wiley products, visit
www.wiley.com .
ISBN 978-1-119-27866-5 (cloth)
ISBN 978-1-119-27867-2 (ePDF)
ISBN 978-1-119-27868-9 (ePub)

PREFACE
We know what you might be thinking: When machines do everything, what am I
going to do? It's a good question.
If machines can do everything, then how are humans going to make a living?
How are we going to pay the rent or mortgage or put food on the table? How are
we going to survive when software eats all the knowledge work?
Even if you have reached a stage in your career in which you feel safe from the
rise of the new machines, how will your children thrive when computers can out-
think, out-work, and out-manage them? What do they study? Where do they
focus? And will they have any chance of living a life as good as yours?
At work, how should your company be structured when so much can now be
automated? What will happen to all those middle-class, middle-management
knowledge jobs that currently stand as the economic bedrock of our society?
These are all good questions—the right questions—for indeed, something very
big is going on.
The rise of artificial intelligence is the great story of our time. Decades in the
making, the smart machine is leaving the laboratory and, with increasing speed,
is infusing itself into many aspects of our lives: our phones, our cars, the planes
we fly in, the way we bank, and the way we choose what music to listen to.
Within the next few years, AI will be all around us, embedded in many higher-
order pursuits. It will educate our children, heal our sick, and lower our energy
bills. It will catch criminals, increase crop yields, and help us uncover new
worlds of augmented and virtual reality.
Machines are getting smarter every day and doing more and more; they will
soon change our lives and our work in ways that are easy to imagine but hard to
predict. So what does one do?
These are the questions that have been going through our minds for a while, too.
Anyone with a casual interest in the future can see these issues swirling through
the zeitgeist at the moment: in movies (Ex Machina and Her ), on TV (Black
Mirror , Humans, and Battlestar Galactica ), in books (Superintelligence and
Rise of the Robots ), and in countless articles in the press. But we have more than
a casual interest in the future.
As the leaders of Cognizant's Center for the Future of Work it is our job to

As the leaders of Cognizant s Center for the Future of Work, it is our job to
figure out how the future of work works. We engage with many of the world's
leading companies, universities, analysts, technologists, and economists to make
sense of the great change we are all experiencing as well as to fathom how work
will be reimagined, reconfigured, and restructured in the years to come. We do
this to understand how new technology will shape the opportunities we have and
the threats we face and to foresee how man and machine will relate and coexist.
So we've spent the last three years thinking about what to do when machines do
everything, separating the hype from the reality on the front lines of global
business.
The book you're holding contains our answers to these questions.
The bottom line? It's going to be all right. In fact, better than all right, because
AI is about to usher in a new industrial revolution that, for those who manage it
properly, will generate significant economic growth.
Will the new machines displace many current workers? Yes. However, on a
larger scale, new machines will also create work that is better, more productive,
more satisfying than ever before. The new machines will raise living standards
and usher in a period of widely distributed economic growth that will be far
stronger than any we've seen in the Western world during the past 50 years.
But there's a catch, which is expressed in the “what to do” part of the title of this
book.
You and the company you work for and represent must accept, embrace, and
leverage the fact that, minute by minute, machines are doing more and more of
the work we perform today. That is the underlying assumption at the heart of this
book.
This is where many people get stuck. They start tumbling down existential
wormholes: Will machines need us? Who will control the machines? Will
machines act in the best interests of humanity? Again, these are great questions
that prompt fascinating discussions, all of which we like having as much as the
next person, particularly with a glass of red wine on hand. But these discussions
don't help you know what to do.
If you want to read about the big philosophical debates about what AI might do
in the next 25 years, this is not the book for you. But if you want pragmatic
advice on what AI will do in the next five years, then this is definitely the book
for you.
While some have their heads in the sky, others have their noses to the

y,
grindstone. While some will ponder, winners will act.
This book aims to answer questions about the future of your business and your
work in an era of intelligent machines. It explains how you as an individual and
as a leader in your organization can survive and thrive in a world where
machines do everything. This book explains what you should do, why, and what
will happen if you don't.
We wrote this book because we are in an amazing time. Though we are
professional students of the future, the three of us are students of history as well.
Understanding the great shifts of the past provides a framework for
understanding how change happens in the here and now. The rise of machine
intelligence is such a moment of great change. Our children and grandchildren
will study these times just as we study James Watt, Andrew Carnegie, and
Thomas Edison.
It's time to build our own future, complete with a sense of optimism and
confidence. When machines do everything, there will still be a lot for you to do.
Let's get on with it.

1 
WHEN MACHINES DO EVERYTHING
Artificial intelligence has left the laboratory (and the movie lot) and is in your
building. It's in your home. It's in your office. It's pervading all the institutions
that drive our global economy. From Alexa to Nest to Siri to Uber to Waze, we
are surrounded by smart machines running on incredibly powerful and self-
learning software platforms. And this is just the beginning.
To date, we've been enjoying—without even really noticing—various forms of
“weak” artificial intelligence (AI). It's how Amazon recommends just the right
gift. How Netflix suggests the perfect film for your Sunday evening. Or how
Facebook fills your newsfeed. These forms of AI have been welcome little
helpers, making our days just a bit easier and more fun. Once we start using
them we stop thinking about them. In just a few short years, these machines have
become almost invisible to us in our personal lives.
Now AI is transitioning from being our little daily helper to something much
more powerful—and disruptive—as the new machines are rapidly outperforming
the most talented of us in many endeavors. For example:
Games of intellect: AI platforms can now out-compete us at some of our
most challenging games—Jeopardy!, Chess, and Go. Google's AlphaGo beat
world champion Go player Lee Sedol by a score of 4–1 in March 2016. 1
This was a convincing win, but not a rout. Yet with the current rate of
technological advancement, in just a few years it will be inconceivable for a
human to beat the new machines in such games of the mind.
Driving: The driverless car, while still relatively nascent, is already a better
driver than the average person. According to a Virginia Tech study, human-
driven vehicles are involved in 4.2 crashes per million miles vs. 3.2 crashes
per million miles for the automated car. 2 This disparity in safety will
undoubtedly grow considerably in the next few years, and driverless cars,
which never text behind the wheel or drive drunk, may soon become
mainstream.
Trading: In 2015, six of the top eight hedge funds in the United States
earned around $8 billion based largely—or exclusively—on AI algorithms. 3
The machine has already won in stock picking.

Health care: In medicine, the new machine is quickly surpassing the
capabilities of human radiologists. Researchers at Houston Methodist
Hospital utilize AI software, which interprets results of breast X-rays 30
times faster than doctors and with 99% accuracy. By contrast, mammograms
reviewed by humans result in unnecessary biopsies nearly 20% of the time. 4
Law: In the legal profession, AI-enhanced computer systems are conducting
discovery and due diligence far better, faster, and cheaper than the most
talented team of paralegals in a white-shoe law firm. Multiple studies predict
that the vast majority of paralegal work can soon be automated. We may
reach a point in the not-too-distant future when relying only on humans for
discovery might be grounds for malpractice.
We could go on and on with many more examples, but the point is clear; the new
machines have already surpassed human capability in many ways. Moreover,
with the geometric growth in the power and sophistication of these platforms,
this is only a preview of coming attractions.
Thus, this rapid expansion of AI leads us to ask some big questions:
Will a robot take my job away?
Will my company be “Ubered”?
What will my industry look like in 10 years?
Will my children be better off than I am?
In the coming pages, we will answer these questions in a structured and practical
manner. Based on our cumulative 100 years of experience analyzing and
charting shifts in business and technology, we are fully convinced that we're now
moving into a new economic era, one that will change the nature of work and the
basis of competition in every industry. In this new economy, we will witness an
expansion of what is possible and move from machines that do to machines that
appear to learn and think.
Like It or Not, This Is Happening
What the World Economic Forum hailed in 2016 as the Fourth Industrial
Revolution is now upon us: a time of economic dislocation, when old ways of
production give way to new ones, and when those who can harness the power of
the new machine will harvest the bounty of economic expansion. 5 In the same
manner that the First Industrial Revolution was powered by the invention of the

loom, the second by the steam engine, and the third by the assembly line, the
fourth will be powered by machines that seem to think—what we refer to in
these pages as “systems of intelligence.”
This is leading to what we call the “know-it-all” business, in which leaders and
managers can and should have a continuous awareness of all that is occurring in
their company's operations. Where we used to guess, now we can know. These
new machines—always “on,” always “learning,” and constantly “thinking”—
will soon challenge and enhance the intellect and experience of even the savviest
professionals in every sector. There's no way to escape the gravitational pull of
these new machines and the business models that enable and leverage them.
As such, whether you are managing a large enterprise or just starting your first
job, deciding what to do about the new machine—this new cocktail of AI,
algorithms, bots, and big data—will be the single biggest determinant of your
future success.
Digital That Matters
For the past decade, we've collectively enjoyed “digital that's fun.” We've seen
the incorporation of Twitter (2006), the introduction of Apple's iPhone (2007),
and Facebook's IPO (2012). These companies, along with others, such as
Google, Netflix, and Amazon, have been able to generate unprecedented
commercial success in terms of customer adoption, daily usage, and value
creation by changing how we communicate and socialize. Yet, history will note
that we started the digital revolution with the amusing and the frivolous:
Facebook posts, Twitter feeds, and Instagram photos. We are using the most
powerful innovations since the introduction of alternating current to share cat
videos, chat with Aunt Alice, and hashtag political rants. However, that's just the
warm-up act, for we haven't yet begun to fully realize the potential of the new
machines.
Technology writer Kara Swisher summed it up best when she said, “In Silicon
Valley, there's lots of big minds chasing small ideas.” 6 Well, we're entering an
era of big brains focused on big ideas—digital that matters —using these
technologies to transform how we are educated, fed, transported, insured,
medicated, and governed.
While companies such as Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, and Google (sometimes
known as the FANG vendors) seem to have established themselves as the
presumptive and eternal winners in this space, history will likely remember them

as the precursors to a much more momentous and democratic economic shift.
The next wave of digital titans probably won't be characterized by start-ups from
Silicon Valley; instead, it will be made up of established companies in more
“traditional” industries—in places like Baltimore, Birmingham, Berlin, and
Brisbane—that figure out how to leverage their longstanding industry
knowledge with the power of new machines.
We're starting to see this play out as we collectively work to apply systems of
intelligence to help address some of our most vexing societal ills in areas where
digital technology is not just entertaining or convenient but also life-altering.
Certainly, many of our institutions—the pillars of our society and our everyday
lives—are ripe for improvement.
For example, worldwide we lose 1.2 million lives to car accidents annually, with
more than 94% of these accidents a result of human error. 7 In the United States
alone, these wrecks cost society over $1 trillion. This is nearly one-third the
amount the U.S. federal government collects in individual income taxes. 8
Driverless cars promise to save countless lives and heartache.
One-third of all food produced in the world goes to waste. The food wasted in
rich countries alone is almost enough to feed all of sub-Saharan Africa. 9 By
instrumenting the supply chain and applying AI, we could literally feed the
world.
Medical misdiagnoses could also plummet. Right now, 5% to 10% of trips to the
ER results in a misdiagnosis. 10 More than 12 million diagnostic mistakes
contribute to 400,000 deaths caused by preventable errors each year, and that's
just in the United States. 11 Applying data to the diagnostic process could
dramatically improve patient outcomes.
The United States spends more per student on secondary education than most
other countries in the world but generates mediocre results. In a recent
international study, American students achieved scores far below those in many
other advanced industrial nations in science, reading, and math. 12 By tailoring
lessons to the individual learning style of each student through technology, we
could make the education process radically more productive and effective for
both students and teachers.
These are the sorts of big things that we can address with the new machine. It's
digital with purpose and digital that matters, and the big brains bringing these
innovations forward will not necessarily reside in Silicon Valley or an MIT dorm
room. They may well be sitting in an office down the hall at your company.

oo .
ey
ay we
be s tt g
a o
ce dow t e a
at you co pa y.
For example, McGraw-Hill Education is applying new technology to help
teachers and kids improve learning with a system called ALEKS. The artificially
intelligent A ssessment and LE arning in K nowledge S paces system uses
adaptive questioning to quickly and accurately determine exactly what a student
knows and doesn't know in a course. ALEKS then instructs the student on the
topics he or she is most ready to learn. As the student works through a course,
ALEKS periodically reassesses the student to ensure retention. All of this results
in more flexible, one-on-one instruction for students, which boosts student
success. And for teachers, ALEKS helps take over some of the more routine—
and, let's say it, boring—work to allow them to focus more intently on working
with students. Discovery, one of South Africa's leading insurers, uses its Vitality
platform to provide economic incentives—discounts on travel, entertainment,
healthy food, gym memberships, sports equipment, health products, and the like
—to its members based on whether they participate in healthy behaviors.
Members earn points by logging workouts with connected fitness devices and
purchasing healthy food (also logged by swiping their Vitality card). The
insurance sector may not be known as a hotbed of innovation, but Discovery has
built a thriving business based on the value derived from the new machine.
Playing the New Game
Another area ripe for reinvention is managing our money. Jon Stein doesn't look
like a Wall Street Master of the Universe—just the opposite, in fact. In his mid-
30s, dressed in blue jeans and a mildly tattered shirt, he works not in a financial
citadel but in a relaxed loft-like space. His language is not full of bravado and
bombast but is casual, considered, and humble.


Figure 1.1 Jon Stein, CEO and founder of Betterment
Yet Stein is turning his corner of the banking world, personal wealth
management, on its head. His company, Betterment, has rapidly become one of
the world's leading “robo-advisors,” leveraging AI platforms to rewrite the rules
of the financial advisory business. Betterment provides highly personalized,
curated wealth management services 24x7. His system of intelligence is doing
the work of hundreds of people and is doing it better, at a fraction of the cost.
Millions of investors—millennials, Gen-Xers, and baby boomers alike—are
flocking to the platform. From the beginning of 2015 to mid-2016, Betterment's
assets under management grew from $1.1 billion to $5.0 billion 13 , 14 and for
good reason. Betterment has created a bigger pie for wealth management
services because it can attract new customers that traditional banks wouldn't
touch. Traditional “bulge-bracket” investment banks (e.g., Goldman Sachs,
Morgan Stanley, Credit Suisse, etc.) often do not offer personalized wealth
management services to anyone with less than $1 million in assets; the margin
isn't there, given their one-to-one advisory business model. So where does that
leave the other 99.9% of the population that is interested in having their money
professionally managed?
Betterment started by focusing on HENRY (h igh e arners, n ot r ich y et). These
are young professionals in their 20s and early 30s: lawyers, doctors, and
managers starting their careers armed with great educations…and the associated
student debt.
Traditional wealth managers won't touch HENRY, but Betterment welcomes
anyone with money to invest. And as each new customer comes on the platform,
the system gets smarter, providing better value to each individual participant: on
the spot, empirically based, unspun counsel on investment strategy, portfolio
allocation, and tax management.
Robo-advisers, collectively, have more than $50 billion in assets under
management today (and are estimated to have over $250 billion under
management by 2020) and are taking aim at the $20 trillion worldwide that is
currently being managed by 46,000 human financial advisors at traditional
banks. 15
Now, we don't know whether Betterment will ultimately emerge as the long-term
winner in this new form of financial advisory services, but the company does
demonstrate how new machines are disrupting traditional ways of work. Such
widespread adoption is creating shock waves in both the financial services and

widespread adoption is creating shock waves in both the financial services and
technology industries.
Stein, and others who have figured out the new game, are nothing short of the
Henry Fords of our time. They understand today's new raw materials (big data).
They have built and now operate the new machines. And, most important, they
have surrounded these new machines with business models that generate
remarkable growth and profitability engines while expanding the overall market.
The story of robo-advisors in wealth management is about to be replayed a
thousand-fold across all sectors of our economy. So the question becomes: Will
you play, or stand on the sidelines?
But Will I Be Automated Away?
We have already proven that we love to consume AI-based products (with our
rabid usage of the FANG vendors’ offers on our smartphones). And, through
digital that matters, the new machine is poised to transform the primary
institutions of our society for the better.
Yet once we get over our initial awe of the new machine, we start to wonder
how it will impact jobs. What will happen to all those bankers, drivers,
radiologists, lawyers, and journalists? What will happen to…me? Will a robot
take my job?
Many of us don't know whether this Fourth Industrial Revolution is very good or
very bad. It all starts to feel like a capitalist's dream…but a worker's nightmare.
And the uncertainty is creating a palpable sense of anxiety, for at a personal
level, many of us don't know what to do about it.
Some see only the dark side of this shift, and indeed, many of today's headlines
forecast a grim future in a “jobless economy” as robots take over our livelihoods.
But the coming digital boom and build-out we describe in the next chapter will
be highly promising for those who are prepared. In fact, it will usher in once-in-
a-century growth prospects as we reengineer our infrastructure, our industries,
and our institutions. Similar to the prior three industrial revolutions, this one will
steamroll those who wait and watch, and will unleash enormous prospects and
prosperity for those who learn to harness the new machine.
All of this depends on what you do now to prepare for an era when machines can
potentially do nearly everything related to knowledge work.
Will many jobs be “automated away” in the coming years? Yes. However, for
the vast majority of professions the new machine will actually enhance and

the vast majority of professions, the new machine will actually enhance and
protect employment. We don't think, for example, that a single teacher or nurse
will lose their job due to artificial intelligence. Instead, these professions will
become more productive, more effective…and more enjoyable. Workers in such
professions will come to view the new machine as their trusted colleague. Just as
one wouldn't think of driving across London today without an AI-based GPS, or
researching a subject without referring to Google and Wikipedia, most workers
in the coming years would not consider approaching their daily tasks without a
“bot” at their side.
Additionally, entirely new professions will be created, driving employment in
fields we can't currently envision (imagine trying to describe a “database
administrator” to somebody in 1955). We have much to look forward to if we
understand exactly what the new machine can and cannot do and how it will
impact the future of work. Some very clear patterns for success have emerged,
and we'll spend the rest of the book framing what's going on and providing
tactical guidance on how to win in the new digital economy.
Getting AHEAD in the Age of the New Machine
We've written this book to provide you with a roadmap, a guide to success for
this time of transition. First, we will outline what the machine actually is: how
it's built, what it can do, and what it can't do. We will then look at where it can
best be used today and tomorrow. What industry problems can it solve? What
new customer value propositions can it create? Third, and most importantly, we
will give you a structured approach for moving forward with our AHEAD
model, which is based on our work with Global 2000 companies at the vanguard
of the digital transition.
Briefly, AHEAD outlines the five distinct approaches for winning with systems
of intelligence. The acronym stands for:
Automate: Outsource rote, computational work to the new machine. This is
how Netflix automated away the Blockbuster retail store and how Uber is
automating away taxi dispatching.
Halo: Instrument products and people and leverage the data exhaust they
generate through their connected and online behaviors (what we call Code
Halos) to create new customer experiences and business models. 16 General
Electric and Nike are changing the rules of the game in their industries by
instrumenting their products, surrounding them with halos of data, and

creating new value propositions and customer intimacy.
Enhance: View the computer as a colleague that can increase your job
productivity and satisfaction. The GPS in your car currently enhances your
driving, keeping you on the fastest route, alerting you of road hazards, and
ensuring that you never get lost. In the coming years, entire vocations, from
sales to nursing to teaching, will be revolutionized with the power of
computer-based enhancement.
Abundance: Use the new machine to open up vast new markets by dropping
the price point of existing offers, much as Henry Ford did with automobiles.
In the way that Betterment is using AI to bring financial security to the
masses, which market offers can be greatly democratized and expanded in
your industry?
Discovery: Leverage AI to conceive entirely new products, new services,
and entirely new industries. As Edison's light bulb led to new discoveries in
radio, television, and transistors, today's new machine will lead to a new
generation of discovery and invention.
These are five specific approaches—plays , if you will—for winning with AI,
each with its own set of approaches and tactics. In the coming pages, we will
utilize this model to demystify the application of the new machine in your
business.
The first play—to automate —is the one most prevalent in today's zeitgeist.
Automation has been the initial step in each industrial revolution, as one loom
replaced 40 textile workers or one steam engine had the power of 50 horses.
Today, automation will be a similar necessary “evil,” because it's how you will
deliver at the “Google price” in core portions of your company. However, what
most market observers miss is that the next wave of automation will pave the
way for invention and economic expansion through the four subsequent plays.
This one-two of efficiency plus invention will manifest itself across all
industries. Banking will become more efficient and personalized. Health care
will become more transparent and effective, generating much better outcomes.
Manufactured goods will become more interactive, intuitive, and reliable. Our
food system will be less wasteful and produce higher quality goods. Education
will be enhanced and individualized, and government services will be upgraded
and more cost-effective. And, as outlined previously, much of this shift will not
be driven by companies that were started last year or even 10 years ago but by
companies started by our grandparents. This is because those companies have
access to the richest lodes of data the “fuel” for the new machine

access to the richest lodes of data, the fuel  for the new machine.
Much has already been said and written about the potential impact of the new
machine on society. We wrote this book not for policy wonks and academics but
rather for people in organizations large and small that are trying to make the best
decisions possible for their businesses and their own jobs. We aren't naïve to the
fact that business happens in a wider context, but we can't all sit around waiting
for politicians to improve education or to pass huge spending bills to enhance
infrastructure or enact a universal basic income. We need to act today in the
world as it is. You can rest assured that if you don't act now, others will.
The title of this book is What to Do When Machines Do Everything . This may
sound a bit hyperbolic, and clearly machines will never do everything and
nobody really wants them to. But in the next few years the new machines will
continue to amaze, will be embedded most everywhere and in most everything,
and will increasingly do more and more of the work people do today.
Technology is no longer the domain of the few but the province of the many. As
such, those who win in the next phase of the digital economy are not those who
can create the new machines, but those who figure out what to do with them.
This book is your field guide.
Notes
1. Christopher Moyer, “How Google's AlphaGo Beat a Go World Champion,”
The Atlantic , March 28, 2016,
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/03/the-invisible-
opponent/475611/ .
2. “Automated Vehicle Crash Rate Comparison Using Naturalistic Data,”
January 8, 2016, http://www.vtti.vt.edu/featured/?p=422 .
3. Emel Akan, “World's Top Hedge Fund Managers Took Home $13 Billion in
2015,” Epoch Times , May 17, 2016,
http://www.theepochtimes.com/n3/2067771-worlds-top-hedge-fund-
managers-took-home-13-billion-in-2015/ .
4. Todd Ackerman, “Houston invention: Artificial Intelligence to read
mammograms” San Antonio ExpressNews , Sept. 16, 2016,
http://www.expressnews.com/local/prognosis/article/Houston-researchers-
develop-artificial-9226237.php .

5. Klaus Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution , World Economic Forum,
Jan. 11, 2016, https://www.amazon.com/Fourth-Industrial-Revolution-Klaus-
Schwab-ebook/dp/B01AIT6SZ8 .
6. John Kennedy, “Kara Swisher: ‘In Silicon Valley, There Are a Lot of Big
Minds Chasing Small Ideas,’” Silicon Republic, June 24, 2015,
https://www.siliconrepublic.com/start-ups/kara-swisher-in-silicon-valley-
there-are-a-lot-of-big-minds-chasing-small-ideas .
7. “Human Error Accounts for 90% of Road Accidents,” International News ,
April 2011, http://www.alertdriving.com/home/fleet-alert-
magazine/international/human-error-accounts-90-road-accidents .
8. See http://www.rmiia.org/auto/traffic_safety/Cost_of_crashes.asp and
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/publications/road_traffic/worl
and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_federal_budget .
9. http://www.fao.org/save-food/resources/keyfindings/en .
10. “Surprising Number of Emergency Room Medical Errors,” July 15, 2016,
http://philadelphia.cbslocal.com/2016/07/15/surprising-number-of-
emergency-room-medical-errors/ .
11. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/12-million-americans-misdiagnosed-each-
year-study-says/ and http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/deaths-by-
medical-mistakes-hit-records .
12. http://www.cbsnews.com/news/us-education-spending-tops-global-list-
study-shows/ and http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/02/02/u-s-
students-improving-slowly-in-math-and-science-but-still-lagging-
internationally/ .
13. “Millennials hire computers to invest their money,” Denver Post , March 4,
2016, http://www.denverpost.com/2016/03/04/millennials-hire-computers-to-
invest-their-money/ .
14. Julie Verhage, “Robo-Adviser Betterment Hits the $5 Billion Mark,”
Bloomberg Markets , July 14, 2016,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-14/robo-adviser-
betterment-hits-the-5-billion-mark .
15. Melody Hahm, “Robo-advisor Wealthfront is now using AI to manage over

$3 billion in assets,” Yahoo! Finance , March 31, 2016,
https://beta.finance.yahoo.com/news/robo-advisor-wealthfront-artificial-
intelligence-betterment-assets-venmo-205354921.html and Michael P. Regan,
“Robo Advisers to Run $2 Trillion by 2020 if This Model Is Right,”
Bloomberg, June 18, 2015, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-
06-18/robo-advisers-to-run-2-trillion-by-2020-if-this-model-is-right .
16. For more information on Code Halos, see our white paper and book,
https://www.cognizant.com/code-halos .

2 
FROM STALL TO BOOM 
WE'VE BEEN HERE BEFORE
Many of us feel stalled. Growth, both for our companies and for us individually,
seems increasingly difficult to attain. There is plenty of evidence of the
structural weakening of our economy: stagnant wages, rising debt levels, and
anemic productivity growth. It seems the major trends are all working against us:
increased global competition, a winner-take-all economy driving massive
income inequality, the steady erosion of privacy and security, start-ups worth
billions emerging while legacy firms crumble, and technology taking our jobs.
It's clear that the old rules of work and business no longer apply.
We (the authors) work with a lot of people excited about the opportunities that
lie ahead in the digital economy, but their optimism is often tempered by the
news of the day. The headlines all too frequently seem to foretell a pending
jobless nightmare of breadlines and robot overlords. And some feel as if there's a
party being thrown—in Silicon Valley, New York, and London—that they're not
invited to.
Yet within the malaise there is good news. We have weathered similar storms
before, and the shape and pattern of our current situation is actually a harbinger
for a period of technology-fueled growth. This seems counterintuitive; after all,
how can economic stagnation signal future growth and opportunity?
It's because our current stall fits within a well-established pattern that shows up
during every major shift in business and technology, when the economy moves
from one industrial revolution to the next. In short, we are currently in an
economic “stall zone” as the Third Industrial Revolution is (literally) running out
of gas, while the Fourth Industrial Revolution—based on the new machine—has
yet to grab hold at scale.
This situation creates a dissonance in which we marvel at the computers that
surround us, and all they can do, while we search in vain for greater growth
prospects for our companies and career security for ourselves.
The good news, which we will explore in this chapter, is that we are coming to
the end of the stall zone and entering a time when the economy can break out for
those who harness the power of the new machine. We refer to this as the coming
“digital build-out ” in which the fruits of digital technology move from Silicon

digital build-out,  in which the fruits of digital technology move from Silicon
Valley to the entire economy. This value migration will be of a scale similar to
the industrial build-out of the last century and will move much faster. To fully
understand this transition, it helps to take a look back at the impact of new
machines on work in previous periods of tumultuous disruption.
When Machines Do Everything, What Happens to Us?
People have been worried about “new machines” and their effect on the human
condition for centuries. Only the machine has changed; the concerns remain the
same.
Back in the early 1800s, during the First Industrial Revolution, the Luddites in
northwestern England responded to the introduction of power looms by
smashing them. They recognized that their textile jobs were at risk. It turned out
that they were right; the machines did take over their jobs. Then the same thing
happened in agriculture. At the beginning of the 19th century—when the
Luddites were smashing looms—80% of the U.S. labor force was working the
land. Today, less than 2% of U.S. workers are in agriculture.
When the steam engine enabled mechanization during the Second Industrial
Revolution, experts openly worried that “the substitution of machinery for
human labor” might “render the population redundant.” 1 As assembly lines
made mass production possible, the economist John Maynard Keynes famously
warned about widespread unemployment, “due to our discovery of means of
economizing the use of labor outrunning the pace at which we can find new uses
for labor.” 2
Today, many of us feel that same sense of trepidation as we read increasingly
foreboding accounts of how new machines based on artificial intelligence will
displace us. A widely cited Oxford University study estimates that nearly 50% of
total U.S. jobs are at risk from the new machines during the next decade or so. 3
But Haven't Our Computers Made Us More Productive?
In spite of this doom and gloom, some of us, being ever-optimistic, will argue,
“Maybe so. But all of these computers are having a broad positive effect as they
are making all of us more productive.” However, the data doesn't support this
argument either.
In spite of the billions spent on enterprise technology (think of all those Cisco

routers, SAP applications, Oracle databases, and Microsoft-based PCs, combined
with the recent explosion in consumer technologies such as smartphones and
apps) worker productivity and associated G7 industrialized nation GDPs haven't
budged much. For example, from 1991 through 2012 the average annual
increase in real wages was a paltry 1.5% in the UK and 1% in the United States
(which was approximately half the level of wage growth from 1970 through
1990), and these were the leaders in wage growth in the industrialized world. 4
Similarly, GDP growth rates in the United States and Western Europe during
those two decades were below the GDP growth rates of the previous two
decades. 5
How can this be? How is it that we are merely treading economic water in spite
of massive technology investments? Isn't this a technology golden age?
Ask yourself: Have your PC, smartphone, e-mail, and instant messaging
platforms shortened your work day? Ours neither.
Carlota's Way
The good news amid the gloom is that our current stall zone fits a historical
pattern that foretells future growth. Indeed, the signals of fear that the new
machine will take our jobs usually appear at the cusp of technology-led
economic booms. In fact, if the Fourth Industrial Revolution doesn't generate
widespread economic expansion along with associated job growth, we will have
broken with history. Why do we have confidence in such a prediction? A
Venezuelan-born economist will help guide us.
Carlota Perez is an award-winning economics professor at the London School of
Economics. Her most important work focuses on what happens between the end
of one era and the beginning of the next. She describes it like this:
History can teach us a lot. Innovation has indeed always been the driver of
growth and the main source of increasing productivity and wealth. But
every technological revolution has brought two types of prosperity.
The first type is turbulent and exciting like the bubbles of the 1990s and
2000s and like the Roaring Twenties, the railway mania, and the canal
mania before. They all ended in a bubble collapse.
Yet, after the recession, there came the second type: the Victorian boom,
the Belle Époque, the Post War Golden Age and…the one that we could
have ahead now.

Bubble prosperities polarize incomes; Golden Ages tend to reverse the
process. 6
Perez describes a coming Golden Age, the digital build-out that's just in front of
us. But we're getting ahead of ourselves. How and why can this emerge from our
current economic stall? The patterns of history provide us with the guide.
Riding the Waves
When we look back at the invention of the cotton gin, the internal combustion
engine, and alternating current, we might sometimes think that one day there was
an invention and the next day everything changed. But that's not how the world
works. In virtually every case, there was a long and bumpy road connecting one
era of business and technology to the next; the evolution of each industrial
revolution follows the path of an S-curve (as shown in Figure 2.2 ).
Figure 2.1 Luddites in the early 1800s

Figure 2.2 The S-Curve and the Stall Zone
Why an S-curve? Historically, upon the introduction of new technologies,
associated GDP does not rise for decades (the bottom of the S-curve). Select
individuals and companies might get rich, but society overall does not. Yet once
the technology fully grabs hold, usually 25 to 35 years into the cycle, GDP
experiences near-vertical liftoff (the middle of the S-curve). All current members
of the G7 nations have experienced this previously—for example, Great Britain
rode the steam engine to massive GDP growth in the 19th century, and the
United States did the same with the assembly line in the 20th century.
Over time, as the technology is fully adopted and finds its way into most every
industry and part of the globe, GDP growth wanes (the top of the S-curve). This
is where we are today with the industrial economy of the Third Industrial
Revolution. The model of production is well understood, widely distributed, and
commoditized. (Consider, for example, the nearly 23 million motorcycles
produced in China in 2013.) 7 This top-of-the-curve, flattening-out is what's
behind our current economic malaise.
This S-curve pattern of innovation, stall, rapid expansion, then maturity has
occurred with the previous three industrial revolutions, and to date it's playing
out in the early stages of our computer-driven Fourth Industrial Revolution (as

shown in Figure 2.3 .)
Figure 2.3 S-Curves and Industrial Revolutions
Currently we find ourselves at the end of the stall zone and are entering rapid
expansion. But this situation of being between stages is also why we have such
confusion in today's markets between the optimistic technophiles and the
pessimistic economists. Both groups are right if their aperture is focused on the
past 20 years (which, for most observers, is often simply based on their own
personal experiences). However, in expanding the view over a broader arc of
economic history it becomes very clear as to where we are, where we have been,
and (most importantly) where we are headed.
To reinforce this point, let's take a closer look at recent history and how these
periods fit within Professor Perez's model.
The Burst of Innovation (1980–2000)
The advent of the PC, Steve Jobs's original Mac, Bill Gates becoming the
world's richest person, the Internet explosion, the wiring of our corporations. It
was all so very heady. It was “the time of the great happiness” as remembered in
the technology industry, at least until it all ended in tears with the dot-com
bubble and bust.
Similar bursts of innovation have occurred at the beginning of each industrial
revolution, paving the way for the great fortunes of titans such as Cornelius
Vanderbilt, Andrew Carnegie, and John D. Rockefeller. But this wealth was
highly concentrated because the new technologies and their associated business

highly concentrated, because the new technologies and their associated business
models were understood and implemented by only a few. The public at large
would marvel at the new machine of its age; it would garner lots of press and
capture the collective imagination, yet its reach was still limited and highly
concentrated in a few industries and geographies. Invariably, when too much
capital would start chasing too few implementers, financial bubbles would result.
The Stall (2000–2015)
The Internet bubble burst around the turn of the millennium. Then, roughly
seven years later, the financial crisis hit. And we've been stalled for a decade and
a half. While it all felt new and unpleasantly surprising to us, our recent busts
and malaise have also fit closely with the historical pattern.
This stall zone, while painful to experience, is an important period of change.
Think of it as the gestation period of a new technology, the larva in the cocoon
before it becomes a butterfly, during which the broader economy takes time
figuring out how to best leverage the new machine and business models catch up
with technology innovation.
This is why the FANG vendors, along with unicorns like Dropbox, Airbnb, and
Betterment, are so important; they have provided examples of combining the
new machine with new business models. Probably more important is to look
beyond the FANG vendors to the industrial leaders that have recognized the
shift, such as Siemens, Nike, and Progressive Insurance Corporation. These
enterprises are making moves that will take time to come to full fruition but will
ultimately set them up for success in the digital build-out phase that will follow
the stall. In the coming pages, we will decode many of the important lessons to
be learned from both FANGs and well-established corporations who are
successful early adopters of new machines and business models.
The Build-Out (2015–2040)
This is the phase when innovations move from the radical fringe to the
mainstream. It is the time for the “democratization” of the innovation, as new
ideas, which are initially implemented in very concentrated areas, become much
more widely disseminated.
This will occur over the next few decades, when industries and institutions that
serve as the pillars of our society—banking, insurance, health care, education,
transportation, law enforcement, government—leverage the power of the new
machine and begin to base their operating models on digital technology.

OK, enough of the economic theory. We took this brief trip through history and
economics (summarized in Figure 2.4 ) in order to set the stage for what's
happening to all of us currently and to point out that all of the available evidence
reveals us to be on a path not to the end of times but to the Fourth Industrial
Revolution build-out. Every previous industrial revolution has followed this
same basic cycle of innovation bubble, stall, and boom. The digital revolution is
no exception, and there are three big reasons for why we are about to transition
to widespread, digitally driven growth.
Figure 2.4 The Three Phases of the S-Curve
Three Big Reasons Why a Boom Is About to Occur
A
it th t
iti
t th b ild
t h
ill b d i
b th
ll l

As we see it, the transition to the build-out phase will be driven by three parallel
large-scale trends:
“Ubiquitech”—technology embedded into everything . As the Internet of
Things (IoT) comes to life, almost everything will become tech-infused,
connected, and intelligent. When tech is everywhere, transformation can
come from anywhere.
By 2030 standards, we stink . In 2030, we will look back at many aspects
of today's society and wonder, “How did we tolerate that?” We have big
problems to solve with the new machine, and in the process massive new
forms of demand will be generated.
Becoming digital—mastering the Three M's (raw Materials, new
Machines, and business Models) . Enterprises are “becoming digital,”
organizing their people and processes around the capabilities of the new
machine. Increasingly, the winning new business models are emerging out of
the stall zone, leading to the rearranging of league tables in industry after
industry.
Now let's explore all three of these.
“Ubiquitech”—Technology Embedded into Everything
In the next decade, most everything around us will become tech-enabled and
connected. The “Internet of Things (IoT)” is the catchall phrase that describes
the embedding of computing capability into devices and objects that have
previously not had such capacity, and then the connecting of them to the
Internet. Think of your shoes, thermostat, or hair dryer; your town's streetlamps
and parking meters; and the multiple key components of a jet liner, an assembly
line, or a power grid.
In some cases, this digital “enchantment” is relatively limited. 8 For example, a
light bulb can now contain a sensor that tells the bulb when it is dark, and thus it
turns itself on. In other cases the “thing” is much more sophisticated. An entire
house can be wired so that, in effect, it becomes a networked computer—a
“smart home.” Not only the lights but also doors, windows, temperature, security
features, entertainment systems, and kitchen appliances can all be programmed
to do things automatically. Further, they all can be controlled when the home
owner is five feet—or 5,000 miles—away from home.
The spread of this capability—making every thing Internet Protocol addressable
—is happening at breakneck speed; the scale of the explosion of the “thing”

universe is staggering, and even hard to fully comprehend. For example:
Cisco Systems estimates that the number of connected devices worldwide
will rise to 50 billion by 2020. 9 Intel goes even further, suggesting that over
200 billion devices will be connected by then. 10
McKinsey forecasts that global spending on IoT devices and services could
reach $11 trillion by 2025. 11
With “wearables” constituting an important sub-element of this market, IDC
expects global wearable-device shipments to surge from 76.1 million in 2015
to 173.4 million units by 2019. 12
The smart-home scenario, mentioned above, will be a significant growth
area; according to Harbor Research and Postscapes, it generated $79.4 billion
in revenue in 2014 when it was just in its infancy. 13 That number is expected
to increase to $398 billion as mainstream awareness of smart appliances
rises. 14
The auto industry is becoming “smarter” by the day. Even before cars
become fully autonomous (i.e., “driverless”) they will become more like
increasingly connected rolling data centers. By 2020, 90% of cars will be
online, compared with just 2% in 2012. 15
General Electric estimates that the “Industrial Internet” market will add
between $10 trillion and $15 trillion to global GDP within the next 20 years.
16
Of course, these are all just estimates and should be treated with some degree of
cool skepticism. But whatever the actual numbers turn out to be, there is little
doubt that the trend lines strikingly point in only one direction. The next
generation of smart devices will be hugely significant for nearly every kind of
business.
In reality though, we've only scratched the surface of this “smart” wave. We can
already see texts and our heart rate on an Apple Watch; sure that's cool, but why
can't it do a lot more? Why can't Amazon Alexa manage our whole home? Why
can't Nest smart thermostats monitor the house for leaks and other insurance
risks? In due course, all of these things will happen, and millions of other similar
“smart scenarios” will stop being science fiction and will become, simply, our
reality.
But improvements in entertainment and domestic life won't impact the wider

economy enough to transition us from stall to boom. What is starting to happen
and does have the potential to raise all our boats is the application of IoT ideas to
mission-critical parts of the economy, such as health care, transportation, and
defense. Such a development has begun to radically change work that matters.
We'll look at many more examples of smart devices in Chapter 8 ; for now, just
recognize that soon your default position should be to instrument all of your
operations, products, and customer experiences.
By 2030 Standards, We Stink
Just as we tease our parents and grandparents about the outhouse in the back
yard, black-and-white television sets, and the cars without seatbelts that were
common in their day, our descendants will rib us about how rudimentary and
odd our tools still are today. They will look back on us and wonder, “How on
earth could they live like that?”
If you have very young children, imagine sitting at dinner with them as teenagers
15 years from now, describing the world they were born into. After their giggles
over Justin Bieber, the Kardashians (“What was that all about?”), hipster beards,
and hashtags, the conversation may move on to more pedestrian issues. For
example, you may describe to them what you had to go through to get your car
fixed.
You know the scenario, when you go to the service department of your car
dealership: you sit there with a dozen strangers, sipping the stale coffee,
watching CNN on a TV that's playing about 10 decibels above comfort level.
Your mind starts to wander: “How long will this take? Will I make it back to the
office in time? And do I really trust what the mechanic is about to tell me about
the extent and cost of the repair?” Ten years from now, your car will self-
diagnose exactly what is wrong with it, will give you an estimated cost of the
repair, and then will schedule itself for an appointment at the dealership based on
your calendar. Then, as your car drives itself out of your office's parking lot to
get itself repaired, you will start to think of how much we tolerated, and the
opportunity costs that abounded, in our pre-digital era.
In 2030, those 15-year-olds will wonder how we didn't know days in advance
that we would be coming down with a cold. That every student at school didn't
have a highly pixilated understanding of their personal learning style and a
supporting individualized curriculum to maximize their development. That when
patients arrived at the emergency room they first had to spend time presenting
their insurance card and then sitting in the waiting room instead of having their

g
g
g
personal health history, as well as pictures and videos of their injury, sent ahead
so a team of well-prepared doctors was awaiting them at the door.
Our current industrial-age inefficiencies may feel terrible now, but anyone with
an entrepreneurial bone in their body sees problems and friction as business
opportunities to fix these gaps. New machine-based digital solutions such as
these—multiplied across all industries—will address myriad societal problems,
in the process generating enormous economic value. Rather than presaging the
end of the middle class, technology will help drive massive financial expansion.
The key point is this: in thinking about digital solutions and artificial
intelligence, we often focus on the impact of the technology on the world that we
know. Many critics thus go straight to the “How many jobs will the machine
destroy?” question, yet the question is really about “What can this technology
improve?” The answer is “a tremendous amount,” for in viewing things from a
2030 perspective, it's clear how much is about to change.
To better understand the scope and scale of this opportunity, Cognizant's Center
for the Future of Work, together with economists from Roubini ThoughtLab (a
leading independent macroeconomic research firm founded by renowned
economist Nouriel Roubini) studied 2,000 companies across the globe to
understand the economic impact of the new machine. Our study, conducted in
early 2016, focused on several industries that are central to our economy but
have yet to become truly digital (i.e., retail, banking, insurance [health and
property & casualty] manufacturing, and life sciences), which collectively
generate over $60 trillion in revenue today (roughly 40% of world GDP). 17
Respondents reported that approximately 6% of that revenue was currently
driven by digital but that the figure will nearly double during the next three years
to 11.4%. To put this in perspective, this means the “Republic of Digital,” if it
existed as a separate country, will soon be a $6.6 trillion economy, making it the
third largest economy in the world behind the United States and China and
roughly equal to the economic horsepower of the 2015 economies of Germany,
the UK, and Austria, combined. As work that matters becomes more fully
digitized, leveraging the new AI machines, huge economic expansion is set to
occur.
Becoming Digital: Mastering the Three M's
In looking at the digital economy, the consensus view seems to be that recent
start-ups shall inherit the earth. After all, who can stop the momentum of
relatively young yet already rich and massive companies like Amazon Google

relatively young yet already rich and massive companies like Amazon, Google,
Facebook, and Uber? Where does this leave the 100-year-old companies, or even
the 40-year-old companies? What about them? Actually, in a very good place…
if they move quickly.
In our view, long established companies are extraordinarily well-positioned for
the digital build-out. This is because they already have advantages for taking the
steps required on the next leg of the journey in delivering digital that matters.
They understand their markets, products, and associated regulations better than
anybody. And, per the IoT section, they have all the assets to instrument in order
to gain proprietary insights into their operations and markets. Still, to get there
they must align the Three M's.
The Three M's refer to (raw) materials, (new) machines, and (business) models.
Further along we devote individual chapters examining how each of these
elements is necessary for winning in the coming digital boom. For now, the key
point is that these three elements have to be integrated and aligned to create
value. Why? Let's look at how the combination of these three elements has
driven every major business and technology shift that's come before.
How the Three M's have historically related to each other is illustrated in Figure
2.6 .
In our current context, the Three M's are:
Raw materials: the data generated from IoT devices and instrumentation of
all people, places, and things.
New machines: systems of intelligence that combine hardware, AI software,
data, and human input to create value aligned to a specific business process
or customer experience.
Business models: commercial models that monetize services and solutions
based on systems of intelligence.
Perhaps the best example of aligning the Three M's comes from a company that
is well over 100 years old.
Today, many mythologize Henry Ford as having invented the car. He didn't.
When Ford launched the Ford Motor Company it was actually his third car
company (the first had failed and the second became Cadillac), and he had
dozens of competitors in Detroit alone, including Oldsmobile, Packard, and
Buick.
What Henry Ford did invent, his great gift, was the alignment of the Three M's
of his time with a primary focus on the third; he created a business model based

of his time, with a primary focus on the third; he created a business model based
on the assembly line, which completely changed the price and quality points of
the automobile. Aligning the Three M's allowed Ford to mass-produce cars
(turning them from a toy for the rich into a necessity for the masses), win his
competitive battles, reshape transportation, and reshape society.
In subsequent chapters, we'll discuss how the Three M's will impact your
organization and your work in more detail.
New Business Models Take Shape in the Stall Zone
The stall zone is vitally important because materials and machines are
understood long before the associated business models can adapt.
The starting point for a truly digital business model, or for the specific business
process or customer experience in question, should not be “How do we make it
better/faster/cheaper by adding new technology to it?” Instead, the question
should be “If digital technologies were available when we designed this process,
would we have structured it differently?” The former lens gives you
Blockbuster, which put Internet e-commerce on top of a retail chain network.
The latter lens yields Netflix, which designed core processes as digital from the
ground up.

Figure 2.5 Our Connected World

Figure 2.6 The Three M's in Major Business and Technology Revolutions
General Electric currently stands out as an industrial leader that is undergoing
the hard work of reconfiguring itself around the Three M's for the digital
economy. Incorporated in 1892, GE is the oldest company listed on the New
York Stock Exchange, so you couldn't find a better poster child of an old-school
industrial company. It retains its leadership in manufacturing power turbines, jet
engines, lighting, and locomotives, but it is currently becoming so much more.
GE CEO Jeff Immelt recognized the need to combine data, systems of
intelligence, and new business models to win in the digital industrial economy.
He noted, “If you went to bed last night as an industrial company, you're going
to wake up this morning as a software and analytics company.” 18
Leaders at GE are taking tactical steps to make the shift to the Fourth Industrial
Revolution happen by creating what they refer to as “the world's premier digital
industrial company.” In recent years, they have jumped fully into ubiquitech,
putting sensors into nearly every “thing” they make to generate the new raw
material. GE has invested in building an IoT management platform (Predix),

which is the company's system of intelligence. And GE hasn't overlooked new
business models. It is now selling insights based on the raw material, opening up
entirely new lines of business. In fact, GE now has a software business earning
more than $6 billion in revenue, making it one of the world's largest software
companies. 19
Another example of a 100-year-old industry realigning itself around the Three
M's model, and leveraging the new machine, is education, which certainly is a
pillar of society where progress is badly needed, long overdue, and finally
coming into focus. We met with Joel Rose, co-founder of New Classrooms
Innovation Partners, whose work is a leading indicator of a Three M–aligned
future. Rose is trying with new tools, machines, and attitudes to reinvent a
hidebound industry and mindset seemingly unchanged since long before many of
us were in school.
Developing People of Intelligence with Systems of
Intelligence
The notion of “reinventing education” has a long and bumpy history that
predates the advent of the computer but has certainly accelerated since PCs
found their way into schools during the late 1970s. Space prohibits us from
revisiting too much of that history here, but suffice to say most of it ends
badly!
Launched in 2011 by teachers, education administrators, and technologists,
New Classrooms is essentially leveraging the power of data to tailor
teaching individually and thus break the long-established educational norm:
a teacher standing in front of a class of 30 students, all of them learning the
same material at the same time. That traditional teaching model is literally
an industrial model. Large-scale public education dates from a time when
workers were pouring into factories and mills, and it mirrors the production-
line mentality that was key to efficiency and productivity within those then-
new technology spaces.
In a New Classrooms school, students equipped with laptops or tablets are
placed in groups of typically between 5 and 20, and work through
assignments and projects where they undertake different “modalities” of
learning at “stations” within the classroom; some modalities have the kids
collaborate in teams, some directly with a teacher, some “virtually” with

online software programs. At the stations, teachers interact with the group,
answering questions, setting challenges, or posing new questions. After each
interaction, the group moves on to another assignment and visits new
stations. Whereas a traditional school will have one group of 30 kids interact
in one room with one teacher, a New Classrooms school will have between
two and six teachers as well as additional team educators in a large space or
several classrooms with between 60 and 80 kids circulating amongst the
stations (see Figure 2.7 ).
All the lessons are online (though it should be noted that not all the teaching
happens exclusively through a computer). Most of the grading is done
automatically and in a fraction of the time a human teacher would require,
and by 6 A.M. the following day, each student, along with the associated
teachers, receives a fully individualized learning plan for the day ahead. This
outline is based on the software's analysis of the student's progress: what
needs a do-over, what needs reinforcement, and what new input can be
added to stretch and engage the student.
New Classrooms co-founder Joel Rose says the main issue with the
industrial teaching model is that in a class of 30 students, the three brightest
kids will be bored to death, the 10 least academically gifted will be
hopelessly lost (and perhaps prone to causing mischief), and the kids in the
middle will muddle through, some doing well through inclination (or with
the help of parental carrots and sticks) and some drifting in and out of the
process. In a New Classrooms school, steered by data and machine learning
and platforms, the “no back rows” philosophy of a private academy is made
available to students in a public school environment; no students fall through
the proverbial cracks. The New Classrooms model is thus bringing the
concept of the “democratization of luxury” to life in an arena that is vital to
us all, individually and societally.
The team at New Classrooms is all too conscious of the inertia surrounding
them, but they report the growing numbers of principals, teachers, boards,
and parents who are open to the radical reengineering of both the physical
classroom and the “workflow” of learning.
From Stall to Boom, a Time of Optimism
The three of us have been working at the cutting edge of business and

technology for years. If you ask people who know us, we could hardly be
accused of being naïve or irrationally exuberant about any specific technology.
Even so, we have a sense of optimism based on what we see happening in the
market, among our customers, and from our research. Essentially, this is what
this book is about: getting you to the prosperity found in the coming digital
build-out. The primary thing you need to take away from this chapter is the
necessity of (a) understanding the new machine and (b) situating it in the right
business model. This is the heart of our thesis, and in the coming chapters we
detail (and demystify) each of the Three M's in today's success formula and
explain how they must be activated to move ahead.
Figure 2.7 A Typical New Classrooms Learning Environment
But before we get to that we need to address “the elephant” in our book, the
great concerns we've mentioned that many have about the impact of AI and
automation on jobs.
Notes

1. “March of the Machines,” The Economist , June 25, 2016, p. 11,
http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21701119-what-history-tells-us-
about-future-artificial-intelligenceand-how-society-should .
2. Quoted in Klaus Schwab, The Fourth Industrial Revolution , January 2016,
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Media/KSC_4IR.pdf .
3. Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael Osborne, “The Future of Employment: How
Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?” Oxford Martin Programme on
Technology & Employment, Sept. 17, 2013,
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Empl
.
4. “Technology Isn't Working,” The Economist, Oct. 4, 2014,
http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21621237-digital-revolution-
has-yet-fulfil-its-promise-higher-productivity-and-better .
5. “United States GDP Growth Rate 1947-2016,” Trading Economics,
http://www.tradingeconomics.com/united-states/gdp-growth .
6. Carlota Perez, “The New Technological Revolution,” Presentation at the
Technology Frontiers Forum of The Economist , March 5, 2013,
http://dev1.carlotaperez.org/ .
7. Wikipedia entry on the motorcycle industry in China,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motorcycle_industry_in_China .
8. David Rose, Enchanted Objects: Innovation, Design, and the Future of
Technology (New York: Scribner, 2015),
https://www.amazon.com/Enchanted-Objects-Innovation-Design-
Technology/dp/1476725640 .
9. Dave Evans, “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet
Is Changing Everything,” Cisco, April 2011,
http://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FI
.
10. “A Guide to the Internet of Things,” Intel Corp.,
http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-
things/infographics/guide-to-iot.html .
11. “IoT Market Forecast at $11 Trillion, Report Finds,” InformationWeek, June

29, 2015, http://www.informationweek.com/strategic-cio/digital-business/iot-
market-forecast-at-$11-trillion-report-finds/a/d-id/1321100 .
12. “IDC Expects Global Wearable Device Shipments to Surge from 76.1
Million in 2015 to 173.4 Million Units by 2019,” IDC, Sept. 14, 2015,
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25903815 .
13. Leo Sun, “Internet of Things in 2016: 6 Stats Everyone Should Know,” The
Motley Fool, Jan. 18, 2016,
http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/01/18/internet-of-things-in-
2016-6-stats-everyone-should.aspx .
14. “What Exactly Is the Internet of Things?” March 5, 2014,
http://www.slideshare.net/harborresearch/harborresearch-and-postscapes-
infographic
15. Leo Sun, “Internet of Things in 2016: 6 Stats Everyone Should Know,”
Motley Fool, Jan. 18, 2016,
http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/01/18/internet-of-things-in-
2016-6-stats-everyone-should.aspx .
16. “Industrial Internet Insights Report for 2015,” GE and Accenture, 2014,
http://www.ge.com/digital/sites/default/files/industrial-internet-insights-
report.pdf .
17. Paul Roehrig and Ben Pring, “The Work Ahead: Mastering the Digital
Economy,” September 2016, https://www.cognizant.com/FoW/the-work-
ahead.pdf .
18. “About GE Digital,” GE, https://www.ge.com/digital/about-ge-digital .
19. Rick Clough, “GE Forms Digital Unit to Expand $6 Billion Software
Business,” Bloomberg , Sept. 14, 2015,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-14/ge-forms-digital-unit-
to-expand-6-billion-software-business .

3 
THERE WILL BE BLOOD
So far, our narrative has been generally positive. We believe the new machines
will help us move our companies and our economies from stall to boom. But this
transition won't be without significant disruption in jobs. Metaphorically, there
will be blood.
The rise of the new machine poses a difficult question: Is it a capitalist's dream
or a worker's nightmare? Or both? At the dawn of the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, many people are asking, “How many solid, middle-class office
worker jobs will soon be eliminated?”
This is no abstract consideration, for there's probably a voice inside you
wondering “Will new disruptive technologies take my job away? And, even if
my job is safe, what about the ethical implications of automation sending many
of my colleagues to the unemployment line?”
Predictions of Massive Job Losses via AI
No doubt such concerns have been amplified by recent headlines on the potential
impact of AI on employment. After all, some predict that robotic automation will
eliminate enormous portions of the workforce. Oxford University researchers
have predicted as many as 47% of U.S. jobs could be automated away by 2025. 1
There are about 160 million jobs in the entire U.S. workforce, so the Oxford
prediction would mean roughly 75 million jobs would simply be gone. 2
Extrapolated across the G7 industrialized nations, where there are roughly 368
million jobs, this would mean at least 173 million jobs would be eviscerated by
the new machine within eight years. Such levels of unemployment occurring at
such a pace would lead us to an Elysium -class dystopian future. 3
Of course, some jobs will be automated away, but 173 million G7 jobs by 2025?
We don't think so. 173 million is such a large number it does not pass the smell
test, for that's larger than the entire population of Russia, or the combined
workforces of Germany, the UK, France, Italy, Australia, and Canada.
Take a deep breath. The rise of the new machine is not going to lead to full-scale
revolution in the streets. A lot of jobs, indeed, millions of jobs over time, will be
automated but not at a scale or pace that will create the social dislocation that

automated but not at a scale or pace that will create the social dislocation that
some are predicting (and many more are fearing).
There are literally dozens of studies on this topic, and in reviewing nearly every
one of them over the past three years we have found that the Oxford report takes
the most extreme position. Not surprisingly, it has grabbed most of the headlines
as it has tapped the nerve of insecurity in our slow-growth, stalled economy.
The consensus among the majority of the studies, though, is far less dramatic,
positing a range from around 5% to 15% of jobs being automated away over the
coming 10 to 15 years. Based on our analysis, we believe that the middle of this
range, about 12%, is the most likely scenario.
This level of job dislocation from AI of course is still significant. 12% is the
equivalent of around 19 million jobs in the United States. If one of those jobs is
yours, life will undoubtedly be very tough. However, what's often overlooked in
examining the big picture of employment levels is the growth of new jobs. We
believe that there will be almost 21 million new jobs, about 13% of the current
U.S. labor force, directly created as a result of the growth of the new machine. In
case these numbers—19 million jobs disappearing and 21 million jobs being
created—sound implausible, keep in mind, as a point of reference, that since
2010, during the years of the post–Great Recession recovery, 15 million private
sector jobs have been created in the United States.
Our assumption is that in the industrialized world, for nations that embrace the
Fourth Industrial Revolution, unemployment rates by 2025 will be roughly what
they are today. 4 This relatively small expected change—plus or minus—in the
net unemployment rate will, however, mask huge changes in what work we do
and how we do it. Within the overall labor force, there will be massive job
transition (often creating skills mismatches), and figuring out “what to do”
within this churn is what this book is all about.
The new machine will change the G7 labor force in three distinct ways:
1. Job automation: Roughly 12% of existing jobs are at risk of being taken
over by systems of intelligence.
2. Job enhancement: Roughly 75% of existing jobs will be altered or
enhanced by the bot. The employment will remain, and these jobs will be
delivered with greater output and/or quality.
3. Job creation: 13% net new jobs will be created as the new machine creates
new revenue opportunities and/or new job categories.
In our view any responsible analysis of the impact of the bot on jobs needs to

In our view, any responsible analysis of the impact of the bot on jobs needs to
consider job automation, enhancement, and creation together; new machines
always give as much as they take away.
We believe that the more fearful predictions are based on research that is
incomplete and misinterpreted and is often generated by those who aren't
particularly close to work either inside modern corporations or today's
technology.
In terms of framing this issue for you and your organization, there are four key
considerations that we find to be useful in understanding and explaining what
will really happen to jobs within your industry or business.
Manual vs. knowledge labor: Researchers—and many of us—still view
manual labor and knowledge labor as interchangeable (and therefore
“automatable” in the same way). They are not interchangeable, and therefore
their substitution by machines is different.
Jobs vs. tasks: We tend to look at “jobs” holistically, instead of seeing them
as being composed of their various tasks, some of which can be automated
and others of which will never be automated. In looking at the tasks that
make up a job, we quickly see that some jobs indeed will be replaced by the
machine, but others will be merely altered and enhanced.
Technology as job destroyer and creator: Most analyses look at
automation and technology solely as a job destroyer, but every major
technology shift through history has also led to job creation. Dystopian
visions of the future have been largely fueled by ignoring the growth side of
the equation.
Time: In trying to understand the future, one of the most important variables
is time. This is often overlooked or extended so far out as to make some
predictions meaningless.
Let's look at these four in detail.
Manual vs. Knowledge Labor: As Goes the Factory, So
Goes the Office?
For the past several decades, automation in the industrial economy has been
grand in scale, yielding product improvements, process efficiencies…and horrid
layoffs. Huge factories full of people are now more productive with 80% or 90%
fewer people managing fleets of machines. Robots now make our cars, unload

p
p
g g
,
ships, assemble any number of products, and even vacuum our floors. When the
price was right, the bots took over the work of thousands of physical laborers.
That shift was easy to see, and it was painful in a lot of ways. The three of us as
authors were all raised in towns that stood as industrial leaders in the 1960s, but
which had become economically depressed by the 1990s. At a human level this
transition was nothing short of brutal and provided harsh truths about economics
and technology. In fact, the manufacturing robot improved efficiency and
boosted quality. Those jobs are gone, and they won't come back. As such, many
are drawing a parallel between the blue-collar labor collapse of Detroit and a
similar impending white-collar labor collapse in places like London, New York,
and Los Angeles.
However, drawing such parallels has limitations, for manual labor and
knowledge labor have very different attributes and, as such, the automation of
them is substantially different. An old aphorism is instructive in this regard:
If I give you a dollar, then you are a dollar richer and I am a dollar poorer.
But if I give you an idea we are both richer, for now we both have the idea
and your reaction to it has made it more valuable to me.
Putting a lug nut on an automobile chassis, whether done by hand or machine, is
done once and then there's no going back to it. Additionally, this task is the same
every time it's conducted. However, knowledge automation is different, for often
the atomic unit of “knowledge” can be reused many times and continually
“enriched” to become more valuable over time.
As an example of this, think back to the newspapers of a generation ago. These
were true one-to-many offers, as all of us received the same newsprint each
morning. As such, because those knowledge products arrived in a physical form
we thought of them as being similar to that lug nut.
However, now think of the highly personalized news feeds received online
today; your local news, weather, sports scores, stock portfolio, and traffic
information. All at your request, at any time or place. Think of the permutations
involved in generating such customized, curated experiences. In a mid-sized city
of 500,000 people, simply delivering the personalized needs across the five basic
news variables (news, weather, sports, stocks, traffic) would yield 3.1228
permutations alone! Obviously, it's a mathematical impossibility to think that the
newsroom of old could even begin to consider delivering personalized news to
everybody in town. Yet today, bots, by recombining all of those units of
knowledge work, can do this effortlessly (and we show how they do this in more

detail in Chapter 7 ). Therefore, automation of knowledge assets is not zero-sum,
in that it's not just a matter of removing existing labor. It is also allowing for
more throughput, and this often manifests itself as a level of mass customization
that was impossible before systems of intelligence.
This phenomenon—the codification, recombination, and repurposing—of
knowledge assets has broad implications. In the coming pages, we examine how
it will impact core processes in your business (within sales, human resources,
supply chain management, or finance) to both streamline them and to greatly
increase throughput, quality, personalization, and overall capability.
The point is, knowledge work is very different from manual labor. When the bot
is applied to knowledge processes, even for the explicit purpose of automation,
the underlying knowledge assets become richer and can be used (and reused) in
interesting and productive ways. As such, the envelope of work potential (and
corresponding output) is usually expanded, thus removing the one-to-one work
substitution that occurred with the automation of manual labor.
Don't Confuse Jobs with Tasks
Related to this is the second flaw that most of the doomsday analyses share: they
fail to make the crucial distinction between “jobs” and “tasks.” These studies
tend to view “jobs” in a binary sense (i.e., “they will be automated away” or
“they will not be automated away”). That's far too simplistic; any knowledge job
is a collection of tasks. Some of these tasks are ripe for automation, while others
never will be. In the vast majority of cases, portions of a job will be impacted or
replaced by the bot, while other portions of it will be untouched or even
enhanced.
Consider Tamara, an accountant laboring in your company's accounting
department. Her job consists of dozens of tasks, some of the primary ones being:
Documenting financial transactions
Preparing asset, liability, and account entries
Preparing tax filings
Auditing transactions and financial statements
Recommending corporate policies and procedures
Reconciling financial discrepancies

Creating profit and loss statements
Creating balance sheets
Providing strategic counsel
Pursuing data integrity
Some of these tasks will be automated away with the use of the new machine or
made dramatically more efficient by them, but not all of them. Tamara's job will
change, but it will not go away completely. To imagine that the entire profession
of accounting will in short order disappear and be replaced by software is to fall
prey to the trap of over-extrapolating how and how fast technology changes
things in the real world.
One of the best analyses of machine-based job displacement has been
undertaken by Forrester Research, which has taken the “task-based” vs. “job-
based” approach. In many cases, “robotic process automation” will eliminate
only portions of a job, most often the ones humans find to be drudgery. Thus, in
many cases 20% of the routine—and highly boring—portions of a job go to the
machine.
Forrester puts it like this:
The greatest change to the workforce…will be in job transformation—that
is, occupations in which 25% or more tasks are automated, leading to
redeployment and responsibility-shifting on the part of the worker. In 1992,
cable TV technicians had a relatively simple job: connecting coaxial cable
to a pole and into households. Since then, their job tasks have expanded to
include Internet service, wireless routers for Internet, voice-over-IP (VoIP)
telephony, and even home security installation. With each new task, the
overall composition of the job transformed, even requiring the technician to
log into your PC to activate services—a new skill set for sure. Similarly,
we'll see jobs transformed across all categories…. 5
Figure 3.1 highlights the percentage of job tasks that will be impacted by the
machine, not necessarily replaced by the machine.
For example, the findings are not claiming that 92% of management, business,
and finance jobs will disappear by 2022. Instead, they are asserting that 92% of
the “workflows, processes, and metrics” in those job types will be changed by
the new machine. In cases where a specific job has too many tasks
“cannibalized” by AI, the job can, in fact, disappear completely. This accounts
for the 12% of jobs that will be automated away.

Figure 3.1 Cumulative Percentage of Job Tasks Cannibalized (Absent
Secular CAGR)
Such a task-based analysis (by vocation) starts to paint a much more realistic
picture of the machine-generated transformation of work, and it has three
important elements:
Time: Forrester's findings still show a significant near-term impact, but they
are not suggesting the end of employment as we know it during the next few
years. Also, each worker can see the steady impact of automation in his or
her chosen field. Seeing the transition provides both a personal roadmap and
some time to adapt or to develop new skills.
Eliminating rote work: Automating 50% of a job may not be a bad thing.

As we explore in the coming pages, in many cases this automation is focused
on rote, non–value added activities (e.g., the manual grading of homework
by a school teacher). When workers are liberated from such activities, how
can they then reinvest their time?
Performance growth: Job performance can then be enhanced. The worker
can double down on the more human elements of the job, double output, or
greatly increase quality of delivery. For example, automation won't make a
teacher disappear; instead it can make that teacher much more effective.
Don't Overlook the Job-Growth Story
This atomic-level view of a job and its associated tasks has provided a
foundation for our AHEAD model. Will some jobs be automated away by AI?
Yes, of course. But far more will be enhanced, and in time millions more new
jobs will be discovered, driving future employment. Our confidence in these
predictions is not based just on the capability of the new machine in the present;
we have seen this movie before—automation is really the story of business.
Today, we are all great beneficiaries of industrial-age automation. The creature
comforts many of us enjoy—the cars we drive, the TVs we watch, the computers
we use, the appliances in our kitchen, the clothes we wear, the flights we take,
the food we eat, and the entertainment we enjoy—are all delivered at a
price/performance ratio unimaginable just a few generations ago. After all, look
no further than your 60-inch flat-screen high-definition TV, which, in real terms,
costs one-third the price of the old 19-inch RCA that graced your parents' den.
All of these goods and services are the direct result of automation. However, any
mention of the word “automation” in 2017 is frequently met with a negative—
and sometimes viscerally negative—reaction. Many seem to forget that
throughout history, automation has provided a net benefit to society. In the
process of automating our work and our society, through generation after
generation, three positive things have repeatedly occurred:
1. A new abundance has been created; sales of products and services produced
by automation—now vastly more affordable and of higher quality—
skyrocket.
2. With the new abundance, overall employment rises, even when there is less
labor input per unit.
3. Society gains a net benefit, with higher living standards created by newly

affordable products and services.
Each time a new form of automation is introduced, there is consternation and
anxiety. After all, in the moment we often cannot yet see the new abundance, the
growth of overall employment, and the net societal benefit, but we certainly
recognize the initial job losses. This process of automation, initially cursed and
then ultimately lauded, has repeated itself with great consistency.
Think of the steamboat, the locomotive, and the assembly line. With the
introduction of each new technology, vested interests were threatened and
business as usual was upended. This was the story of the aforementioned
Luddites. In the context of the moment, their arguments had merit. Yet in the
context of history, as we recognize how the loom clothed the world, established
a foundation for global trade, initiated the growth of a large middle class, and
launched various related industries, the Luddites were wrong.
Automation is a deep and unstoppable force. Automation of your core processes
is a key first step for you and your organization to gain a deep operational
understanding of the new machine, and to unlock its potential for future bounty.
Don't allow Luddite thinking to remove those opportunities.
This may sound like the 30,000-foot theory, but it has a very practical
application. As a manager, in considering automating jobs within your company,
these four considerations should be useful. After all, if one is afraid to automate
some internal jobs away, then, in time, all jobs at the company may be
jeopardized (given that the company will become noncompetitive on cost).
Additionally, the jobs that can potentially be enhanced by automation won't
come to fruition, and new offers with their associated jobs won't come to market.
The new machine will be painful for some to accept, but this shift is inevitable;
if we manage it wisely, it will ultimately be positive for our companies and our
societies.
The Pace of This Transition
Our prediction is that AI will impact nearly 100% of knowledge jobs, while
completely eliminating approximately 12% of them. But the key question is
“When?”
AI will eat existing jobs in a “slowly, slowly, suddenly” manner. Certain tasks
will quietly and increasingly become automated and will then hit a potential
tipping point that will fundamentally impact the very nature of certain jobs (such
th 50%
ib li
ti
i t i th F
t
d l) Thi t
iti
ill

as the 50% cannibalization point in the Forrester model). This transition will
follow the pattern of technology adoption outlined by Bill Gates in that “We
always overestimate the change that will occur in the next two years and
underestimate the change that will occur in the next ten.”
Consequently, it's easy to believe both sides of the job dislocation argument. In
taking a short-term view (of the next three years) one can think “No way our
accounting department will be automated away.” Yet, in understanding the
capabilities of AI platforms, one can take a 15-year view and think, “No way we
will have more than a handful of people processing accounts receivables by
2030.”
The key for setting a realistic timeframe lies in (a) the task-based view of work
and (b) the value of the remaining human element. In looking at these two
variables we can start to make solid predictions as to how quickly the bot will
eat a certain profession.
Getting AHEAD in a Time of Churn
In concluding this examination of the job-destroying nature of the new machine,
the perspective we've outlined provides a basis for the remainder of this book. In
the coming chapters we explore the practical applications of these dynamics and
what they will mean for you and your organization. In Chapter 7 we examine
automation in depth, looking at specific processes, functions, and jobs within
your company that are particularly ripe to be taken over by the new machine. In
reading this chapter, you may think, “Hmm, Tamara in accounting is in trouble if
she doesn't respond quickly.” In Chapter 9 we outline the jobs that will be
protected and enhanced. In Chapters 10 and 11 we look to net-new job creation
through the new abundance and a process of invention and discovery.
However, before we get to determining the future of work, we need to take a
deeper look at the new machine that's driving all of this change.
Notes
1. Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael A. Osborne, “The Future of Employment:
How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation?” University of Oxford, Sept.
17, 2013,
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Empl
.

2. Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey,
http://data.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet?
request_action=wh&graph_name=LN_cpsbref1
3. The 2013 science fiction film Elysium (directed by Neill Blomkamp) depicts
humanity divided between two classes of people: the ultra-rich living aboard
a luxurious space station called Elysium, and the rest living a hardscrabble
existence in Earth's ruins.
4. See Barack Obama, “The Way Ahead,” The Economist , Oct, 8, 2016,
http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21708216-americas-president-
writes-us-about-four-crucial-areas-unfinished-business-economic .
5. “The Future of Jobs, 2025: Working Side by Side with Robots: Automation
Won't Destroy All the Jobs, But It Will Transform the Workforce—Including
Yours,” Aug. 24, 2015,
https://www.forrester.com/The+Future+Of+Jobs+2025+Working+Side+By+S
/E-RES119861

4 
THE NEW MACHINE 
SYSTEMS OF INTELLIGENCE
Perhaps you sometimes wonder the same things we do: “How can Uber instantly
connect me to a car when I'm on a random street corner some 500 miles from
home and then automatically bill my credit card, send me an invoice, and
capture my passenger rating in seconds?” “How can I be watching a YouTube
video on a mobile device while moving at 130 mph on a train?”
These two experiences, moments of “magic” that have become almost mundane,
would have been impossible even a few years ago. What's surprising is that Uber
and YouTube, in spite of offering dissimilar services, both run their operations
on a “machine” with essentially the same components. This new machine, what
we call “a system of intelligence,” is rapidly becoming the cornerstone for
companies that compete on knowledge. It sits at the center of Facebook,
Instagram, Google, e*Trade, Betterment, and all the other examples of today's
digital leaders.
Yet, for all its importance, the new machine is still largely misunderstood. Most
of us actively consume the output of these systems of intelligence without
slowing down to think about how such real-time, personalized, and curated
experiences are actually created and delivered.
To that end, in this chapter we will explain what these new machines are—what
the technology components are, how they fit together, what a good one looks
like, what they mean to enterprise work, and how they will profoundly impact
the future of your work.
We know; this overview may seem akin to when you were learning to drive as a
teen and your uncle popped the hood on the car, and started to explain exactly
how everything worked. Some of the lesson can be dry (e.g., “this is the
carburetor; these are the spark plugs”), but as we now consume these systems of
intelligence on a continual basis and need to build and implement them in our
own companies to seize competitive advantage, a working knowledge is
important.
Defining the New Machine

Let's start with a simple definition; then we'll unpack it a bit.
A system of intelligence combines software (algorithms, business rules,
machine-learning code, predictive analytics), hardware (servers, sensors,
mobile devices, connectivity), data (contextualized and real-time), and
human input (often judgment or questions).
This may sound like “a bunch of hardware, software, and data is combined, and
then a miracle occurs.” So let's touch on the three key attributes that make a
system of intelligence so special:
Software that learns: The software at the core of the new machine is like
nothing we've seen before. For the first time in human history we have a tool
that can make itself. With machine-learning software, these systems improve
on their own over time. The system learns how to recognize patterns and
how to find hidden insights in the data, all without being explicitly
programmed on what to do or where to look. This is the way, for example,
Uber knows how to match the right driver with the right passenger or how
Facebook populates your personalized News Feed. There are few humans at
these companies figuring these things out. That would be impossible as, in
the case of Facebook for example, there are more than one billion daily
customer logins. 1 Instead, the machine learns about each and every one of
those sessions, continually getting smarter.
Massive hardware processing power: During the past several decades,
we've seen the power of hardware technology increase exponentially. No
other innovation in history has both improved and diffused this rapidly.
Moore's Law, which finds that the number of transistors on a chip (and
therefore processing power) doubles approximately every two years, persists
in spite of having recently celebrated its 50th birthday. But lately, this has
been turbocharged by the cloud, which enables hyper-powerful computers to
be tied together. By way of comparison, a muscle car may have impressive
horsepower, such as the 435 horses under the hood of a Ford Mustang GT,
but you cannot glue two Mustangs together to go twice the speed. By
contrast, with cloud computing one can tap into multiple computers to get
blazing-fast performance. Thus, each time you use Google, Facebook, or
Amazon, you are tapping into their hardware farms of connected, super-fast
servers.
Huge amounts of data: Data is the fuel of the new economy. Relate this fact

to the taxi dispatcher example cited previously. In the good old days of, say,
2012, maybe three points of “data” about your ride would be captured: a
record of your phone call requesting the cab, the handwritten notes of the
dispatcher and the driver, and your payment details. (Of course, rarely if ever
would these manual records be reviewed or analyzed.) Compare that with a
typical Uber ride, which will capture data on your request, location, time,
route taken, device used, payment and tip, driver, passenger, driver rating,
and passenger rating. And then multiply that by the more than two billion
rides taken (through mid 2016) via Uber.
In short, these three special features—software that learns, massive processing
power, and enormous amounts of data—are combining to bring systems of
intelligence to life. (As an aside, in some circles, these are now being referred to
as software “platforms”; for clarity and consistency, we will refer to them as
systems of intelligence). Further along in the chapter, we will outline how these
pieces all fit together. Before we get there, it's useful to provide some definitions
on the most controversial and misunderstood part of the machine—artificial
intelligence.
Artificial Intelligence: Why a Narrow View Is Best
The term “artificial intelligence” has become so overused that it's actually
causing more confusion than clarity. There are many definitions in the market,
and almost all of them emphasize a comparison to humans. Such definitions—
for example, Merriam-Webster's (“the capability of a machine to imitate
intelligent human behavior”)—immediately send many of us down the wrong
path, for we start thinking, “What human intelligence can and will be imitated?”
We think this is wrong.
Our definition is simpler:
AI is an area of computer science that focuses on machines that learn.
It's that clear-cut. The anthropomorphically biased definitions of AI are wrong
for two basic reasons:
1. AI that creates business results will focus on what machines do really well,
rather than trying to replicate what humans already do well.
2. Humans have long ago proven themselves to be imperfect “machines” (just
watch the six o'clock news). It seems a bit narcissistic that the design-point

of the new machine should be that of a human.
Thus, AI is not about building robots that ape human form and behavior. Instead,
practically applied AI represents the next generation of computer systems that,
like the systems of old, are housed in air-conditioned computer rooms and
accessed through networks and systems (like those apps on your smartphone)
that you may not see but consume on a regular basis.
But such a definition is only the beginning. We've found it very helpful in slicing
through the definitional clutter to divide AI into three subsets: 2
1. Narrow AI
2. General AI
3. Super AI
Narrow AI, which is also referred to as “applied AI” or “weak AI,” is our
default definition for this book. It is important to note that all AI today—and for
at least the next decade—is narrow (also termed “artificial narrow intelligence”
or ANI). Such AI is purpose-built and business-focused on a specific task (e.g.,
driving a car, reviewing an X-ray, or tracking financial trades for fraud) within
the “narrow” context of a product, service, or business process. It's what the
FANG vendors utilize today in delivering their digital experiences. Thus, while
it appears that the new machines can do everything, they actually focus on doing
just one particular thing very well. As such, these ANI systems would be
hopeless in any pursuits beyond those for which they were specifically designed
(just ask your Waze GPS if that onion bagel with cream cheese fits your current
diet). ANI is simply a tool, albeit a very powerful one, that provides the basis for
all we will explore in the coming pages.
General AI, also referred to as “strong AI” or AGI, is what is fueling the fears
of the Singularity crowd, and has been highlighted in the previously referenced
films Her and Ex Machina. 3 Strong AI is the pursuit of a machine that has the
same general intelligence as a human. For example, just as you in a span of a
few moments can discuss politics, tell a joke, and then hit a golf ball 150 yards,
the AGI computer will have the general intelligence to perform these activities
as well.
Ben Goertzel, Chairman of the Artificial General Intelligence Society, points to
the Coffee Test as a good definition for AGI. That is, “Go into an average
American house and figure out how to make coffee, including identifying the
coffee machine, figuring out what the buttons do, finding the coffee in the

cabinet, etc.” 4 This set of tasks that is seemingly easy for almost any adult to
perform is currently insanely difficult for a computer. Creating AGI is a
dramatically harder task than creating ANI; by most estimates we are still more
than two decades away from developing such AI capabilities, if ever.
That said, it's easy to scare ourselves with general AI for two reasons, one
practical and the other theoretical. On the practical front, we see examples today
of narrow AI that appear to be general AI. This might be your Amazon Alexa
home appliance, which passes the Turing test (of acting in a way that's
indistinguishable from a human). It may feel as though it's moving toward AGI,
but it's actually just a brilliantly elegant vocal interface to the Internet search
capacity we've known for over 15 years.
On the theoretical front, computer scientists look at the human as a machine in
and of itself—one with very distinct limitations. Human IQs generally range
from 80 to 150, an incredibly small scope in computing terms. If AGI becomes a
possibility from a software standpoint, why would we limit a machine's
“intelligence” to, say, an IQ of 150? Why not 300 or 3,000 or 30,000? None of
us would even begin to understand what such an IQ would be or could do, but
when it's a simple matter of stringing together more servers in the cloud to add
more processing power, where would this take us?
This leads to the third definition. Super AI , in essence, is the technical genie
being let out of the bottle. In such a scenario, would humans even know how to
stop such a machine? It would run circles around our collective intellect (and, as
we know, whenever 10 reasonably smart people are put in a room, the collective
IQ is not 1,200 but actually somewhere around 95 once one accounts for the
different opinions and objectives that people always bring). How could we then
turn the machine off when it's always 10 (or 1,000) steps ahead of us?
This is interesting stuff, particularly for cocktail party conversations. Yet, to
reiterate, based on our research, a post-Singularity future with super AI-based
Terminators running amok is a mirage. Serious people—the people building
these systems today—are quite modest about whether such scenarios are even
possible in the next 100 years, much less in the next 5 to 10. Andrew Ng, the
chief scientist at Baidu Research, put it succinctly when he said that “worrying
about [general or super] AI is like worrying about overpopulation on Mars
before we've even set foot on it.” 5
Thus, our focus in this book is specifically on ANI because here, in the real
world, we are more concerned about effective tool use for good business
outcomes in the modern enterprise. Although some will continue fretting away,

outcomes in the modern enterprise. Although some will continue fretting away,
worrying about such things as super AI, their competitors will put them out of
business with practical applications of narrow AI. With that as a definition of AI,
let's go deeper into the new machine.
Meet the Machine: Anatomy of a System of Intelligence
Each system of intelligence can do vastly different things, but they all share a
similar basic anatomy. In fact, if you are familiar with enterprise technology and
the prior generation of systems of record (such as ERP and CRM systems), many
of the constituent parts will seem familiar. After all, the technology “stacks” of
systems of record and systems of intelligence share many common elements,
such as user interfaces, application logic, process flows, databases, and
infrastructure.
However, critical differences exist up and down each layer of the stack, the most
important focusing on the three distinguishing characteristics of the new
machine highlighted earlier: systems that learn, massive processing power, and
huge amounts of data. In Figure 4.1 we highlight several of the key differences
at each layer of the software stack. Next, we'll work top-down through the
various components

Figure 4.1 Systems of Record vs. Systems of Intelligence

Figure 4.2 Anatomy of a System of Intelligence
common to every system of intelligence as shown in Figure 4.2 .
Users, Customers, and Employees
Regardless of how digitized our world becomes, this shift is primarily oriented
around people; that is, us—carbon-based life forms without an on/off switch.

Thus, with successful digital solutions, the more technical they are, the more
human they feel. The best digital solutions don't slow us down; instead, they get
out of the way, seamlessly helping us to achieve our end goals. We don't want to
learn the systems, we just want the results. With the Waze app, it's how to get
somewhere by the fastest possible route; with GE's Predix platform, it's the
status of our windmill farm; with the Lex Machina legal analytics service, it's the
track record of a particular judge. The machines may be able to do amazing
things, but the trait we've seen successful systems share is that they put the
human experience at the center of the design. Oftentimes, even in the most
automated, seemingly AI-rich environments, there is still a considerable amount
of human intervention involved.
The App Interface
In our personal lives, we think of Netflix, Strava, LinkedIn, and so on as “apps.”
Most of us don't even call them “software” anymore. What you touch, the
content you share, the information or insight you get—all of this flows through
the app (or the application layer), which is the front door to the rest of the new
machine. For years, you've downloaded apps onto your PC, your smartphone, or
your tablet, and now they are being embedded into industrial machines (such as
cars). What's essential here is that it's the app that frames our experience. The
rest of the system of intelligence, if it's any good, is invisible to us.
Additionally, as we outlined in our book Code Halos, the app has to provide a
beautiful experience for users. The app has to hit the FANG benchmark for
elegance and ease of use. This explains the explosion of “design thinking” in
corporate IT circles, given that these interfaces must fit the way in which your
customers, partners, and employees wish to use them in the midst of their
activities. (No owner's manuals or user training allowed!) The key to success
here is that the app interface must be simple and intuitive, seamlessly fitting into
the context of the user's needs.
The AI “Innards”
Beyond all the hype, ANI is modern, complex, adaptive software that is the
essential core of a system of intelligence. What we think of as AI really
comprises three main elements:
1. Digital process logic: Whenever we log onto a system of intelligence, we
are engaging in a process: booking a car, processing an insurance claim,
making a financial trade, or checking the status of an MRI machine. There's

nothing terribly new here. An IT consultant from 1990 would recognize the
technical portions managing the process flows in a system of intelligence.
What is revolutionary is that systems of intelligence transform many manual
processes into automated ones. Think again of the Uber versus taxi example.
The car-dispatch process for a traditional taxi company is manual (e.g.,
customer calls in, agent informs dispatcher, dispatcher radios the appropriate
cabbie, etc.). At Uber, that entire chain is automated. When that digitized
process is multiplied over millions of transactions, an industry is
revolutionized. We outline how to do this in the second half of the book. But
for now, the key point is that while the technology that runs the process layer
of a system of intelligence is rather simple, getting the underlying process
structured properly is very hard work.
2. Machine intelligence: This is what's genuinely new and different about the
technology of the new machine. Through a combination of algorithms,
automation processes, machine learning, and neural networks, the system
mimics “learning” through experience, which is really just a richer data set.
This is how it can automate work processes (e.g., reading an X-ray), instruct
an employee on the next best action (e.g., a salesperson knowing the precise
pricing that will most likely close the next deal), and recognize market trends
that will lead to the next breakthrough product. The internal “clockworks”
(the software mechanism inside the system of intelligence) is machine
intelligence, the true heart of AI. When viewed this way, it's not scary,
arcane, or hopelessly complex. Don't get us wrong; we're not trivializing the
technical complexity of creating these works. But it's not anything mystical
either. For all the talk of a “ghost in the machine,” 6 in the real world, that's
merely applied ANI. It's nothing more and certainly nothing less, because in
the corpus of the new machine, AI is the heart.
3. Software ecosystem: Our apparently magical experiences with systems of
intelligence may appear seamless, but we are never interacting with one
piece of software. These systems are usually made up of an ecosystem of
dozens of other tools connected by application programming interfaces
(APIs) that are bits of software that link one tool to another like Lego blocks.
Uber, for example, leverages a rich fabric of tools, including Twilio for
cloud-based communications, Google for maps, Braintree for payments,
SendGrid for e-mail, and so on. We each have an elegant personal
experience thanks to the Uber software interface, but we are actually
engaging with an entire ecosystem of tools and services.
This is a business book for a technical age. We're not going to go into the ins and

This is a business book for a technical age. We re not going to go into the ins and
outs of the specific technologies that comprise today's artificial intelligence. We
could write an entire second book on machine learning, deep learning, and
neural networks (these are the hot topics in leading universities around the
world), but candidly that would be redundant because there are some terrific
learning resources in the market already.
Data from Things and Systems of Record
The inputs to the new machine are many and varied. Some will be mature, ERP-
based systems; some will be real-time data pouring in from instrumentation—the
Code Halos of data surrounding products, people, and places—that is continually
informing this nerve center as to what is going on all around it. Over time, these
inputs will evolve, sometimes both quickly and radically. All those inputs are
responsible for creating that contextualized, highly valuable data. Without those
new data sources, it will be difficult to build or fuel your new machines. Sensors
in mobile devices, apparel, sporting equipment, cars, roads, and virtually every
other physical entity will be responsible for generating the information—the
code. Connecting those sensors to a system of intelligence is the Internet of
Things coming to life.
Data may seem like a weightless abstraction. (If you're interested, all the
electrons in the Internet together apparently weigh about as much as two
strawberries.) 7 So while it doesn't weigh much, data has a huge amount of value
when it's deployed in the right place at the right time. Massive amounts of data
must be captured, stored, maintained, analyzed, and made accessible. That's why
we need large database systems that that are stable, scalable, and tested (no
matter how cool the shiny new tools may seem). A new generation of databases
(e.g., Hadoop) are finding favor, but Oracle and SAP, with a combined customer
base of more than 740,000 companies, are not going anywhere. Neither are IBM,
Microsoft, or any of the other major enterprise software “arms dealers.” In the
digital economy, we'll still need high-quality systems of record (both traditional
and emerging ones) as much as we need our AC power grid.
Infrastructure
As with any machine on a factory shop floor, the new machine needs power and
“plumbing.” Infrastructure includes all the networking, servers, power sources,
and so forth that make the machine hum. For existing systems, many of the
elements are already managed either directly by the IT department, by an
external service provider, or—more common now—by a cloud provider. Mobile
ki
ll
i
j
i
i i
i
F
i

networking, generally running on a major carrier, is imperative. For computing
power, regardless of whether your system is running on Amazon's servers,
somewhere in the Googleplex, or in your own data center, systems of
intelligence all need highly efficient, always-on plumbing.
Systems of Intelligence in Action
The “anatomy” of the new machine can seem somewhat abstract unless the parts
are linked together into actual new machines visible in the real world that we
conceptually understand. Much has already been said about Netflix, but our take
is different. Because we are all familiar with the media-streaming platform, it
provides a great illustration of how a company that is leveraging the new
machine, the new raw materials, and a business model oriented around them is
upending business as usual.
The Machine That Is Netflix (Thanks to AI)
As of 2016, Netflix represented about 35% of all Internet traffic in North
America and has the incumbent TV networks in quite a spin. 8 By dissecting
Netflix a bit, we can see the anatomy of the new machine in action. (See Figure
4.3 .)
Figure 4.3 The Anatomy of the Netflix System of Intelligence
Anatomy
Element
How It Works (continued )
Users/Customers This is all of us as consumers. Netflix now has about 75
million subscribers worldwide (and growing), and we all want
what we want (and we want it now, on every device, always).
14
The App
Most of us experience Netflix as an app. Regardless of where
we are or the hardware we use—tablet, mobile device, laptop,
set-top box, or VR headset—the only part of the Netflix
system of engagement we touch is the app that connects us to
Orange Is the New Black (and many more).
Process Logic
Do you remember using the print TV Guide to find out what
was on television and then having to time your life around
when a show was airing? Um, neither do we. In those bygone
days, there was really only one process for consuming media
via television or movie screen and it wasn't great Now of

via television or movie screen, and it wasn t great. Now, of
course, whether we are watching on a mobile device on the
road or next to our loved ones at home, Netflix provides
content in an almost infinite set of variations. It seems so
simple now. Of course we can watch House of Cards at any
time on a train going 130 mph! But it feels seamless and
frictionless because Netflix has thoughtfully adapted its entire
system to the way we want to consume content.
Machine
Learning
Netflix's recommendation engine—basically, a set of
algorithms that connect us to content we want—is the most
well-known element of the Netflix AI system, but the whole
engine is actually much more than that. 15 The core of the
Netflix experience connects us to content, distinguishes
between family members, and processes billions of events a
day related to movies, viewers, payments, and the like. More
important, the platform improves over time. As we use it
more, it learns about our tastes and serves up the best content
available in a highly personalized way. It can distinguish
between what we say we like and what we actually like.
(Note, for example, that Adam Sandler's The Ridiculous Six is
rated a middling three stars by Netflix users, but in January
2016 was the most watched Netflix program in history.) 16
The core of the Netflix system is a remarkable piece of
software design and engineering, which, because it is so
good, is nearly invisible.
Software
Ecosystem
Netflix relies on connections to dozens of other systems to
bring us Orphan Black and The Walking Dead (two of the
most binge-watched shows). 17 The Netflix team emphasizes
open-source software tools such as Java, MySQL, Hadoop,
and others. Content distribution is supported by tools like
Akamai, Limelight, and Level 3 Communications. It also
relies heavily on Amazon's cloud systems for storage. 18 The
point here is not the specific tools Netflix uses but that the
company realized early on that it would need to build certain
elements of its overall system and that it also could leverage
other best-in-class systems to grow faster.
Sensors/Internet
of Things
Netflix engages with us—both providing content and
collecting data
via our devices but it also learns about us

of Things
collecting data—via our devices, but it also learns about us
via the many sensors and data associated with these devices.
Other sensors are starting to matter to Netflix. For example, it
is exploring ways to connect to Fitbits and even socks to
monitor if we've fallen asleep. 19
Data
The Netflix data warehouse stores about 10 petabytes of
information. 20 (One petabyte is equivalent to 13.3 years of
streaming HD-TV video. 21 ) With all that data flowing
through the AI engine, Netflix knows you. We're sorry if that
creeps you out, but it tracks the movies we watch, our
searches, ratings, when we watch, where we watch, what
devices we use, and more. 22 In addition to machine data,
Netflix algorithms churn through massive amounts of movie
data that is derived from large groups of trained movie
taggers. (Netflix isn't saying, but the best guess is that it is
applying more than 76,000 genres to categorize movies and
TV shows. 23 )
Systems of
Record
There's no way to manage the vast reams of Netflix data
without an absolutely top-notch architecture. Netflix started
with Oracle, but has moved over to an open-source database
called Cassandra. It uses Hadoop for data processing and
Amazon S3 for storage. 24 It also links to back-end payment
systems so nothing can interfere with our next purchase.
Infrastructure
Amazon inside! As of February 2016, all of the infrastructure
services Netflix requires are provided by Amazon Web
Services. 25 (Anyone still waiting for the cloud to “mature” is
probably tripping over the stretchy cord on his or her phone at
this point.)
What Does “Good” Look Like? Attributes of a
Successful System of Intelligence
There's a big difference between merely having all the necessary ingredients of
the new machines and actually getting them to perform at a high level. A system
of intelligence that can help you be the Usain Bolt of whatever race you're in
will have all or most of these characteristics:

Smart, not dumb: Effective new machines get better—more powerful and
valuable—as they scale. One true test of good AI is that as data flows in, it's
smarter tomorrow than today. In every case, the best systems of intelligence
suck up data from a wide variety of sources, which helps achieve the data
mass required to derive insights and create personalized experiences. Today's
digital masters recognize that ultimately, “it's all about the data.”
Open, not closed: Systems of intelligence that achieve their full potential are
generally more open than closed. Think of Tesla giving away its patents and
Uber with its open APIs; both of these policies have helped generate new
solutions built on the companies' AI cogs and gears. One of the most striking
current examples of this is the competition between Amazon and
Walmart.com . In many respects, using the system anatomy we have outlined
in this chapter, the two look quite similar. And the customer experience
through their respective apps is, give or take 10%, pretty much the same. Yet
viewed through the lens of APIs, the companies couldn't look more different.
Amazon has more than 325 API mash-ups that open up its platform to others.
Walmart, Target, Macy's, and Sears all had three or fewer as of September
2015. 9 Openness is necessary for digital success, because a fully fleshed-out
ecosystem will be more powerful than a closed development environment.
Smart hands, not just bots: Most successful ANI systems include people.
One of the most common mistakes that we've observed on our travels occurs
when companies try to completely dispense with the human element. 10
There are lots of things that machines simply cannot do as well as we can (at
least within the timeframe of a meaningful business decision). Game-
changing systems of intelligence are built around the integration of AI with
humans by combining the best of what computers do with the best of what
humans do. (More about AI “enhancement” is provided in Chapter 9 .) Some
AI experiments, such as the robot hotel concierge, which attempt to mimic
what humans do uniquely well, are a surefire way to waste time and money.
Narrow, not broad: Trying to create one magic black box to solve all of the
challenges you want AI to address might be enticing, but it's incredibly
difficult to pull off. Even complex platforms like IBM's Watson or GE's
Predix offer significant business value only when they are configured for a
specific process or customer experience. 11 Focusing on a “moment” or a
simple activity is one of the best indicators that a system of intelligence
might have meaningful impact.
One-to-one, not one-to-many: If you have ever worked with PeopleSoft or

in an SAP environment, you know first hand that your user experience there
was not designed for you personally. It was designed for the largest scale
possible. This has been part of the architecture of almost every commercial
software system since the punch card. While most existing enterprise
systems are generally not designed to give us an individualized experience,
systems of intelligence most definitely are. Alexa, for example, self-
configures to your patterns. Amazon tunes its offerings to your virtual self.
Old-school software requires you to conform to it; new-machine-age
software conforms to you.
Bespoke, not “off the rack”: It would be nice if we could access an iTunes
store offering a range of systems of intelligence and pick up solutions there
for our own organizations, but that capability doesn't exist yet. Over time, AI
will become “productized”—and there are many machine-learning solutions
that can be accessed on an “as-a-service” basis—but for the near future, you
shouldn't imagine that your organization can simply buy a complete piece of
software that will instantly get you into the heart of the new machine age.
New systems of intelligence are emerging every day, so things are changing
fast. This is the biggest area for innovation across virtually every industry. If
you are looking for platforms aligned to claims processing, finance and
accounting processes, or secondary education classes, you are in luck,
because powerful systems already exist. However, in many if not most cases,
there is not yet an existing product. You should keep a sharp eye out for new
solutions that will matter to your business, but for now, many of these
systems must be created or assembled from existing components.
Three Key Learnings on Building Systems of
Intelligence
Born from the LexisNexis® history of deep data analysis, LexisNexis Risk
Solutions helps customers assess, predict, and manage risk across multiple
industries (including insurance, banking, retail, health care, communications,
and public sector).
Dr. Flavio Villanustre, vice president of Technology Infrastructure and
Product Development, and David Glowacki, vice president of Product
Engineering, are responsible for platform strategy and new product
development. They are involved in a number of projects involving big data,
analytics, and machine learning, and are responsible for the teams that build
and run machines that are starting to do (nearly) everything

and run machines that are starting to do (nearly) everything.
They have created not just one, but multiple systems of intelligence that help
customers manage compliance, fraud detection, health outcomes, risk, and
many other core business processes. In doing so, they've gained wisdom that
you can apply in your own business.
Data without a system of intelligence is just white noise . Many
companies we work with are still struggling to make sense of their new raw
material. Leaders are buried not only by their data; they're also buried by so
many tool options—API libraries, online machine-to-machine-learning
software, cloud-based solutions, automated systems, and so on. While
having so many tools and capabilities widely available is a good thing, it can
also be overwhelming to have so many options.
Systems of intelligence—like the ones built by LexisNexis—come to life
when they connect data to a recognized meaningful outcome. As Villanustre
noted, “The goal is to take an intractable problem, something that's infinitely
too complex for human beings to figure out, and reduce it down to a set of
data points that we can present to somebody like an investigator or an FBI
analyst and derive enough information to really dive into it and kick start an
investigation, if they think it's warranted.”
Villanustre continued, “Leaders are coming to a greater realization: No
matter what kind of data they collect—through economic transactions and
other data collected within the course of their business—all data has some
value. By adding a data set to another data set, you can potentially make a
completely new thing.”
Don't think you have to build it all yourself. As mentioned, today many
system-of–intelligence solutions are simply not available “off the rack.” This
is where companies such as LexisNexis and others come in. “We strongly
believe that the future is going to center around enabling tools,” Villanustre
said. “Being able to take all of the vast assets we have and present them in a
meaningful way to users who may have extreme domain knowledge, but
may not have any technical knowledge, is…broadening the number of
individuals who can actually mine and take advantage of the assets that we
have.”
The recommendation for leaders here is to focus on the specific process or
experience you want to make a system of intelligence. Once you've
identified the process or experience where you want to apply new machines,
investigate to see whether there is a readily available solution from a partner

(such as LexisNexis). While it may be the right decision to buy piece parts
of a service from a general platform provider (e.g., Google, Amazon Web
Services, Palantir, Microsoft, etc.), be prepared for a substantial
configuration process to make the technology fit your business requirements.
If your system of intelligence is good, you won't need 10,000 data
scientists. When your systems are instrumented, you have a data flood. The
conventional reflex is that companies should hire a busload of data scientists
to make sense of the information. That may be a reasonable initial answer,
but over time this becomes impossible to sustain.
Glowacki and his team clearly recognize that the burden of making sense of
the data must shift from users to the platform. “Over time, just getting access
to a mountain of data doesn't help.” This is where the system of intelligence
proves critical because the actual “meaning making” can be and should be
encoded into the AI.
As Villanustre shared, “Why is it so hard to find data scientists today? It is
because you are trying to find a unicorn. You're trying to find someone with
good programming skills that also has good, deep mathematical knowledge
combined with physical knowledge, as well as a good engineer with an
analytical mind to break down problems and build programs. This data
scientist needs to be a subject-matter expert because he or she needs to
understand what they're trying to build as well as the data. We are talking
about someone that doesn't exist.…The one thing that you can't replace is the
subject-matter expert. Everything else can be built into a machine.”
From Vapor to Value
In looking in more detail at systems of intelligence, many profound, strategic,
even existential questions are raised. What is a department store in an age of
Amazon? What is a hotel in an age of Airbnb? What is car insurance in an age of
self-driving cars?
Given just how large these questions are, it's tempting to think what we are
calling a major trend is actually just a fad or the latest consulting theory. We
hear it all the time: Maybe this is tomorrow's problem. Maybe we should wait
until regulation or a disruptive event forces change on our industry.
We disagree. Every day that passes gives us more evidence and strengthens our
conviction that the new machines that we've examined in this chapter are the

p
engines of a Fourth Industrial Revolution. We are well past the theoretical phase.
Individuals and companies that are realizing an early advantage are not all
geniuses or legendary entrepreneurs. They are people like you, people who are
using new technologies to solve major problems.
Remember, building your own new machine is becoming increasingly easy, even
though, as we have pointed out, “some assembly is still required.” Increasingly
you can take your credit card out and lease access to machine-learning code,
infrastructure, and databases. The Google Cloud Platform gives you immediate
access to a neural-net machine-learning platform. 12 Amazon Machine Learning
gives you access to the same predictive analytics platform that provides
recommendations to deep-pocket consultants and enterprises. 13 Only a few years
ago, this would have cost companies millions and have taken many months to
put into place.
The actual builders of the new machines all say the same thing: Making narrow
AI the core of a system of intelligence is not a theoretical exercise; it's possible,
and it's happening today. And what's really supercharging this explosion of
activity is that the fuel for the new machines is all around us if you can see it,
grab it, and use it, which is the focus of the next chapter.
Notes
1. “The Top 20 Valuable Facebook Statistics. Updated July 2016.” Zephoria,
https://zephoria.com/top-15-valuable-facebook-statistics/
2. We've based some of this discussion on Tim Urban, “The AI Revolution: The
Road to Superintelligence,” Wait But Why. Jan. 22, 2015,
http://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificial-intelligence-revolution-1.html .
3. Annalee Newitz, “What Is the Singularity, and Will You Live to See It?” io9,
May 10, 2010, http://io9.gizmodo.com/5534848/what-is-the-singularity-and-
will-you-live-to-see-it .
4. https://intelligence.org/2013/08/11/what-is-agi/
5. Chris Williams, “AI Guru Ng: Fearing a Rise of Killer Robots Is Like
Worrying About Overpopulation on Mars,” The Register , March 19, 2015,
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/03/19/andrew_ng_baidu_ai/ .
6. Wikipedia entries on ghost in the machine:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghost_in_the_machine and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ghost_in_the_Machine .
7. “How Much Does the Internet Weigh?” YouTube, Oct. 29, 2011,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WaUzu-iksi8 .
8. “2016 Global Internet Phenomena,” Sandvine, June 2016,
https://www.sandvine.com/trends/global-internet-phenomena/ .
9. “Number of Netflix Streaming Subscribers Worldwide,” Statista, 2016,
http://www.statista.com/statistics/250934/quarterly-number-of-netflix-
streaming-subscribers-worldwide/ .
10. Xavier Amatriain, “How Does the Netflix Movie Recommendation
Algorithm Work?” Quora, https://www.quora.com/How-does-the-Netflix-
movie-recommendation-algorithm-work .
11. Yoni Heisler, “Netflix's Ratings System May Soon Be Getting a Big
Overhaul,” BGR, Jan. 11, 2016, http://bgr.com/2016/01/11/netflix-ratings-
system-overhaul/ .
12. Daniel Holloway, “Netflix Looks at Which Shows Are Most Binge-
Watched,” Variety, June 8, 2016, http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/netflix-
looks-at-which-shows-are-most-binge-watched-1201791061/ .
13. For a more complete description of the Netflix system, see “A 360 Degree
View of The Entire Netflix Stack,” High Scalability, Nov. 9, 2015,
http://highscalability.com/blog/2015/11/9/a-360-degree-view-of-the-entire-
netflix-stack.html .
14. Netflix socks: http://makeit.netflix.com/
15. Daniel Weeks, “Netflix: Integrating Spark at Petabyte Scale,” O'Reilly
Conferences, Oct. 1, 2015, http://conferences.oreilly.com/strata/big-data-
conference-ny-2015/public/schedule/detail/43373 .
16. “How Much Is a Petabyte?” The Mozy Blog, July 2, 2009,
https://mozy.com/blog/misc/how-much-is-a-petabyte/ .
17. Tom Vanderbilt, “The Science Behind the Netflix Algorithms That Decide
What You'll Watch Next,” Wired , Aug. 7, 2013,
http://www.wired.com/2013/08/qq_netflix-algorithm/

18. Alexis C. Madrigal, “How Netflix Reverse Engineered Hollywood,” The
Atlantic , Jan. 2, 2014,
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/01/how-netflix-reverse-
engineered-hollywood/282679/ and Vincent Lanaria, “Netflix Has More
Than 76,000 Micro-Genres of Movies and TV Shows: Here's How to Unlock
Them,” Tech Times , Jan. 9, 2016,
http://www.techtimes.com/articles/122723/20160109/netflix-has-more-than-
76000-micro-genres-of-movies-and-tv-shows-heres-how-to-unlock-them.htm
.
19. “Netflix's Viewing Data: How We Know Where You Are in House of Cards
,” Netflix, Jan. 27, 2015, http://techblog.netflix.com/2015/01/netflixs-
viewing-data-how-we-know-where.html and
http://www.slideshare.net/PhilipFisherOgden/netflix-viewing-data-
architecture-evolution-qcon-2014 .
20. Yevgeniy Sverdlik, “Netflix Shuts Down Final Bits of Own Data Center
Infrastructure,” Data Center Knowledge , Feb. 11, 2016,
http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2016/02/11/netflix-shuts-
down-final-bits-of-own-data-center-infrastructure/ .
21. Peter C. Evans and Rahul C. Basole, “Decoding the API Economy with
Visual Analytics,” The Center for Global Enterprise, Sept. 2, 2015,
http://thecge.net/decoding-the-api-economy-with-visual-analytics/ .
22. New business services integrate human process work (the smart hands) with
collaboration and automation via technology platforms (the smart robots).
See our white paper “Smart Hands and Smart Robots,”
https://www.cognizant.com/content/dam/Cognizant_Dotcom/worldwide_olt_p
Hands-and-Smart-Robots.pdf .
23. For example, DenialsIQ is built on Predix to focus on U.S. healthcare claims
management. Hive (which runs on the perfectly named Honeycomb AI
platform from British Gas) is a system that helps homeowners manage their
IoT-enabled residence. See Chris Merriman, “Hive Launches First Products
Built on Its Honeycomb IoT platform,” The Inquirer , Jan. 27, 2016,
http://www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/news/2443443/hive-launches-first-
products-built-on-its-honeycomb-iot-platform .
24. Google's Cloud Machine Learning Products:
https://cloud.google.com/products/machine-learning/ .

25. Amazon Machine Learning: https://aws.amazon.com/machine-learning/ .

5 
YOUR NEW RAW MATERIALS 
DATA IS BETTER THAN OIL
Each industrial revolution was catalyzed by a new raw material: coal, steel, oil,
electricity. This time around, data is the primary raw material.
In this revolution, the organizations that are winning know precisely how Engine
T17BBI is performing during Flight V26 from New York to London. They
know how a potential 0.5% interest rate increase in New Zealand will impact a
California state government–issued zero-coupon bond before lunchtime. They
know how a kid is performing in today's lesson on differential calculus. How do
they know? Because they have the data.
Like oil, data needs to be “mined,” “refined,” and “distributed.” But unlike oil,
data is a multifaceted, curious commodity. It is a potentially infinite resource—
opaque, ephemeral, at times intangible. It can grow quickly in scale and value,
but it can also be worthless, even a burden, if it's not viewed through the right
lens and managed in the right way. Today's leaders need to understand how to
take this commodity, which is available to each and every one of us, and turn it
into a competitive advantage. After all, harnessing the new machines without
abundant data is akin to owning a fleet of tractor-trailer trucks without any
access to gas.
The data we are talking about is currently under your nose, capable of being
mined from your own daily business operations. For example, per our reference
to Flight V26, a typical Airbus A350 has approximately 6,000 sensors across the
entire plane, generating 2.5 terabytes of data per day. 1 And a terabyte? That's
one trillion bytes, or a million million bytes. (And, yes, it's true that the word
“tera” is derived from the Greek word for “monster.”)
So how big is this monster data? Let's put it this way: The complete works of
Shakespeare, in basic text and stored on your computer, would consume
approximately five megabytes. 2 Given that a gigabyte is 1,024 megabytes, and a
terabyte is another 1,024 gigabytes, it means the average A350 is producing the
equivalent of 524,000 times the Bard's life's work every 24 hours. We know, you
may be thinking, “What could Airbus and its airline customers possibly do with
all that data? Isn't it much ado about nothing?” (Sorry, too easy.) Sometimes it

is. Many organizations often don't know what to do with such data. Sometimes
it's just static, and sometimes it becomes a liability. Yet in the next decade, the
breakout companies will be those that become masters in consistently turning
this abundant data into actionable, and proprietary, insight.
Turning Data from a Liability into an Asset
In recent years, the phrase “data is the new oil” has become something of a
cliché. But like many clichés, the phrase holds an important truth. Let's unpack
what it really means.
Imagine yourself in a city in the UK sometime during the 1850s—a world
grimly described by Charles Dickens. The Second Industrial Revolution was
well underway, and a lot of it wasn't very pretty. It was a time before child labor
laws. The buildings were covered with soot. The streets were full of horses and
the products of hundreds of thousands of equine digestive tracts. Many countries
were in political upheaval (or worse). Unless, m'lord, you were at the very top of
the economic food chain, life could be pretty tough and confusing.
Coal and steam still powered the economy. Oil was primarily used for lighting,
waterproofing, and other incidental purposes. People knew about oil, and they
did have uses for it, but nobody really saw it as the fuel for the full blaze of the
Third Industrial Revolution. At that time, oil seeped through the ground or was
found by miners going after coal. Oil was still seen almost as a problem—brown
sticky “muck” getting in the way of mining out the coal.
In 1847, a Scottish chemist named James Young reconceptualized the
understanding of oil. Having come across a natural oil seepage at a mine in
Derbyshire, he applied a distillation process to efficiently convert the “muck”
into something completely different and more useful—refined oil. In the years
and decades that followed, more and more ideas of how to use the new
commodity emerged, and the seeds were sown for the incredible boom of the oil
industry, as well as every derivative industry that followed during the next 100
years.
Today, many of the hundreds of business decision makers we work with are
struggling with a similar reconceptualization of their data. We have yet to come
across anyone who says, “We have complete control of all our data, fully
understand its value, and are hungry for more. Bring it on!” On the contrary, we
hear lament after lament about the cost, complexity, and unrealized value they
feel is locked in a morass of structured and unstructured data. If you ask almost
f

any business leader of a major industrial enterprise, they'll say they see their data
more as muck than as oil.
These sentiments are well captured by renowned business and technology
consultant Geoffrey Moore (author of Crossing the Chasm , among many other
highly influential books), who stated that “[data] is a liability before it's an
asset.” 3
Yet, by contrast, the management teams of today's digital leaders are “data-first,”
focused not on product or process, but on their new raw material. Their data isn't
“muck”—it's the lifeblood of the new machine, the fuel that moves it forward. In
sticking with our oil metaphor, data is superior to oil as a raw material in several
ways as shown in Figure 5.1 .
Figure 5.1 Properties of Oil vs. Data
Managing the Data Supply Chain
Turning data into actionable insight will occur not by accident but by
establishing and managing a “data supply chain” across the business. This also
has parallels to today's energy industry.
Oil companies are organized around three key activities: exploration and
extraction, refining, and distribution; these are commonly referred to as
upstream, midstream, and downstream. Oil executives have long recognized that
all three of these areas are quite distinct and require different skill sets,

technologies, and business-model approaches. Very few executives responsible
for handling data have put in place a similar clearly delineated approach. They
should. Figure 5.2 outlines this comparative concept further.
Figure 5.2 The Supply Chains of Oil vs. Data
There are several important ways in which data is far superior to oil:
Cheap to “mine”: As the world becomes increasingly instrumented, it
becomes easier and easier to create and capture data. Once you instrument an
MRI machine, for example, the cost of data over time drops to nearly
nothing. This is in contrast with oil. If you drill one big well, the second one
isn't much cheaper.

Infinite and shared: There have been warnings about “peak oil” (i.e.,
running out of it) from almost the moment James Young started selling
people on the idea of its value. To this day, no one really knows how much
oil there is, but it is certain that we aren't getting any more, and without
technology advancing, it's becoming harder to access. 4 Data, your new raw
material, isn't found deep in the ground somewhere on the other side of the
world. Instead, it's under your feet and under your nose right now; you just
have to grab it. And unlike coal or oil, which are “zero-sum,” data and
insight actually increase in value the more you use them. After all, adding
one drop of oil to another simply yields two drops. However, combining one
piece of data from your operations with another from a customer or a
business partner could yield huge benefits.
Proprietary in nature: Oil is, by definition, a commodity. What is produced
in Alaska, Nigeria, or Saudi Arabia is essentially the same—and is valued as
such on the open market. Your data, on the other hand, is proprietary. It's
unique, and it trades, if you will, in a closed market. If managed properly,
this provides it with immense value. Such proprietary data, at scale, is the
moat that exists around the franchises of Google, Facebook, and Uber; in the
coming years, your proprietary data will become the competitive moat
around your business. As a bank, it's how you will assess risk in ways your
competitors cannot. As an insurer, it will be how you revolutionize the
actuarial science. As a health care provider, it will be how you fundamentally
transform patient outcomes and reset your cost base.
Cheap to distribute: The Trans-Alaska Pipeline System cost about $8
billion to build; its owners continually wrestle with the huge maintenance
costs. Access to data is really expensive initially—building and maintaining
cellular networks is neither free nor cheap—but the value of the information
being shipped (movies, music, car telematics data, robo-journalism articles,
cat pictures) can increase enormously without a corresponding increase in
distribution costs. Moving 75,000 barrels of oil an hour takes a pipeline of a
certain size; no compression algorithm or switch upgrade can condense that
volume.
Exponentially valuable: The value of oil is like that of any other
commodity. The price of a barrel is set by the market, and each barrel at any
time costs about the same. It's a linear relationship between value and
volume. Data, however, conforms to a different model. It follows more of an
exponential curve. A little bit of the right data might be worth something, but

perhaps not much. Once there's enough data to draw more valuable
conclusions, though, the value of the data set increases exponentially. Netflix
wouldn't know much about us if only 10 people used it. Google wouldn't
work either without billions of searches. The real value of code is that once
you have enough data, the value goes through the roof.
This three-pronged approach—upstream, midstream, and downstream—is a
useful way of thinking about organizing your technology, staffing, and approach
to building your own new machine.
Business Analytics: Turning Data into Meaning
In time, we believe the structure we have described of harvesting, refining, and
distributing data will become a universal practice. Data harvesting will become
standardized and, thus, “table stakes.” By 2020, Ford will not seize any
advantage over Chevrolet by instrumenting the car's carburetor. Similarly, the
distribution of information via apps and embedded systems will become a
commodity. After all, the success of Google vs. Bing or Amazon vs.
Walmart.com has almost nothing to do with the distribution and interface,
because in each case they are largely the same. However, the middle step, the
refining of data or turning it into meaning, will be the key competitive
battleground. This is where competitive distinction can be created and
maintained. This is where you and your teams will need to convert the data into
insight and apply that insight via new commercial models; and this is where
business analytics comes into the frame.
Business analytics can be defined as the tools, techniques, goals, analytics,
processes, and business strategies used to transform data into actionable insights
for business problem solving and competitive advantage. 5 In our research at
Cognizant's Center for the Future of Work, we have determined that a company
that harnesses value from data better than its competitors can enjoy an average
cost decrease of about 8.1% and an average revenue increase of about 8.4%. 6
Before you can order your analysts to analyze, though, you need to give them
something to analyze; this is where turning everything—really everything—into
a “code generator” comes into the picture.
If It Costs More than $5, and You Can't Eat It, Instrument
It!

Smartphone vs. dumb phone. Remember the dumb phone? The black or beige
block of plastic with a rotary dial that sat in your parents' living room? OK,
sometime in the 1980s, it gained a punch-dial keypad, but it was still dumb,
completely incapable of storing numbers, tracking calls, or anything like that.
Why do we bring up vintage phones? Well, the way we view the dumb phone
now is how we will view today's walls, desks, glasses, shoes, cars, toothbrushes,
forks, houses, fridges, elevators, doors, trains, televisions, pacemakers, hearing
aids, credit cards, ticket booths, lights, sports stadiums, plane seats, restaurants,
factories, roads, subways, offices, museums, and so on by 2025. Dumb. Amazed
that they couldn't adapt to our needs in real time and that they couldn't help us in
our tasks, providing new insight and context, in real-time. As such, we are on the
verge of the smart-product transformation.
At the heart of this transformation is the instrumentation of everything; as
sensors have become miniaturized and their price/performance curve has
become “Moore-ish,” it has become possible, technologically and economically,
to put them into smaller and smaller objects. 7 Not just possible but imperative.
After all, to know everything about everything, you need to instrument
everything. The strategic question shouldn't be “What should we instrument?”
but rather “What shouldn't we instrument?” as not instrumenting something
should be the exception, not the norm. And, in doing so, not only will you begin
the process of harvesting all the data in your organization, but you will also
greatly increase the intrinsic value of the very objects you are instrumenting.
Table for Two? Or Two Thousand?
Take this one simple example: a non-sensor-enabled table that costs $150 to
make might retail at around $500. A sensor-enabled table that costs $200 to
make could potentially retail at $1,000. Consider a “smart” table that could
adjust its height automatically for different users (the way a car seat does),
charge electronic devices with no need for charging cables, allow someone to
type or draw on it directly and then project those commands onto a digital
whiteboard, display the name of the person sitting at the table, or track whether
someone was sitting at it (or not) and adjust surrounding heating and lighting
conditions accordingly. Any of these possible scenarios would be hugely more
valuable to purchasers. For a relatively modest increase in manufacturing cost,
an incredible opportunity for increasing revenue and profitability would be
unleashed. And then, think through the “stickiness” of the smart table. A dumb
table can be swapped out for another with no problem. However, doing the same
with the smart table would result in a sudden removal of the personalization that

with the smart table would result in a sudden removal of the personalization that
surrounds it. The lights in the room wouldn't work the same, for example, or the
digital whiteboard would sit dark. The history of that worker's preferences would
be lost. Suddenly, that table becomes very “sticky” for its users.
If you take this one mundane example of something “dumb” becoming “smart”
and extrapolate it into the “universe of things,” the impact of instrumentation
becomes more and more profound. This is how and why GE is making its
industrial windmills “smart”; this is how and why Bosch and Samsung are
making their consumer white goods (i.e., fridges and ovens) “smart.” It's also
why there's an explosion of activity around the idea of instrumenting people.
Let's face it; at times we're pretty “dumb” too. Instrumenting us will help us get
smarter about a lot of important things, like our health, as well.
The Home-Field Advantage of Big Companies
So if every “thing” needs to be instrumented, the question is raised: Who has
most of these “things?” The answer: the typical 100-year-old company.
The Silicon Valley elite and the software unicorns 8 don't have these assets that
are soon to be transformed from dumb to smart. It's the hospital that has the
beds, the operating rooms, and the intensive care units, all waiting to be
instrumented. It's also the hospital that has the patients in its care, all needing to
be tracked. This is not the case for some faraway, venture-backed software start-
up.
We find too many traditional companies saying they feel insecure in the
burgeoning digital economy, claiming they are burdened with inherent
disadvantages (in legacy systems and processes, cost structures, physical assets,
facilities, culture, etc.). This may be so. But they also come armed with a
fundamental and massive advantage: they now own all the new data generators,
the “things” of their operations, and their customers. This is an advantage not to
be relinquished, and it must be protected through an instrumentation imperative.
First Data Is Now in First—with Data
Another long-established company reimagining its product portfolio is one
you probably interact with every day. First Data, based in Atlanta, Georgia,
manufactures the point-of-sale (POS) devices you encounter when you
swipe your credit or debit card or scan your mobile device at the pharmacies,
grocery stores, or restaurants you frequent. In addition, the company

g oce y sto es, o
estau a ts you
eque t.
add t o , t e co pa y
manages the entire back-end payments process—after the card is swiped or
inserted—for the six million businesses, four thousand financial institutions,
and government agencies it serves, making it the world's largest merchant
acquirer and issuer processor. In the U.S. alone, First Data processes nearly
half of all credit and debit card transactions. Although this is an
unglamorous task, it is absolutely fundamental to the enablement of
commerce around the world.
With the rise of FinTech start-ups, it was important for First Data to adapt its
business to keep up with both the pace of payments technology change as
well as the needs of all businesses—from new entrepreneurs to major big-
box retailers. In strategizing how to respond to this increasing competition,
First Data understood it needed to evolve its product portfolio. After all,
similar to the home telephone of old, many viewed these devices as “dumb
bricks” for credit card transactions.
For decades, First Data thrived on its payment processing business, and so it
wasn't completely clear whether investing further in its POS portfolio was
still a good business model. Then, in 2013, Frank Bisignano became First
Data's new CEO. In understanding the emerging digital economy, Bisignano
recognized First Data had a massive home-field advantage: the company's
position as the world's largest merchant acquirer provided significant
opportunity for unparalleled distribution of its POS devices. Those “dumb
bricks” had potential massive value. Bisignano understood that the relatively
“dumb” POS readers could be become “smart”—similar to the smartphones
consumers carry in their pockets every day. Infused with sensors, new
software, and hundreds of third party apps, the POS “brick” could move
beyond simple payments acceptance and instead become a comprehensive
business management tool.
With this new perspective, First Data decided to reposition itself in the
marketplace with a next-generation unified software and a hardware
“platform” to safely and securely enable POS, business intelligence, and
commerce-enhancing services. The transaction data First Data is able to
collect is now allowing the company to know who is buying what, where,
when, and how. As a result, the company has insights into, for example, how
customer behavior and loyalty actually manifests itself in a store. First Data's
POS software and hardware is known as Clover. The product line features a
series of sleekly designed POS devices that double as business management
tools, including an app market that serves a variety of business needs from
employee time and inventory management to salon appointment booking

employee time and inventory management to salon appointment booking.
Over time, First Data's Clover operating system and hardware have
revolutionized how the company is viewed in the marketplace. Instead of
simply providing the platform for credit card transactions, First Data can
become a true partner to its retailers by offering innovative commerce
technology. An example of this is all the data that is captured and
transmitted by that newly smart brick, that little machine that can lead to
greater insights than the store staff may recognize. First Data leaders clearly
recognized the value of data, and are doubling down on their new “smart
terminals.” Their newest Clover payment system is actually the entry point
to a platform world that allows the company to help merchants manage their
supply chains and workers, offer loyalty programs, improve security, and—
oh yes—collect payments.
This jujitsu move of taking a seeming disadvantage and using it as an advantage
can serve as an example to all “pre-digital” companies looking to retool. The
truly digital economy, full of Know-It-All businesses, could, in fact, be the era
of “the revenge of the 100-year-old firm.” American Express, for example, has a
stockpile of data in a closed-loop system, as issuer, underwriter, and processor
from customer transactions going back decades. Airlines, banks, and insurance
companies (some around since Madison was president of the United States) all
have valuable data ready to be extracted and refined.
That's the good news, but a significant threat still looms. One advantage that oil
has over data is that it is timeless. The oil in the ground today is largely the same
as it was 100 years ago, which is the same as it will be in 50 years. Though its
value will fluctuate wildly due to the commercial battles fought by petro-states
around the world, the oil itself won't change. However, the advantage of data-
rich traditional companies is highly perishable. If this sounds a bit too dramatic,
well then, just look around. The taxi business has been around for centuries, but
Uber is now pooling massive amounts of data from the assets owned by others—
us, its drivers, Google Maps, and so on. This data is integrated through Uber's
platform, and now it is applying its new model not just to taxis but also to a host
of other products and services (flu shots, puppies, food, yachts, helicopters, and
much more to come). 9 Using the new raw material, Uber is playing the new
game for a new commercial era.
Clever innovators are already figuring out how to grab decades' worth of data
seemingly overnight. Leaders will either act to capture this data and value now,
or be faced with a “sorry, and thanks for playing” result.

Data Is Job One
For the three of us in our consulting travels, we have a one-question litmus test
to determine a company's digital readiness: Is the management team we're
working with obsessive about data or not? We sometimes think of it as the “data
point test,” as in “How do we know they are serious about digital? Because they
always go where the data points.”
Those who are making true progress toward “being digital” have increasing faith
in data; they recognize it as their source for proprietary insight and advantage,
and for good reason. In our recent study of over 2,000 companies across the
globe with a combined revenue of $7.3 trillion, 10 the executives surveyed
estimated that fully a third of their industry revenues—$20 trillion—would soon
be touched by digital. 11 That's a lot of people, things, and events acting as code
generators. That's a lot of insight—$20 trillion worth.
This is truly becoming an age of knowing it all. Yet, without the right business
model to support your data-fueled new machines, you won't get very far. So, let's
now explore the third of the Three M's, the digital business model.
Notes
1. http://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/that-s-datascience-airbus-
puts-10-000-sensors-in-every-single
2. http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/memory-sizes-gigabytes-terabytes-petabytes/
3. Geoffrey Moore, “Is Your Business Model Being Disrupted? The Era of Code
Halos Is Here,” Cognizant Technology Solutions, Feb. 28, 2014,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hfKysCb3ju8
4. Jude Clemente, “How Much Oil Does the World Have Left?” Forbes, June 25,
2015, http://www.forbes.com/sites/judeclemente/2015/06/25/how-much-oil-
does-the-world-have-left/#2af33c85dc5e .
5. See Thomas Davenport's bio, http://www.tomdavenport.com/about/ and
Thomas Davenport, “The New World of Business Analytics,” International
Institute for Analytics, March 2010,
http://www.sas.com/resources/asset/IIA_NewWorldofBusinessAnalytics_Mar
.

6. See our white paper, “The Value of Signal (and the Cost of Noise): The New
Economics of Meaning-Making,”
http://www.futureofwork.com/images/article/documents/the-value-of-
signal.pdf .
7. Moore's law states that overall processing power for computers will double
every two years.
8. Software “unicorns” are private venture-backed start-ups valued at $1 billion
or more.
9. Joanna Rothkopf, “UberYACHT Is Real,” Jezebel, April 28, 2016,
http://jezebel.com/uberyacht-is-real-1773607160 .
10. Paul Roehrig and Ben Pring, “The Work Ahead: Mastering the Digital
Economy,” September 2016, https://www.cognizant.com/FoW/the-work-
ahead.pdf .
11. In the study, we surveyed leaders from 2,000 companies from across the
globe with a combined total revenue of about $7.3 trillion during the past
year. Approximately 6% of that revenue was driven by digital. While that
percentage may sound small, it translates into roughly $438 billion. Over the
next year, leaders believe they could unlock an additional $151.6 billion in
revenue value if they took full advantage of digital. (Equivalent to an average
impact of $75.7 million per studied company.) Executives expect the total
potential revenue impact to more than double over the next three years to
11.4% of total revenue, unlocking value of about $770 billion per year. That's
a total economic impact of about $2.3 trillion projected over the next three
years across all companies studied. Extrapolating these findings across the
industries studied revealed that the impact of digital transformation over the
next three years alone could be up to $20 trillion.

6 
DIGITAL BUSINESS MODELS 
YOUR FIVE WAYS TO BEAT SILICON VALLEY
Silicon Valley is coming. There are hundreds of start-ups with a lot of
brains and money working on various alternatives to traditional banking.
The ones you read about most are in the lending business, whereby the
firms can lend to individuals and small businesses very quickly and—these
entities believe—effectively by using Big Data to enhance credit
underwriting. They are very good at reducing the “pain points” in that they
can make loans in minutes, which might take banks weeks. We are going to
work hard to make our services as seamless and competitive as theirs.
Jamie Dimon, Chairman and CEO, JPMorgan Chase, 2016 Annual
Shareholder Letter
Silicon Valley is also coming for your company. Digital disruptors in your
industry are armed with the new machine, fueled with data. As we have just
outlined in the two preceding chapters, you can do the same and, if you go about
it correctly, with even greater success.
That said, harnessing the power of the new machine alone is not enough. The
final piece of the puzzle, and the ultimate determinant of your success, is
surrounding it with the right business model.
Ten years ago, you had to learn how to compete at “the China price” as
globalization mercilessly drove unit costs down. Today, your business needs to
take another step-change, learning to compete at “the Google price,” not to
mention the “Google speed.” In that pursuit, most industrial business models are
currently too slow, too expensive, and too cumbersome. They crumble under
their own weight in the face of digital competition.
What do we mean by “business model?” It's the process architecture and
supporting organizational model through which your company competes. It's
how an insurer processes a claim, a bank determines a car loan, or a retailer
manages its supply chain and makes money from doing so. Today, in the vast
majority of cases, these core aspects of a business are suddenly archaic.
In every well-established company, these business models and supporting
processes were formed long before digital technology appeared on the scene.

Back then, knowledge work could not be virtualized, aggregated, and instantly
distributed to the right people in the right format. (Just think of attempting to
create a Facebook equivalent a generation ago without the Internet, smartphones,
or relational databases.) As such, knowledge work was structured very similarly
to manual labor, and consequently, we're often left with seas of cubicles—in
large rooms, in suburban office parks, under fluorescent lights—in which
workers push paper to one another. At Ford Motor Company, the accounting
staff of the 1930s was structured on the model of the company's River Rouge
assembly line (see photos in Figures 6.1 and 6.2 ). The Taylorism that was born
in the factory made its way into the office, with the focus primarily on the
efficiency and quality of manually processing knowledge work.

Figures 6.1 and 6.2 Knowledge Work and Physical Work Assembly Lines
While such structures all made sense at the time, we will soon look back and
wonder, “Why did we do things that way?” Warren Buffett characterized it well
in the context of the news business:
If Mr. Gutenberg had come up with the Internet instead of movable type
back in the late 15th century and for 400 years we had used the Internet for
news and all types of entertainment—and all kinds of everything else—and
then I came along one day and said, “I've got this wonderful idea. We are
going to chop down some trees up in Canada and ship them to a paper mill
—which will cost us a fortune to run through and deliver newsprint—and
then we'll ship that down to some newspaper and we'll have a whole bunch
of people staying up all night writing up things, and then we'll send a bunch
of kids out the next day all over town delivering this thing and we are going
to really wipe out the Internet with this”…it ain't going to happen. 1
Of course, such a scenario sounds absurd. Yet you will soon look back on
several aspects of your business with the same incredulity that Buffett views the
old newspaper business.
That skepticism is already apparent to many of your employees. Millennials,
while waiting for an answer to emerge from “cube land,” may often ask, in
frustration, “Why can't there just be an app for this?” For a generation that has
defaulted to digital, filling out mortgage forms in triplicate seems like utter
d

madness.
In defense of many organizations, though, there are good reasons for long-
standing processes to be entrenched and tough to change: quality control,
institutional knowledge, fraud management, and regulation, to name a few. And,
of course, the daily crush of your operations is enough to deal with—managing
the supply chain, dealing with customers, processing orders, managing cash flow
—making it easy to defer change for another day. Stability is to be admired, but
in the digital economy such considerations can lead to stasis.
With the coming ubiquity of the new machine, however, as we have outlined in
the previous chapters, stasis is no longer a viable strategy. Competitors, new and
old, will not only be able to change the rules of the game from the outside by
delivering vastly improved customer experiences through digital with mobile
apps, instrumented products, and advanced analytics for one-to-one customer
management. They will also begin changing the basis of competition from the
inside, using the new machine to rewire core internal processes. Doing so will
fundamentally change their cost base, as well as the speed of their operations and
their ability to derive insight on all aspects of the business. Truly better, faster,
cheaper. Very simply, in the face of the new machine, manually based
knowledge processes do not stand a chance.
With that said, what do you do about it? How do you get your company to move
forward? After all, a second great contributor to stasis is too many ideas on how
to address the digital threat. We call it being “catatonic by cacophony.” You've
probably been in some of these meetings that soon feel like debates. Some may
point to digital leaders, advising, “Let's be the Amazon of our space,” while
others think, “That sounds inspiring. Yet, I have no idea what it actually means.”
Others argue for starting small by launching a few pilot programs. That sounds
reasonable, until somebody in the room says, “Even in the best of conditions, if
we extrapolate the growth of those pilots over the next three years, it won't move
the needle for us.” Still others may argue, “I'm tired of hearing about digital.
That's for other industries, but not ours. Let's just get back to what we've always
done best.” Half the room then stares back in incredulity. None of it feels good,
but then you go back to your daily operations until the next offsite strategy
meeting. So how do you get unstuck?
Hybrid Is the New Black
Let's start by putting the right frame on the issue. Too often, the conversation on
“going digital” feels binary: “the industrial firms of the past” vs “the digital

going digital  feels binary: the industrial firms of the past  vs. the digital
firms of the future.” This is far too simplistic.
With “digital that matters,” the winning business model will be hybrid—part
physical, part digital. The airline of the future will still need to get the 280-ton,
300-seat Boeing 787 Dreamliner from New York to London. Yet, much of the
passenger experience and flight operations—before, during, and after the flight
—will be digitized. Similarly, a hospital will always have its in-person
emergency room, operating rooms, intensive care units, and recovery wards, but
all will become heavily instrumented and digitized. Some processes will look
much the same as they do today, while others will be fully automated and
unrecognizable.
As such, your challenge in building a digital business model is different from
that of, say, building Twitter. You have an industrial business with existing
processes, systems, and culture that has to transition to a blend, a hybrid, with
just the right mix of industrial and digital. But what goes where? What stays
physical, and what goes digital? And what becomes a mix of physical and
digital, and to what degree? For example:
In looking at your customer channels, what stays with your people (e.g., your
sales force, retail stores, etc.) and what goes virtual? Should, for example, a
retail bank actively shrink its branch network while transitioning customers
to the Web and mobile apps?
With your product portfolio, which new commercial models should be
pursued? Should you begin to reclassify your products as digital services,
much like Uber (car as a service), Airbnb (lodging as a service), WeWork
(space as a service), Netflix (movies as a service), Nike (personal health
management as a service), and GE (industrial uptime as a service)?
With your process portfolio, where can the new machine drive significant
efficiencies? Do you start with core processes or contextual ones? How do
you structure such initiatives? Do you create a “newco,” essentially running
two companies in parallel—or attempt to transform the current operational
process (often referred to as “changing the engines while the plane is in
flight”)?
It's all enough to make your hair hurt. This new business model design and
implementation can seem daunting. However, best practices are emerging. In our
work with over 100 industrial companies looking to make this transition, in
addition to our research on thousands of others, the path to business model
digitization is becoming clear.

g
g
In the remainder of this chapter, we outline the path forward to building the
winning hybrid model of the future. All of our work can be distilled into two big
pieces of insight from all of these digital transitions:
1. Avoiding failure: The four traps to avoid in digital transformation
2. Getting AHEAD: The five ways to harness the new machine
Let's start by looking at the primary ways in which digital initiatives go bad.
Avoiding the Four Traps
In working with as many clients as we do on digital transitions, we see that the
four biggest traps that even the best-intentioned executives consistently fall into
with business model redesign are:
1. The “doing digital” vs. “being digital” trap
2. The FANG trap
3. The “boil-the-ocean” trap
4. The denial trap
Let's investigate each of these in more detail.
Trap 1: Taking the Easy Way Out of “Doing Digital” vs. “Being
Digital”
Too often we see the superficial use of digital technology, such as putting a
mobile front-end on an existing enterprise application that supports an industrial
business process. It's quick, it's cheap, it's low risk. But it's also like climbing a
tree to get to the moon; you will convince yourself you're making progress
toward your digital goal (and, technically, you are), but you will never reach
your destination.
We consistently see far too many managers taking fourth-generation machines
and jamming them into third-generation business models. Then they wonder
why there isn't value being created.
We refer to this phenomenon as “doing digital”—managers simply gluing digital
solutions onto industrial business models. Rickard Gustafson, the CEO of
Scandinavian AirLines (SAS), framed the problem well:
For us, it's not just about putting some lipstick on a pig and trying to

portray a nice portal to the customer. You need to have efficient tools. You
need to have an efficient Web offering. You need to have an app. You need
to connect to your customers on these mobile platforms, but the key for us is
also how do you automate and digitize the inside of SAS. 2
“Digitize the inside of SAS.” Translation? Rethinking, rearchitecting, and
rebuilding the supporting business model. Being digital. To gain the truly
outsized results that are achievable (and that we outline throughout this book),
the supporting business model has to be digital through and through, with
process flows and supporting organizational structures based on digital
principles instead of industrial ones.
Trap 2: The FANG Trap
Many have attempted to mimic the FANG vendors or the technology company
unicorns. Intuitively, it makes sense; after all, they are today's digital masters,
and we look to these players with appropriate awe. The problem is not only does
this not work, but in several cases we've seen it be highly counterproductive.
These firms are from different industries than yours and have different starting
and end points.
An assumption contained in the question with which we opened this book (“Will
we be Ubered?”) is the notion of “How do we become like Uber?” In the vast
majority of cases, that's the wrong question, and in fact, many times it is a
dangerous question. More value has now been destroyed than created, costing
time, money, and personal reputation, by firms that attempt to become “the
Amazon of our space.”
Why? Very simply, it's because the FANG vendors are playing a different game.
They (a) are in different industries from yours, (b) had a different starting place,
and (c) are targeting a different destination. They built digital businesses from
the ground up, creating a purely digital company. Your challenge is different.
You need to transition from being an industrial leader into leading as a
digital/industrial hybrid organization. Your starting point is different; you have
an industrial-era installed base of existing processes, products, and culture.
Probably more important, your end goal is different. That's a different challenge
from being a digital middleman like Airbnb or creating social media platforms
like Facebook or Twitter.
We find blind FANG imitation as being similar to a CFO asking, “What would
LeBron James do?” The basketball superstar is absolutely brilliant at breaking
down a zone defense during a tense play-off game. However, he probably

dow a o e de e se du
g a te se p ay o
ga e.
oweve , e p obab y
wouldn't be very helpful to a CFO looking to create, say, a new corporate
dividend program. He's playing a different game.
That said, there are a few important areas of the FANG game you need to know
cold and that are transferable to your business. They are:
The new customer expectation: The online experiences provided by the
FANG vendors are elegant, simple, and easy to use. They are highly
personalized, providing custom content and curated experiences. As such,
your product experiences are now being juxtaposed against the FANG
expectation. It's why, for example, so many observe, “My $300 smartphone
is so smart, and yet my $30,000 car is so dumb.” This gap in expectation and
experience will close in the coming years.
Trust in data: The FANG players have corporate cultures that trust deeply
in data. This may seem like a superficial issue, but it's actually profound and
central to how a digital company must be run. In industrial companies, there
are many different models for decision-making. For example, there's the
personality-led culture (e.g., “Why did we make that decision? Because the
CEO said so!”). In some circles, this is known as HIPPO culture (i.e., hi
ghest p aid p erson's o pinion). Other cultures are deal-led; investment
banking and Hollywood come to mind. Still others are process-oriented or
regulation-led. While these factors will remain important, in the digital
business, all must evolve to first holding faith in the objectivity of data and
what it says about products, people, and performance.
Harnessing the power of the new machine: FANG leaders are all deep
believers in and implementers of AI. The CEOs of all these companies have
stated, in one way or another, that their companies are “AI first.” Copy that.
Send your teams on “digital safaris” to Silicon Valley to, if nothing else, gain
insight into the state of the art in operational AI at scale.
Trap 3: Boiling the Ocean
This third point is often the most difficult. We have recognized a best practice of
keeping initial projects relatively small. Many highly ambitious management
teams decide to go “all in” on digital. They rally the troops, communicate their
plans to the board of directors, and confidently declare their intentions inside the
company and out (you may still have some of the T-shirts and mouse pads).
Then, a year or two down the line, people start asking basic questions: “How is
the digital plan going? How has it changed core metrics, like sales or profits?
How many customers are now on the platform?” Such questions usually induce

How many customers are now on the platform?  Such questions usually induce
highly uncomfortable, staring-at-shoes body language. Although well-
intentioned and in many cases very well-resourced, such change initiatives don't
work.
Now, this piece of advice is not one-size-fits-all. There are cases in which
companies (due to industry structure or competitive moves) find themselves far
behind in digital capability. In such cases a “go big or go home” approach may
be necessary…for such a high-risk approach is warranted if a company finds
itself in a laggard situation. Yet, for the 80%-plus of other companies, we advise
to start small.
In starting small, find a subset of a process, one that is simple organizationally,
with a straightforward digital technical application, and find quick success. Also,
in starting small, build a team of like-minded digital enthusiasts. These team
members will be self-selecting. As a best practice, do not try to convince
anybody to join your team. If someone voices skepticism or sees the new
approach as somehow too risky, move on.
Once this digital SWAT team starts to string a few victories together,
momentum will build. Remember the words of Confederate General Stonewall
Jackson, who during the American Civil War confounded the Union with a
string of victories, in spite of inferior resources:
Never fight against heavy odds, if by any possible maneuvering you can
hurl your own force on only a part, and that the weakest part, of your
enemy and crush it. Such tactics will win every time, and a small army may
thus destroy a large one…, and repeated victory will make it invincible. 3
We have found such an approach to digital business model change to be the most
effective. Find discrete targets in key processes. Devote the full energies of your
best business analysts and technicians to them. Then, with a series of digital
successes under its collective belt, the entire organization will begin to gain
confidence in the approach. Small changes can have big consequences.
Looking back at the Jamie Dimon quote that opened this chapter, you can see he
noted something vitally important in digital business model generation: Digital
start-ups “are very good at reducing the ‘pain points’ in that they can make loans
in minutes, which might take banks weeks.” “Reducing the pain points” is not
“boiling the ocean.” Dimon did not say, “reengineering the entire process”—or
the entire organization. Instead, he advises finding the specific pain points that
can be relieved and liberated with digital technology.

We surveyed over 300 European and U.S. business leaders to understand how
and where they are applying digital tools and techniques to optimize work. As
shown in Figure 6.3 , we found that focusing on outdated process bottlenecks
and pressure points is, by far, the best practice in helping to create healthier
business outcomes and improving work experiences for customers, suppliers,
partners, and employees. 4

Figure 6.3 Pervasive Process Potential: Actual Digitization vs. Pilots in
Flight
In that study, we found a range of ways in which companies are applying what
we call “digital process acupuncture”:
Insurers are capturing images with drones to reduce insurance underwriting
risk and bring them closer to real customer needs.
Retailers are using digital wallets and beacon technologies to create shopper
awareness and boost retail sales.
Manufacturers are using sensors, the Internet of Things, and RFID for real-
time monitoring to streamline the supply chain.
When organizations identify the pressure points and apply digital solutions in
very targeted ways, small changes can spark big results. Our research has found
that by applying digital tools and techniques, respondents are trimming “fat” to
the tune of 8% in cost reductions as well as building digital “muscle” with
revenue growth of 10%. In the aggregate, digital process improvements
implemented through targeted, narrow steps collectively propelled an 18% net
positive for the companies we studied. Spreading this highly focused approach
into the rest of the organization is critical, as it:
Significantly boosts the impact of cost reductions.
Speeds time-to-market improvements.
Eliminates friction points.
We also discovered that well over half of all respondents said digital process
initiatives have resulted in significant levels of process value chain integration.
(We'll give more detailed guidance on where to start this type of work in Chapter
7 .)
Trap 4: The Digital Denial Trap
Digital deniers like to say, “I love what Silicon Valley has provided in my
personal life. And, yes, some industries have been hit hard by digital. But we
won't be. Our industry is different.” Such thinking is dangerous; those who voice
it are in industries that haven't been fully hit by digital yet.
The digital revolution is unevenly distributed. That is, some industries, and their
supporting business models (i.e., newspapers, maps, book retailing) have forever
been transformed, while others (i.e., energy and utilities) are still relatively

untouched.
What accounts for this? There are many factors, including industry structure,
nature of the product or service, and regulatory restrictions. However, in our
view, the primary factor is the amount of data that is swarming the business.
In nature, elements become unstable with significant changes in temperature and
must transform to regain harmony with their environment. Similarly, many
businesses have become highly unstable in this era of hyperconnectivity. Just as
rising temperatures force change upon matter (with, say, ice turning to water),
today's rapid rise of information is forcing structural change upon many
corporate models.
Each year in New England, the changes in season turn winter's ice rink into
summer's swimming pond. Whether one skates on the ice, swims in the water, or
stares up at the clouds, the integrity of the water in any of its forms is never
questioned. Water is water, for regardless of its state, it is always two parts
hydrogen, one part oxygen. Importantly, we inherently understand the stability
of each form given its environment.
There's a strong parallel between the natural states of matter and the proper, or
natural, state of an organization. Just as the state of matter naturally changes
with increases in temperature, the state of the organization must change with
meaningful increases in information (see Figure 6.4 ).

Figure 6.4 Melting Points in Nature and Business
Unfortunately, many managers today are confused. They focus on the state of
their organization instead of its substance. For example, management at Borders,
Blockbuster, and other retailers defined their organizations as physical retailers
that happened to sell books or rent videos, instead of as book and video
providers that needed to take on the appropriate form for their market context.
Incorrectly conceptualizing the business proved deadly in those markets.
If your industry isn't yet addressing this structural challenge, it's because your
sector, like a substance in nature, simply has a different “melting point.” It's why
so many managers, yet to be hit by this technology wave, make statements like
“That's a music or book thing, but our industry is different.” And yet, the only
difference is the industry's melting point. For example, water melts at 32°
Fahrenheit, but aluminum melts at 1,221° and tin at just 449°. Just as no
substance is immune to heat no industry structure is immune to today's

substance is immune to heat, no industry structure is immune to today s
explosion of information.
Thus far in this chapter we've outlined the four big digital initiative killers. Now
let's turn to a more optimistic perspective to highlight the five approaches for
building winning digital business models.
Five Ways to Mine Gold from the New Machines
For companies working to get AHEAD, there isn't just one form of business
model transformation; there are five. A quick summary of each follows, and as
you prepare for the second half of the book (which is much more
implementation-oriented and where we go into much more detail about each of
these areas), think through which portions of your operations or potential digital
initiatives fit into which category.
Automate: What next level of automation can you apply to an existing
human-based process? Can you deploy AI-infused chatbots or kiosks into a
service center or registration desk? Can you build an automated process
machine that speeds a process in the way that the ATM sped up dispensing
cash? If your company is typical, you probably have half a dozen processes
ripe for robotic process automation (RPA).In Chapter 7 we describe the rapid
shift in which the new machine will begin to manage most, if not all,
portions of certain key processes. These will include areas such as claims
processing, accounts payable and receivable, legal discovery, service desk
incident resolution, network security management, and large portions of
customer service and support. In the next five years, this will be the new
battleground for cost savings and performance enhancement with the new
machine in that the stakes will be high and the economic incentives massive.
For example, with initial implementations of RPA, we typically see more
than 60% cost savings in the daily operations of a core process, with error
rates plummeting to near zero. Although such results will garner many
headlines, both good and bad, it will only be the beginning of the automation
story.
Halo: What products can you put a digital “halo” around with
instrumentation, thus creating new commercial models? What “dumb”
objects can become “smart?” What data can you generate that can help you
“see” things that were previously invisible, such as the performance of a
rotor blade in a turbine?

In our book on Code Halos, we outlined that any noun—any person, place,
or thing—had a digital self and a physical self, and we predicted that by
2020, any product costing more than $5 that you couldn't eat would be
instrumented. 5 Well, Marc Andreessen has taken that further by predicting
that in 20 years, every physical item will have a chip implanted in it. 6 Thus,
as a default, you should start thinking about instrumenting all the key
products and machines in your business model, and putting a halo around
them all. In Chapter 8 we explain how to create commercial value from
such efforts.
Enhance: Which human efforts can be enhanced by the new machine,
driving new levels of employee productivity and customer satisfaction? In
Chapter 9 , we outline how the machine becomes the new “colleague” of
your front-line workers, enhancing their efforts and helping your company
reach entirely new performance thresholds.
Abundance: How can you leverage the new machine to drive down the price
point of your products or services to be able to compete and win in low-cost,
high-volume markets—markets of abundance? With the new machine, which
of your products or services could be sold for 10 times less? Not 5% less, but
90% less. This may sound like madness, a prescription to destroy your
revenues. However, what if it led to a new abundance, to markets that might
be 100 times the size of your current market? In Chapter 10 we provide
tactics for identifying your own abundance markets.
Discovery: What areas of true invention are now available to you? How
much of your focus and budget is devoted to initiatives that won't pay off this
year but have enormous potential in the years ahead? If it's infinitesimal, you
likely have a future relevancy issue. In 1910, as the Model T gained
popularity, few could have envisioned the new markets to be discovered.
Who could have predicted suburbia, the big-box retailer (e.g., Walmart), fast
food (e.g., McDonald's), and national hotel chains (e.g., Holiday Inn)? Yet,
these were all inventions that were derived from the initial invention of the
mass-produced automobile.What new discoveries reside in your company?
And, importantly, how can you leverage the new machine to revolutionize
your R&D process? In Chapter 11 , we outline the new process for invention.
Those that are successful in their digital initiatives tend to be very clear-headed
about their goal. They balance each of these five value levers; be it the
automation of a business process, boosting the value of an existing product by
harnessing the data that surrounds it, enhancing human activities with digital

tools, enabling mass-market consumption of your market offerings, or creating
an entirely new offering with technology-based invention. They then utilize the
right teams, methods, and budgets to pursue that goal. Each of these end-states
requires its own path for digital reinvention, and all associated energies need to
be focused on that goal. There is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all model, and
firms that naïvely follow such an approach quickly encounter trouble.
The Management Opportunity of a Generation
We see many industrial-model leaders investing heavily to become hybrid
winners. This book is filled with lessons of these hybrids under construction:
GE, Philips, McGraw-Hill, Nike, Under Armour, Toyota. In looking at the
statements of intent from their CEOs, a pattern quickly emerges:
“It's absurd that you know more about your car than you know about your
body.…[Under Armour Connected Fitness will] fundamentally affect global
health.” Kevin Plank, CEO, Under Armour 7
“If we are to ensure that healthcare remains affordable and widely available
for future generations, we need to radically rethink how we provide and
manage it…and apply the technology that can help achieve these changes.”
Frans van Houten, CEO, Royal Philips 8
“Industrial companies are in the information business whether they want to
be or not.…Now, add to that a series of decisions every company needs to
make: ‘Do I outsource all of that? Do I do it myself? Do I change my
business model accordingly?' The decision we've made [at General Electric]
is that we just want to be all in.” Jeff Immelt, CEO, General Electric 9
“Toyota Connected will help free our customers from the tyranny of
technology. It will make lives easier and help us to return to our humanity.
From telematics services that learn from your habits and preferences, to use-
based insurance pricing models that respond to actual driving patterns, to
connected vehicle networks that can share road condition and traffic
information, our goal is to deliver services that make lives easier.” Zack
Hicks, CEO, Toyota Connected 10
“You know, when I first joined the company, a long time ago, we were a
manufacturing company. As we go forward, I want us to be known as a
manufacturing, a technology, and an information company. Because as our
vehicles become a part of the Internet of Things, and as consumers choose to

share their data with us, we want to be able to use that data to help make
their lives better. And also, create some business models that will help us
earn a return. That's where we're heading.” Mark Fields, CEO, Ford Motor
Co. 11
“Radically rethink.” “Fundamentally affect.” “Help us return to our humanity.”
“We just want to be all in.” These are words spoken by CEOs who are doing the
hard work to rewire their companies for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, to
define and implement the new business models.
This is the management challenge of a generation. Let's now explore how to
successfully take action against it.
Notes
1. Henry Blodget, “Buffett on Newspapers,” Business Insider, May 4, 2009,
http://www.businessinsider.com/henry-blodget-buffett-on-newspapers-2009-
5 .
2. Marisa Garcia, “SAS CEO Says He Wants Real Digital Change at Airlines
Not ‘Lipstick on a Pig,'” Skift, April 21, 2016,
https://skift.com/2016/04/21/sas-ceo-says-he-wants-real-digital-change-at-
airlines-not-lipstick-on-a-pig/ .
3. Stonewall Jackson Quotes, HistoryNet, http://www.historynet.com/stonewall-
jackson-quotes
4. Robert Hoyle Brown, “Digital Process Acupuncture: How Small Changes Can
Heal Business, and Spark Big Results,” Cognizant Technology Solutions,
February 2016, https://www.cognizant.com/whitepapers/Digital-Process-
Acupuncture-How-Small-Changes-Can-Heal-Business-and-Spark-Big-
Results-codex1438.pdf .
5. Malcolm Frank, Paul Roehrig and Ben Pring, Code Halos: How the Digital
Lives of People, Things, and Organizations Are Changing the Rules of
Business (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014),
https://www.amazon.com/Code-Halos-Organizations-Changing-
Business/dp/1118862074/ .
6. Madhumita Murgia, “Marc Andreessen: ‘In 20 Years, Every Physical Item
Will Have a Chip Implanted in It,” The Telegraph, Dec. 23, 2015,

http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/internet/12050185/Marc-Andreessen-
In-20-years-every-physical-item-will-have-a-chip-implanted-in-it.html .
7. Tom Foster, “Kevin Plank Is Betting Almost $1 Billion That Under Armour
Can Beat Nike,” Inc., http://www.inc.com/magazine/201602/tom-
foster/kevin-plank-under-armour-spending-1-billion-to-beat-nike.html .
8. Frans van Houten, “How Technology Will Transform Healthcare,” World
Economic Forum, Jan. 19, 2016,
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/rethinking-healthcare-with-the-
help-of-technology/ .
9. “GE's Jeff Immelt on Digitizing in the Industrial Space,” McKinsey & Co.,
October 2015, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/organization/our-insights/ges-jeff-immelt-on-digitizing-in-the-
industrial-space .
10. “Toyota Expands Focus on Software-and Data-Driven Mobility with Toyota
Connected,” Toyota press release, April 4, 2016,
http://corporatenews.pressroom.toyota.com/releases/toyota+software+
mobility+connected.htm .
11. Chris Ziegler and Nilay Patel, “Meet the New Ford, a Silicon Valley
Software Company,” The Verge, April 7, 2016,
http://www.theverge.com/2016/4/7/11333288/ford-ceo-mark-fields-
interview-electric-self-driving-car-software .

7 
AUTOMATE 
THE ROBOTS AREN'T COMING; THEY'RE HERE
When was the last time you went into a bank and wrote a check to get cash?
Went into a travel agency to book a flight? Created a font to make a PowerPoint
presentation? Can't remember? We can't either. All those things that people used
to do have been automated away.
Now, look around you in the office where you work. See what Fred's doing? See
what Anika's doing? Look at what you're doing. Lots of those things are about to
be automated away too.
As we've pointed out repeatedly in the previous chapters of this book, we are
riding on the cusp of a huge new wave of automated “white-collar” work that is
going to fundamentally change what millions and millions of people all around
the world do, Monday through Friday, 9 to 5.
For a manager, automating existing parts of your business with the new machine
provides a once-in-a-generation opportunity to change the cost structure of your
firm, while at the same time increasing the velocity and quality of your
operations.
The automation of the processes at the core of your organization is going to
make the last 25 years of Six Sigma, business process reengineering, and
outsourcing seem like an overture before the main symphony begins. While each
has provided many benefits (and some tears) along the way, all will pale in
comparison to the impact of digitizing your core processes. In the next few
pages, we cover several aspects of these automation dynamics: what automation
actually is, which parts of your business are the best candidates to be automated,
which jobs will be most impacted, the benefits you can expect, and the problems
to avoid.
Like many things, the decisions you have to make in creating the future of your
work boil down at the end of the day to simple economics. Applying new
machines to your long-standing core business processes can drive not just 3% to
6% of cost out of portions of your operations but 30% to 60% (or more). If this
sounds like hyperbole, recall our study that showed business already reducing
costs by an average of 8% while growing revenue by an average of 10% (as

shown in Figure 7.1 ). 1 These numbers add up, but there's more to come.
Consider that companies such as TriZetto (a Cognizant health care software
subsidiary) are using software robots to decrease health care payer costs by as
much as 90% for some middle-office business processes. Other companies such
as Blue Prism are applying bots to risk, fraud, claims processing, and loan
management in banking to provide similar savings. 2 (See Figure 7.2 for a range
of integrated industry-specific processes that are driving significant value.)
Figure 7.1 Digital Process Change Drives Significant Top-and Bottom-

Line Impact

Figure 7.2 Putting Customers in the Center of the Value Chain, Digitally

Figure 7.3 Familiar Automation in Our Daily Lives
Companies that are not taking advantage of automation are already paying a
significant “laggard penalty,” which will inhibit future investment. 3 Very
simply, if you wish to compete at the Amazon cost and the Google speed, you
have to automate significant portions of your operations during the next few
years.
Automation Is Not Optional
Automation is the first step in the journey of what economist Joseph Schumpeter
termed “creative destruction”—that is, the tendency for industrial change to
continuously destroy old economic structures and create new ones. 4 This may
sound a bit drastic, but to make it a bit clearer and less melodramatic, let's take a
trip back to a newsroom during the Reagan administration.
When Paul went to journalism school in the 1980s, newsrooms were full of
people who could take information from different sources and turn it into a clear,
concise narrative. The daily process of news-making—collection, reporting,
fact-checking, synthesis, writing, and communicating—required people, lots of
people, with education, judgment, and moxie. High IQ, high EQ (emotional
quotient), and gallons of coffee.
Nobody in 1986 could have imagined that within 40 years, large portions of that
activity would be replaced by a computer. But fast-forward to today, and that is
exactly what is happening.
In the past year, you have probably read dozens of news stories written by a bot
without realizing it. These have appeared in The Washington Post , USA Today ,
your local newspaper, and online news sources such as Yahoo! and ESPN. That
real-estate listing in your neighborhood, local weather forecasts, and updates on
your investment portfolio are increasingly being written not by a cub reporter but
by software developed by companies like Narrative Science or Automated
Insights. And this isn't isolated; it's happening at scale and continuing to grow.
The Associated Press alone now publishes more than 20,000 software-written
news stories a year, 5 and Automated Insights' software generated nearly 1.5
billion stories last year, personalized down to the individual level. 6
Many of these news stories aren't just simple regurgitations of data, like the
weather forecast or stock performance. Automation platforms are generating
nuanced language, woven into a true narrative that is engaging, friendly, fresh,

insightful…in fact, well, human. For example, look at the beginning of a story
on a local high school baseball game in Tennessee:
Oak Ridge Wildcat Matt McDaniel Belts Two Homers That Lead to 10–8
Win over Bearden
Tuesday was a great day for Matt McDaniel, as he clubbed two home runs
to carry the Wildcats to a 10–8 victory over Bearden at Farragut High
School in seven innings. 7
We could go on with more of the story, but you probably already get the point:
that it was all written by a system of intelligence. The language is colloquial and
aligned with both the local culture and the sport of baseball: “belts two homers,”
“clubbed two home runs.”
Using software robot “journalists,” news organizations have automated some of
the basic processes of standardized reporting, including data collection,
synthesis, writing, and distribution. Once the baseball game's scorecard data is
loaded into the bot, the only real “action” is telling the system to produce the
written output and then sending it to the required distribution channel (which, as
an aside, is automated as well). During the past few years, more than 10,000
stories on minor league baseball have been produced in this way. 8
Will news automation expand to the type of investigative reporting found on the
front page of the The New York Times or The Wall Street Journal ? Not likely
soon (although bots will certainly enhance the capabilities of investigative
journalists). But it has already had a significant impact in helping an industry—
one under massive cost pressure—find great levels of efficiency while providing
additional value to its customers.
This story isn't just about automating journalism. This trend—applying
automation technology to lower cost and improve productivity—is playing out in
nearly every industry. Like it or not, your competitor across the street will soon
gain the massive benefit of digital automation of core processes. If you don't
keep pace, your cost structure will soon be unsustainable. Additionally, the
savings generated through automation are what will then pay for the coming
digital innovations. Fortunately, most of us have a running start.
We Have Been Automating with Digital for Some Time
The way in which Narrative Science or Automated Insights is automating
journalism and other writing-based activities such as stock-performance
reporting is very sophisticated and represents a new frontier of robotics.

p
g
y
p
p
However, again, let's not forget we've been consuming automation for a long
time, and much as with AI, once used it's not even noticed.
Consider the last time you went to the airport. During your drive, you likely
passed through an E-ZPass tollbooth on the highway. Pulling into the airport
parking lot, a machine dispensed your parking pass. In the terminal, you
received your ticket and checked your bags at a kiosk. Then walking to your
gate, you stopped at the ATM to get cash for your trip.
Some two decades ago, people were working at each of those spots: the tollbooth
attendant, the parking garage attendant, the airline clerk, and the bank teller. Yet,
many (but not all) of those jobs have been automated away (others have been
enhanced with technology, which we'll cover later), and as a consumer you are
probably grateful.
From your house to the airport gate, your trip was at least a half-hour faster than
in pre-automation days. And is anybody really nostalgic about the tollbooth
attendant, that poor soul who had to stand in that cold metal box for eight hours,
making change, breathing in exhaust, all the while creating long lines for the rest
of us? Not even the ex-tollbooth attendant wants that job to come back.
With the new machine, we are now crossing a line to making “intelligent”
processes truly intelligent. The new waves of automation are popping up all
around us, yet unlike the EZPass scanners over the highway, they are both so
subtle and powerful (as in robo-journalism) that they may even go unnoticed.
Software Should Be Eating Your Core Operations
In your company, exactly where will such automation take place? The best areas
are in your core operations, tucked away from customers. Automation's low-
hanging fruit—massive cost savings found in the guts of your operations—is in
what we refer to as your back and middle offices.
Your back office includes core functions that support any corporation:
information technology, finance, human resources, facilities management,
administration, and so on. The middle office encompasses the industry-specific
core processes that run across your value chain: claims processing in insurance,
logistics management in retail, trade settlement in banking.
What if you could run these functions or processes at half the cost and with
double the throughput? With continuous improvement and quality control? And
with all aspects—every transaction—fully instrumented and recorded? With the

new machine, you can.
As with journalism, these areas of your business, at their core, comprise an
information supply chain that gathers, synthesizes, transforms, and distributes
data. The list of candidates, as shown in Figure 7.4 , is so extensive as to be
surprising.


Figure 7.4 Potential Process Automation Opportunities
Each and every one of these areas has an intelligent automation solution focused
on it and available for deployment: AiCure for clinical data science; Talla for
HR management; NextAngles for compliance reporting in financial services.
Kevin Kelly, founder of Wired magazine, has gone as far as to say the business
plans of the next 10,000 Silicon Valley start-ups are easy to forecast: “Take X
and add AI.” 9
While the following lists may be useful, given that these are all areas in which
the new machine is being implemented for automation purposes, how do you
find your best candidates? After all, the same process from one company to
another may be structured very differently. One man's ceiling is another man's
floor.
TriZetto Automates the U.S. Health Care Business
The U.S. health care industry, worth $3 trillion in 2014, is one of the largest
and most complex industries in the world. 10 It's also one of the most ripe for
automation-based reform. According to some estimates, one-third of all
spending on U.S. health care is completely wasted. 11
Colorado-based TriZetto was founded 20 years ago with a mission to bring
the power of automation to bear on this dysfunctional system. As one of the
first software-as-a-service vendors, TriZetto pioneered the ideas of applying
multi-tenancy and platforms to the management of the processes that run
some of the market's biggest health care payers (the insurance companies)
and providers (the hospitals and health care groups). As of 2015, TriZetto
processed 60% of U.S. health care claims, and in the same year it was
acquired by Cognizant for $2.7 billion.
Early in its journey, TriZetto leadership realized that the real value of the
company's offering was in using software to automate high-volume,
routinized work in the payer space (e.g., the many steps that happen behind
the scenes of your health insurance provider in the United States). Given that
health care regulations in the United States require at least 85% of costs to
be related to health care, and no more than 15% of costs to administration, to
be competitive, providers must lower their costs as much as possible while
keeping care quality constant. To help make this happen, over the years
TriZetto has built and bought various software assets to automate and
improve many health care insurance back-office work processes such as

improve many health care insurance back-office work processes, such as
care planning, care management, payments, and so on.
We spoke with Lawrence Bridge, senior vice president of strategy and
corporate development, who explained that automation not only reduces cost
but also helps provide better health care outcomes. “Tools that we're
bringing to market, such as Healthcare Productivity Automation (HPA), are
able to essentially eliminate a lot of the manual processes,” he said.
The operational results are, in a word, stunning. The “before” picture of how
a claim is processed, according to Bridge, involves 120 people sitting in
cubicles working with a lot of paper and largely outdated IT systems. In the
“after” picture, implemented within a matter of weeks, one person works
with a system of intelligence to process the same volume of claims. “Now
the team is working to expand their automation capability to customer
service and other work that has traditionally required a human worker,
including, eventually, actual medical care,” Bridge said.
In TriZetto's work, automation does not equal immediate job loss. While
some jobs are certainly eliminated, many others are redeployed in response
to growing demand for a wide range of other services. Health care in the
United States is moving from a centralized model to a more consumer-
focused one. An increasing number of insured people—due to the
Affordable Care Act—along with growing health care needs due to an aging
population, is resulting in an overall increase in demand for health care. This
demand requires both people and machines to succeed. “You could never do
this without automation. It would take a million people,” Bridge said. “But
now, you've got government regulations compressing and shaping the cost
and spend curves. You've got technology maturing at a crazy rate.…So it's
the perfect storm to drive…this mass personalization model in the health
care payer space.”
Even if you're not in the health care payer business, you can take away some
key automation lessons from TriZetto for your company:
Focus on a high-volume core business process. TriZetto applies
software to routinized recurring work in the middle office of health care
payers. There is literally no company we've worked with that could not
apply this same approach. Every company has automation possibilities.
Our job now is to figure out where we can apply new systems of
intelligence to routinized, high-volume, and often mind-numbing
business processes. (More on this follows.)

Be bold. TriZetto leaders build tools to automate work, so they know
what's realistic vs. theoretical. Their rule of thumb is to shoot for 50%
automation of an existing process. Targeting 4% or 5% is simply not
enough to make it worthwhile. If you start out willing to accept less than
25% automation, you are undoubtedly aiming too low.
Find the patterns. Automation is a scale play. Companies deploying
automation well achieve the most gains by eliminating custom solutions.
As Bridge put it, “The companies that…really well defined their benefit
programs or very much defined their provider contracts.…were the ones
able to auto-adjudicate and drive standardization.…The ones that really
won historically were the ones able to get standardization, replicability,
and consistent procedure. When we look forward, I think it's going to be
all about the use of digital, both on the administrative and the health care
cost side of the business.”
What to Do on Monday? Flick Your Automation-On
Switch
Automation doesn't happen automatically. To that end, here are some lessons
learned from those who have implemented process automation to help kick-start
your automation initiatives. We have found these four “rules of the road” to be
particularly useful:
1. Set your 25%–25% automation imperative.
2. Find your process-automation targets.
3. Break through the “brass wall.”
4. Build a repeatable process to obliterate work.
Set Your 25%–25% Automation Imperative
When you walk into work, (nearly) everyone has a purpose. Things hum along
pretty much the same way, every day. On any given Monday morning, it's
almost impossible to imagine work being done differently. But this is exactly
what you need to do first. To begin any meaningful change using automation,
you must suspend disbelief and imagine that things can be done in an entirely
new way.
We think your baseline expectation should be cost reductions of 25% with an

We think your baseline expectation should be cost reductions of 25%, with an
associated productivity increase of 25%. Based on where the current average is
today (around 15%), and the productivity improvement seen by some solutions
(up to 90%), this should be your achievable near-term rule of thumb for initial
robotic process automation efforts.
The reason the 25%–25% rule is effective is that it forces your team to think
differently about “the way things are done around here.” When the goals are,
say, 5% cost savings or 5% productivity gains, your team will continue to think
in traditional ways. By raising the bar to 25%–25%, it will quickly become clear
that the traditional cocktail of reorganization, outsourcing, and/or enterprise
software will not be good enough. Only the digital automation of the process
will deliver such results. Put simply, if you cannot gain at least 25% cost
savings, you don't have a real “automation” solution. And if you cannot find
25% productivity increases, then the AI platform is not performing as it should.
In addition, you need to create a “no-excuses” environment. There will be those
who push back, saying—for various reasons—“that can't be done.” Yet it's
becoming clear there are no true hurdles with technology, cost, or scale. Once
you set that goal, it's time to pick your spots.
Find Your Process-Automation Targets
When looking for your initial automation opportunities, which should be no
more than two or three processes, you should “pick your spots” on the human-
machine work continuum (see Figure 7.5 ). The best automation starting points
are to the left of the continuum; in these processes, the machine can rapidly take
over the majority of the work effort. As we described in Chapter 3 , these should
be areas with a high percentage of work tasks that can be automated.

Figure 7.5 The Human–Machine Work Continuum
You need to be thoughtful when selecting your first automation targets, because
the success, or lack thereof, of these initial implementations will dictate your
subsequent enterprise AI initiatives. In our work with dozens of intelligent
automation initiatives, we've seen that the successful ones all meet these simple
criteria:
Highly repetitive tasks: Find tasks that are highly repetitive but that occur
at great scale within your organization. In short, look for activities that lots
of people do every day. It could be processing an invoice, proofreading
documentation, “picking and packing,” reconciling orders, answering the
same questions over and over on the phone, and so on. Many of these tasks
are already heavily automated; but many, in our observation, are not. Give
yourself an honest answer: Are these areas—and many more—as fully
automated as they could be? And is there intelligence in the current process?
Any high-volume, highly repetitive task is a prime candidate for automation.
Tasks with low demand for human judgment: Robots are great at
calculation; humans less so. Conversely, humans are better at complex
judgments, while AI and algorithms are not. Thus, jobs that lean heavily on
decision trees (as opposed to ambiguity, intuition, insight, complex
judgment) are strong candidates for automation. Machines may be able to
inform decisions, but making more nuanced judgment calls will for the
foreseeable future require a human touch. Conversely, any job that's mostly a

series of “if-this-then-that” steps should be automated.
Tasks requiring low levels of empathy: Order entry, claims adjudication,
and invoice reconciliation are processes that require accuracy, consistency,
and speed…but rarely empathy. If a bot can materially boost accuracy,
consistency, and speed, many of us will settle for dumping the empathy
factor. There are many areas within your organization right now to which
that logic can be applied. It won't be hard to find them.
Tasks generating and handling high volumes of data: Any process with
the potential for generating lots of data, particularly customer data, should be
automated for the sole purpose of collecting that data—your proprietary raw
material. Humans, even if you can afford enough of them, will not be able to
deal with the volumes of data when more and more “things” become smart
and connected. As one simple example, imagine when all the street lights in
a medium-size city are “smart” and able to report on not only their own
“health” (i.e., whether they need replacing) but can also report on vehicle
traffic flows. The volumes of data generated by this type of city-wide
information “mesh” will be far beyond the human capacity to manage and
make sense of it. In scenarios like this, automation won't replace people but
will be a fundamental building block of creating new services and new
insights that in turn will generate new value. In your organization, you
should look for areas in which processes and workflows can be sensor-
enabled and from which transaction data, previously unavailable, can be
generated and managed.
Identifying your automation targets will give your teams a clear path to success,
but there still remains a significant hurdle in managing change within your
organization. That leads to our third rule of the road.
Break Through the “Brass Wall”
OK, you may have identified your initial automation targets, which are being
pursued across your industry and clearly pass the 25%–25% threshold. Everyone
in your company will see the wisdom of your decision and will be fully
supportive, right? Wrong.
We learned this lesson 20 years ago during the aforementioned business process
reengineering (BPR) wave. Back in the 1990s, acolytes of Michael Hammer
proclaimed, “Don't automate. Obliterate!” The mantra was to find ways to
deliver more with less—way less.
BPR in theory was very sound Yet in most cases the practice failed (widely

BPR, in theory, was very sound. Yet, in most cases, the practice failed (widely
soiling the name of the movement in the process). Why? Quite often, the very
middle managers who were responsible for architecting and implementing BPR
initiatives soon figured out they were reengineering themselves out of a job.
Politics and sabotage ensued.
In hindsight, this was the “brass wall” phenomenon, which was first seen with
reengineering efforts within police forces of major cities in the United States
during the 1980s. During the explosion of drug-trade-related violence, police
chiefs in New York, Boston, Miami, and Los Angeles all looked to establish new
ways of policing (e.g., more cops walking the beat, following the “broken
windows” philosophy of addressing even the smallest of crimes, leveraging data
for smarter policing, and flattening the organization model to remove
bureaucracy and cost). The people at the top of the policing pyramid (e.g., the
police chief and his or her team, as well as municipal leaders) were hugely
supportive, looking to drive the change. Young police officers, living with the
frustration of the existing system, were largely supportive of these new policing
techniques, as well. Yet, such change efforts were initially halted by the “brass
wall”—the officers sitting in the middle of the pyramid (those with brass on their
shoulders), who were at least a couple of decades into their careers, had earned
their way into seniority and the power structure, and could begin to smell their
pensions. To them, the perceived personal threat of such changes greatly
outweighed any potential community benefits.
This brass-wall phenomenon is reappearing in today's corporate environment
with digital automation initiatives. Senior employees may recognize, “Yes,
automation is good for our customers and investors, but is it good for me?”
Rarely are their comments so direct. Instead, you will be hit with issues, such as
“That's impossible.” “It's too expensive.” “We'll get in trouble with regulators.”
“We've done it this way for 50 years, and it's working fine.” “Nobody can prove
the ROI today.” “We should focus our efforts elsewhere.”
This is a tough problem to solve, but solve it you must. We recommend
identifying the most vocal proponents of “business as usual,” talking to them,
and explaining to them the reality of what automation means for the
organization. Invite them to “get with the program” and help their colleagues get
with it too. If they can't, avoid them and have them focus their energies
elsewhere. And if there are no other opportunities available in other parts of your
organization, let them go (of course following all the proper HR protocols).
Achieving the goals of automation is too important to allow failure to happen
due to the intransigence of employees whose skills and experience are no longer
d fit f
k i f
d
ith
t
f i t lli

a good fit for work infused with systems of intelligence.
As we stated earlier, there will be blood; automation will hurt. Nobody said this
would be easy. But automation is a fact of life, and facts of life need to be faced.
Build a Repeatable Process to Obliterate Work
Once you've set bold goals for making automation happen and have chosen solid
targets that will lead to business impact, the next step is to convert work from
“Then Margaret in procurement does this” to “Beep. Done.” This is how you go
about doing that.
In every case of successful automation we've seen, a creative business leader
looked at how a process was being executed; concluded “We really stink at
this”; and found a better way of using code, artificial intelligence, and algorithms
to improve the speed, accuracy, and cost profile of the process.
Additionally, these leaders realized they need to apply the new tools, which may
be fairly simple or incredibly sophisticated, to automate very specific process
steps. Regardless of whether you are re-creating a business process from scratch
or injecting a tried-and-true automation technology into middle-or back-office
processes, there is a path you should follow.
You will need to adapt the path depending on the complexity of what you're
doing; what follows is a high-level walkthrough, but the seven steps for
automating any process or task are basically the same:
1. Set your automation strategy . As discussed previously, the first step is
setting a bold vision for applying the new machines to reduce costs. You
simply can't skip this one.
2. Start small. In spite of the large potential benefits of automation, it's a best
practice to start small. Begin by finding a few pressure points in key
processes. General proclamations of “do automation” are a waste of time.
Every successful automation example we've seen has been focused on a
specific task or business process. What is a “process pressure point?”
Typically, it's a bottleneck that frustrates everybody today (e.g., payments,
mortgage loan applications, medical records management, travel planning,
etc.).
3. Apply the new machines . This is where “market sensing” will pay off. (We
have more on this in Chapter 10 on abundance.) Identify the relevant
automation tools that already exist and test them out in a limited trial. Of

course, if there are no commercially available tools for the process you are
looking to automate, you may need to build your own AI platform. 12 This
will certainly be more complicated; look to buy before you build.
4. Develop a prototype . You have a strategy, some process targets, and a few
potential automation machines. It's time now to put the pieces together, but
you need to start with a prototype. This phase includes blueprinting and the
first rough build of your automation engine applied to your specific context.
You'll need the data, the machine, and a clear understanding of what happens
before, during, and after the automation activity. When an automation tool
already exists, this may require only minor configuration. If, on the other
hand, you're building a new engine, this can take some time. The output of
this step is a prototype that more or less works in a controlled environment.
There will be bugs, and there'll be plenty of people saying it doesn't work,
but you need to exit this step with enough of a working system to warrant
moving to a production environment.
5. Pilot and scale . Now it's time for real work to be affected. As with any big
change, discretion is the better part of valor, so start small—for example, a
subset of the work, a single store, some customer interactions. All the
questions around security, privacy, and compliance must be resolved, and
people's experiences should be assessed to avoid heading into a knowledge-
process industrial accident.
6. Analyze the results . What has the pilot told you? What have you learned?
What went well? What didn't go so well? Be honest; be critical. Look for
reasons to say, “No, this isn't working.” Pivot; adjust; recalibrate. Stay
resolute.
7. Repeat! The requirement to automate is a constant, so no single project will
ensure success in the digital economy.
These seven steps should be the foundation for reaching the next level of
automation in your organization. 13
Automation Is a Means, Not an End
This chapter has focused on the practical aspects of automation in the
corporation: where it is occurring today, how to pick your spots, the critical
success factors, and what you should expect on the journey. We've shown that
robotic process automation is our new loom, our new steam engine. The cost
savings generated from these next levels of automation will provide the cash

savings generated from these next levels of automation will provide the cash
needed to fuel investment in new markets and new ideas. The data generated by
automation is at the heart of creating new products, better customer
relationships, and more transparency. Leaders who create the ongoing
momentum for using automation—every quarter looking for new automation
opportunities using the criteria and guidelines we've presented—will ensure they
have the fuel needed to win.
If you're managing work that is ripe for automation, it's not a time for talk, to
simply say, “We are on the cusp of change!” It's time to get busy. If your
company's rooms are full of people doing work that can be automated, it's time
to realize that is not sustainable.
And finally, you need to realize and remember that the future of work doesn't
stop at “A,” automation. There are four more value levers in our model to go:
“H,” “E,” “A,” and “D.” Automation is not an end in its own right, it is simply a
means to an end. In the next chapter, we'll look at “H”—how you can build halos
of meaningful data, make everything a “code generator,” and convert that data
into dollars (and pounds, and euros, and yen).
Notes
1. Robert Hoyle Brown, “Digital Process Acupuncture: How Small Changes Can
Heal Business, and Spark Big Results,” Cognizant Technology Solutions,
February 2016, https://www.cognizant.com/whitepapers/Digital-Process-
Acupuncture-How-Small-Changes-Can-Heal-Business-and-Spark-Big-
Results-codex1438.pdf .
2. “Robotic Automation: Case Study,” Robohub, http://robohub.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/01/BluePrism-Case-Study-for-Robohub.pdf .
3. In our study of 2,000 global companies, we calculated the laggard penalty by
analyzing the difference in cost and revenue performance of digital “leaders”
and “laggards.” We found that individual laggard companies would miss out
on about $692 million vs. their leader peers between 2015 and 2018.
4. According to Schumpeter, the “gale of creative destruction” describes the
“process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic
structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating
a new one.” (Source: Wikipedia entry on Joseph Schumpeter.)

5. Matt Egan, “Robots Write Thousands of News Stories a Year, but Not This
One,” CNN, June 11, 2015, http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/11/media/robots-
journalists-media-jobs/ .
6. Automated Insights website, https://automatedinsights.com/ .
7. This news story, from the OakRidger local newspaper on May 7, 2013, carried
a byline of “By Narrative Science and GameChanger Media,”
http://www.oakridger.com/article/20130507/SPORTS/130509938 .
8. James Kotecki, “Take Me Out to the Ballgame,” Automated Insights, July 17,
2016, https://automatedinsights.com/blog/take-automated-ball-game-next-
chapter-ai-ap-partnership/
9. Chris Dixon, “What's Next in Computing?” Medium.com , Feb. 21, 2016,
https://medium.com/software-is-eating-the-world/what-s-next-in-computing-
e54b870b80cc#.we598fxrh .
10. “National Health Expenditures 2014 Highlights,” Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services, https://www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-
systems/statistics-trends-and-
reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/downloads/highlights.pdf .
11. Donald Berwick and Andrew Hackbarth, “Eliminating Waste in U.S.
Healthcare,” JAMA , Vol. 307, No. 14, April 11, 2012,
http://www.oregon.gov/oha/analytics/MetricsDocs/Eliminating_Waste_in_US
.
12. We're not going into detail here about the new product-development process.
There are plenty of other books and experts in the market.
13. For more in-depth ideas about building a practice for new products and
services, a good place to look is Eric Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today's
Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful
Businesses , Crown Business, Sept. 13, 2011.

8 
HALO 
INSTRUMENT EVERYTHING, CHANGE THE GAME
Several years ago, we wrote Code Halos to outline how any “noun”—any
person, place, or thing—actually has both a physical self and a virtual self. Once
instrumented and tracked, an invisible halo of code emerges around the object,
and this “digital twin” often provides more insight and value than the actual
physical item itself.
This is how, having never met you as a consumer in person, Amazon and Netflix
know your tastes in literature and movies better than your family and friends do.
These halos are central to how the FANG vendors can build such personal and
valuable customer relationships.
In the time since we wrote that book, winning with data has since gone
mainstream, and leveraging Code Halos has become a strategic imperative for
nearly every type of business. The race is on to win through instrumentation, and
established companies are changing the rules of competition across many
industries, including:
Industrial machinery: Bosch, John Deere, Caterpillar, General Electric,
Siemens, Boeing, and Airbus, with combined revenues approaching $ 500
billion annually, view halo-based competition as central to their strategies, as
they are all now instrumenting their machines as a default. Whereas these
firms until recently competed on only physical aspects—the quality,
price/performance, and safety of their products—they are now focused on
the value of the virtual.
Athletic apparel: Nike, Adidas, and Under Armour are all looking at annual
growth rates of more than 15% between 2015 and 2020—with Under
Armour aiming to double in size during that time—based on the power of
instrumented shoes and clothing. 1 In the process, these companies are
transitioning from new-age cobblers to health information platforms.
Automobiles: Toyota, BMW, Ford, GM, Mercedes-Benz, and Tesla are
investing a combined $6 billion in digitization capabilities, primarily
focusing on revolutionizing the automobile through instrumentation. Doing
so will redefine not just the car but also car ownership and driving itself.

Insurance: Progressive, Allstate, and Travelers are leading the charge in
telematics devices, as the instrumentation of cars, homes, and buildings
promises to transform customer relationships along with actuarial science
itself through real-time asset monitoring. The traditional insurance model,
based on static and one-to-many customer engagements, is soon to become
context based, situational, and one-to-one.
There is now no limitation, technical or financial, for connecting anything to the
Internet and then infusing it with the brilliance of a system of intelligence.
The question now is: What to do about it.
Every “Thing” Is Now a Code Generator
The cost of instrumenting everything is now too low, and the potential value too
high, to avoid. As we noted in Code Halos :
[Winners in the digital economy] have mastered the ability to create and
manage the Code Halos surrounding their customers, products, services,
and entire organizations to establish new thresholds of performance. In
wrapping those widgets with digits, they have created highly personalized
customer experiences, products, and services that deliver not just utility but
also insight and meaning at unassailable levels of efficiency. 2
Boeing's Digital Airline, Philips's connected lighting systems, and Toyota's
smart cars are all examples of these ideas being applied in the enterprise context.
In each case, business leaders are turning their key products into code
generators, thus creating the raw materials (data) for the digital economy.
Algorithms and AI, integrated into systems of intelligence, convert that data into
valuable insights that drive business outcomes.
With all this activity, the failure to take action at this point and turn “things” into
code generators could almost be considered corporate malpractice. To get
started, here are some key tactics to making this work in your world.
Three New Rules of Competition
After helping hundreds of clients learn how to compete on code over the past
few years, we have identified three key principles for success:
Instrumentation is no longer elective; it is now core curriculum. Code
Halos began in the media and entertainment markets, but they don't end

there. As recently as 2013, many thought the digital movement would be
isolated to a handful of industries and would not expand into nearly every
industry you can name, as it has done.
Code is more valuable than things. The value of code can often meet or
exceed the value of any physical device. Many view this as “turning water
into wine,” as traditional products are transformed into platforms that seal
customer relationships. A running shoe of old is the data platform of today,
and the virtual has as much or even more value than the physical.
Never turn them off. Instrumenting every “thing” also means making it
continually connected to the Internet. Value can't grow exponentially when
engagement is an episodic, once-in-a-while thing. Connections with data
need to be always-on.
For a specific example of how these three principles are playing out in the
market, let's take a look at a health insurer in Johannesburg, South Africa.
Step Away from the Donut!
Founded in 1992, Discovery Limited provides integrated financial services,
including life and health insurance, to more than 6.9 million people
(primarily in South Africa but also in the UK, Europe, the United States,
China, Asia, and Australia). The company has successfully integrated the
new raw materials, new machines, and new business models to modernize a
very traditional—some might say stodgy—business.
Brett Tromp, chief financial officer, and Emile Stipp, chief actuary,
explained that government regulation in South Africa required that everyone
have access to health insurance and that everyone must pay the same
premium for coverage. As Tromp told us, “In other words, we couldn't
charge a higher premium for somebody that's on their deathbed rather than
somebody who is perfectly healthy. And…we have to accept anybody who
wants to take out insurance from us.…We can't deny access to anybody.”
This sounds like a disastrous context for an insurance business, but
Discovery leaders figured out that the way to win was actually to keep
people healthy , and they decided to use technology, coupled with a
sophisticated benefit system for members, to lower health risks while
building a successful business.
According to Tromp, “We couldn't just be an insurance company. We had to

be an insurance company and a wellness company.” Discovery leaders knew
that the fuel for their business had to be, no surprise here, data. They needed
to know things like: How many times am I going to the gym? When do I go
for a run? Am I eating healthy food? What's my blood pressure, cholesterol,
and BMI?
They built a system of apps and supporting systems so members can track
and share this data, linking to fitness devices, food diaries, and even driving
habits. It's not a one-way street though. Discovery realized that people need
to “get” something meaningful in return for “giving” over their very
personal data. Insurance customers who engage in healthy behavior get real
benefits, including things like discounts on healthy food, reduced airfares,
Apple Watches you can earn by exercising, movie tickets, and so on.
Discovery has built a thriving business based on connecting insurance
customer Code Halos with benefits. If this all still sounds a bit too fuzzy and
irrationally exuberant, consider that Discovery Limited's stock price nearly
doubled between November 2013 and November 2015. New business was
up 51% from 2014 to 2015. Discovery Health now has a 38% market share
with improving profits, better savings on insurance fraud, and decreasing
costs (recently down by 14%).
The Discovery Health story shows how applying Code Halo thinking can
help a traditionally conservative business create new markets in a world
where systems of intelligence can easily do things that were impossible only
a few years ago. There are many lessons to be learned, but here are a few of
the most important ones:
Connect the Three M's. Discovery Health recognized that it needed to
know more about healthy behaviors than ever before, so it built systems
to collect that information and keep it secure. The company uses systems
of intelligence, including more than 250 people employed simply to
explore its massive data sets to unearth patterns (because machines still
can't ask smart questions). One of its most important innovations is, of
course, an entirely new business model that builds relationships around
healthy behaviors for customers while driving revenue up and costs
down. New raw materials, new machines, and new business models are
all successfully deployed in what is traditionally considered an industry
highly resistant to change.
Make a promise. Many of the innovators we interviewed, when

discussing how they are building new digital solutions, emphasized a
focus on something beyond pure business results. Discovery's leaders
said the same thing. Their focus, the promise of their business, is to make
people healthy. They know if they do that, they can build a wildly
successful insurance business. And that's exactly the right perspective we
should all have going into the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Stipp said,
“So this whole process of making people healthier [is] a central part of
what we do.…Everything that we do stems from it. So when we see that
Apple is launching a new watch [with fitness capabilities], what we
thought is, ‘How can we use this to make people healthier?’ And our
next thought is, ‘If people are excited about Apple Watches and they
want them, how can we use that excitement to achieve this vision?’”
Every day, Discovery focuses on keeping that promise, and the results
follow.
Build a relationship. We focus a lot on technology in this book because
it's a critical element of winning in the digital economy. Discovery's
leaders know that the tools are powerful means to an end. Their ultimate
goal is to use technology in a way that keeps people healthy, not to build
some tremendously intrusive surveillance system because they know
people would reject that. Their goal is to build an ongoing relationship
with customers. “[If] you think about insurance, particularly in life
insurance…you get your policy, sign the paper for it, and then forget
about it. And then when you die, your wife thinks about the fact that you
have insurance. But there's no interaction. And this changes it
completely,” Tromp told us. “We talk to you every day. You talk to us
every day. It changes your relationship that almost no other insurance
company would have.”
Others we spoke with had a similar perspective. They focused first on
making people healthy, supporting education, or helping with financial
security, then they figured out how to use data, new machines, and new
business models to make it happen. Success follows.
Become a “Know-It-All”
Why instrument everything and build solutions around information? Because
doing so sets you on the path to being a “Know-It-All” business. With sensors
and instrumentation, it's now possible to collect and analyze information about

everything, to know everything about everything.
Before the advent of the Know-It-All business, the answers to many questions
(e.g., real-time equipment status of an in-flight plane, the immediate impact of
an economic event, a student's real-time performance on a particular assignment)
were often simply guesses and would take time to figure out.
Earlier we introduced a few examples of this. To determine how a particular
plane engine is performing in-flight, for example, the maintenance crew at
Heathrow would collect some post-flight information and sort of have an idea of
the metrics of the flight, but much of their perspective would be based on
hunches and educated guesses, and would be available eight hours after the
flight had landed.
To determine how an interest rate change in New Zealand would impact state-
issued bonds in California, the traders at your local broker would check their
Excel spreadsheets with complex equations showing the relationship between x
and y , or a and b. But ask about the impact of x on b and ask them for it now ,
and the phone line would probably go quiet.
When asked how Johnny did on today's lesson in differential calculus, a teacher
in a traditional school would probably have some sense of how the student was
performing on a semester-to-semester basis, but he or she wouldn't know for
sure whether Johnny really understood the difference between his local maxima
or minima at this very moment.
Let's look at how General Electric (GE), one of the most venerable industrial
brands in the world, is adopting this model to get more from its machines.
GE's Rolling Data Center
General Electric may be one and a quarter centuries old, but it now views
itself as a software start-up. Halo thinking—and action—is now pervasive
across all divisions of the company, as GE instruments its jet engines, CT
scanners, power turbines, oil rigs, and locomotives to redefine customer
relationships with a “digital twin” of these machines. GE is leading the
Industrial Internet and pursuing the $225 billion market opportunity. 3
By building a Code Halo around its train engines, GE can use sensor
technology and analytics to provide seemingly small improvements that
together lead to business gains worth billions. The company's latest
locomotive, the Tier 4, is armed with over 200 sensors, and this “rolling data

center” is transforming customer relationships in several ways.
Zero unscheduled downtime: An instrumented machine can provide
information on its own needs for predictive maintenance. Through
continual collection and analysis of sensor-generated data, a machine can
essentially “wave its hand,” telling maintenance engineers, “I have a
small problem over here that may soon turn into a large one,” be it a
failing valve, a clogged fuel line, or an overheating rotor. Through such
instrumented and automated maintenance, GE can ensure that small
problems never become large problems and that a GE machine that is
often central to a customer's operations will never let them down.
Finding the 1%: We all know there's waste in our daily operations.
With its intelligent machines, GE can turn to its customer base and say,
“Together, let's go find the low-hanging fruit. Let's find the first 1%.”
Spread across an entire rail network, such as that of BNSF Railway, this
1% can quickly turn into tens of millions of dollars in cost savings that
drop almost instantly to the bottom line.
Coaching the user: One way to find that 1% is to guide users in making
the most effective decisions. In the case of GE Transportation, this could
be the smart locomotive telling the engineer how to best cross a
particular mountain pass. That is, the machine can advise on how to
optimize fuel efficiency on the way up the mountain, and how to best
utilize the brakes on the way down. This is done not in some generic
fashion but mile by mile, turn by turn, based on the history of the track,
the current weather, the driving style of the specific engineer, and the
load being transported. The result is fuel savings of 3% to 17%.
No machine is an island: A single intelligent GE Tier 4 can provide all
these benefits, but a fleet of intelligent locomotives, all connected
together, can take performance to another level (as shown in Figure 8.1 ).
After all, a train is only as efficient as its network; through fleet
instrumentation, GE Transportation's customers can boost the efficiency
of their yard operations and rail networks by 10%. 4
Source : GE Transportation

Figure 8.1 GE's Intelligent Locomotive
Through such efforts, it's clear how GE's (still young) Industrial Internet
initiatives are changing the basis of competition in each of its industries. It's
a great showcase for how every physical thing can—and should—be nearly
painted with different sensors to become essential elements of systems of
intelligence.
In fact, GE's moves to instrument and sensor-enable its entire portfolio of
products and machines is at the core of its Industrial Internet strategy, which
is at the core of its overall corporate strategy, period. It's no wonder why, in
GE's view, the Industrial Internet is set to generate a market worth trillions
of dollars by 2030. GE's CEO, Jeff Immelt, put it this way when talking
about the locomotive example: “Trillions of dollars of wealth have been
created in Industrial Internet stocks over the last 15 years. If you look out 10
or 15 years, there's going to be trillions of dollars of wealth created in the
Industrial Internet, and we're just in the first inning.” 5
Know Your Back Office Too!
In a Know-It-All business everything can be known, should be known, and must

be known. The new rules of business are based on knowing and knowing more
than your competitors do. Get this right: know and win. Get this wrong: guess
and lose.
As of now, using data and devices to upgrade consumer experiences is nothing
new. The big work ahead is applying the same philosophy to other vital, but
maybe less high-profile, aspects of enterprise work. This Know-It-All mindset is
already springing to life in some common enterprise back-office processes:
Human resource management: Google leverages instrumentation
internally to optimize its people management by analyzing the formal,
informal, and personal information its employees generate throughout the
day. Google tries to know all of its roughly 57,000 employees in much more
detail than is typical in a large enterprise and works to personalize career
trajectories for its entire staff. Laszlo Bock, senior advisor at Google and
former senior vice president of people operations (or human resources) at the
company, points to the positive economic impact this approach generates:
better recruitment, retention, and job satisfaction rates (all with an associated
financial implication) than found at competitors. The Code Halos around its
people allow Google to apply the same type of rigor to its people-based
decisions as it does to its engineering decisions. Microsoft's $26 billion
acquisition of LinkedIn in June 2016 is premised on a similar idea—of
harvesting the data around people to inject the same type of collaboration
and “social selling” that is common online into how big businesses run these
types of processes.
Supply chain management: The concept of building Code Halos around
“things” is finding its way into global supply chains, helping manufacturers
and retailers answer a growing number of questions from customers about
the provenance of the goods and services they buy, such as “Where was this
shirt made, and are the people who made it being treated fairly?” The shoe
manufacturer Toms, as an example, uses a software product called
Sourcemap to create transparency within its products’ journeys from
factories around the world to stores in the United States and Europe.
Customers can access information on factory conditions where the shoe was
made and can track the progress of the shoes they buy through sensor
enablement within the end-to-end supply chain, including raw materials,
manufacturing equipment, and shipping containers.
Smart automobiles and fleet management: Automobiles are fast becoming
the next computing platform; according to industry estimates, the average car

already has 100 sensors on board and projections suggest this number will
double by 2020. As such, every car is a rolling generator, sharing data that
allows manufacturers, insurers, and others to know about the health and
performance of each and every individual car in highly personalized detail.
Offerings such as Hum from Verizon—priced at $10 per month—are
attempting to put the “mass” into this “mass personalization.” A car owner
using the service can know in real time about the health of the car's engine,
upcoming road conditions (what exactly is the next best action? ), precisely
where he or she parked (or where the car is if it's been stolen), as well as a
whole range of other information. Soon, we predict this type of plug-in
device will be embedded in every new car (even those that retail at budget
prices). The technology is also finding its way into fleets of company cars
and trucks, providing organizations with far more granular insight into
shipping route performance, trip optimization, and overall fleet maintenance,
than has ever been available before.
What to Do on Monday? Capitalize on Code
The case studies we've presented share a basic element: people just got started.
Instead of spending months outlining grand strategies in attempts to determine
every possible end state, competitor move, and customer value proposition, and
then outlining detailed plans for getting there, instrumentation winners simply
started by putting a chip in a machine and seeing what happened. With this as a
guiding philosophy, here are some tactics you should adopt and adapt to your
business.
Buy an Extra-Large Box of Chips
We've shown that getting your new raw material is the first step to building
effective systems of intelligence. So, first things first; start by ordering chips
with everything (well, sensors, actually). There are many types of sensor and
instrumentation devices, such as RFID sensors, accelerometers, proximity
sensors, motion sensors, and so on. These small, often inexpensive devices can
be placed on any physical thing and can generate data (i.e., about what that thing
is, its physical location, etc.) and then transmit data to a reader. RFID chips, for
example, are already widely used to track goods within supply chains, manage
inventory management, and verify personal information in a range of
applications, such as passports, access management, and contactless payment.
You may even have found one opening this book!

Soon, sensors will be embedded within most if not all physical things in the
world, and even within people. In fact, over 10,000 people have chips implanted
under their skin already (and millions more use medical devices that are sensor-
enabled). 6 Seemingly the stuff of Hollywood and/or nightmares, human chip
implants are a frontier of science that is still in its infancy but may in time seem
commonplace.
Regardless of the specific sensor type (or the creepiness factor of people getting
chipped like a pampered pet), the point is that instrumentation is an important
building block of introducing AI and the new machines into your organization.
Simply saying “buy chips” is a bit hyperbolic, but we're making an important
point: You and your team should view sensors as essentially free and ubiquitous,
and apply them liberally.
Find a Squad of Data Scientists
Once your instrumentation initiatives are in flight, you will soon notice how
much data is being generated. Of course, as we examined in Chapter 5 , this raw
data—this raw material— is useless unless you can do something with it. This is
where data scientists come into the picture. Called, perhaps a bit wishfully, the
“sexiest job of the 21st century,” the data scientist's role is to find business
meaning in all the data that instrumentation creates. 7
In our recent research, however, big data and analytics were named the number-
one hard-to-find competency, not just now but also for the next three years. 8
While many respondents plan to form cross-functional teams (60%) or recruit
staff (58%) to fill the gap, many others (56%) plan to increase their use of
contractors and sourcing providers. Whichever you choose, the important thing
—so important that it may mean the difference between success or failure—is
getting access to smart people to help you pull business insight from rapidly
filling lakes of data.
Everything you do to build systems of intelligence hinges on your organization's
ability to use the new raw material of the machine age. Without the talent to do
this, every step we outline within this book is moot. Recruit, retrain, contract,
acqui-hire, beg, steal, or borrow. 9 The future of your work depends on it.
Build a Halo Business Model
Information begets value, but not without a little help. As we said before, the
real key is to simply get started, but at some point you need to show a material

y
p y g
,
p
y
ROI.
Virtually every solution we've looked at during the past several years shares the
same pattern. Someone had a really rough but interesting idea, and they just
started. Even though solutions are different, in all the cases we've investigated,
once a business begins to compete with code, the business model emerges.
This may sound easier said than done, but it's happening every day, and it all
boils down to establishing the logical link between insight and value. The best
advice we ever heard about this is to keep it simple and follow the money.
A large industrial player is now able to commit to very specific savings targets
for its customers. A medical-device company now has lower maintenance costs
and a streamlined new product development process. Managers of each of these
real-world scenarios know that their solutions create real value, and in each case
they found a way to monetize that value.
Redesign Your Customer Experiences
Code Halos initially emerged in the world of “consumerized” IT. The members
of what we call the Trillion Dollar Club (Google, Amazon, Apple, Facebook,
Netflix, and Pandora) 10 were all primarily business-to-consumer, not business-
to-business, technology companies. The Web 2.0 movement of the early 2000s
led the way in making applications and technology-based services easy on the
eye, easy to use, engaging, youthful, and fun, in contrast to “big business”
technology, which was (and to a large extent still is) difficult to use and less
concerned with making things intuitive and visually attractive.
The Trillion Dollar Club, along with many other companies and organizations
(e.g., the social news aggregator Reddit, Twitter, Mashable, microblogging
platform Tumblr, room booking app Hotel Tonight), realized that to generate
(and keep) users, they needed to simplify the complexity of using technology
and compete in markets that increasingly overlapped with the fashion and
entertainment industries.
The company that first brought all these trends together was, of course, Apple.
Apple realized that the design of a device or an experience—how it looked, how
it felt, how it was used, how it was experienced, what feelings and sensations it
generated in its user—was no longer something briefly considered by marketers
long after engineers had done the real work; it was absolutely central to the
entire end-to-end process of creating, manufacturing, and selling the device or
service.

The success of this philosophy speaks for itself. The beauty of Apple products
and the Apple experience has made it the most financially successful company in
the history of business. Though “beauty” is an odd, ephemeral, subjective,
seemingly non-quantifiable thing, good design has turned out to be the biggest
generator of wealth in history. Even the coldest, hardest-hearted, most cynical
accountant has to be impressed by that.
The lesson from Apple is that making “things” beautiful is not an esoteric
exercise for those with nothing better to do; rather, it is the highest priority on
your to-do list. Every example of a successful machine highlighted in this book
has a design-thinking approach at its core. Narrative Science, Palantir, New
Classrooms, and all the other companies offering systems of intelligence
understand that technology for technology's sake is no longer a winning formula.
To build winning machines, you need to have this obsession too. Good design is
not a nice-to-have; it's an impossible-without, in every aspect of your business. If
you're not involving designers from the very beginning of product and services
development, you're trying to win a fight with one hand tied behind your back.
You're playing an old game when there's a new game in town.
Keep Away from the Dark Side
Once people understand the idea of competing with code, their minds start
ticking through the worst-case scenarios of how corporations and governments
and hackers can use information provided directly or indirectly (via the metadata
of our online activity) to scam, trick, or simply rob us blind. This is the “dark
side of the halo.”
The thinking behind these dark thoughts is not hard to decipher. The day-to-day
news is full of horror stories that show we truly are living in a “world without
secrets,” as Gartner analyst Richard Hunter put it. 11 In just the past few years,
we've seen a raft of high-profile examples of hacking, including the following: 12
Anthem: 80 million records of current and former customers of the U.S.
health insurer were reportedly exposed.
Ashley Madison: 32 million customer accounts of this infamous dating site
were accessed.
Central Intelligence Agency Director John Brennan: His personal e-mail
account was broken into and details were shared online.
The U.S. Government's Office of Personnel Management: 21 million

people's records were hacked, including the fingerprints of 5.6 million
federal employees.
Sony Pictures: 47,000 Social Security numbers of employees and
contractors were stolen, and e-mails between executives discussing the
production and launch of the film The Interview were made public. 13
Democratic National Committee (DNC): 20,000 e-mails from top officials
were placed on WikiLeaks. 14
Yahoo: 500 million customer accounts were hacked. 15
Not surprisingly, legislators are increasingly focused on wading into these fast-
moving and complex waters. The European Union passed a new law—General
Data Protection Regulation—in the spring of 2016, encoding the notion of a
“right to be forgotten.” 16 In the United States, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation was facing a Supreme Court showdown over its request that Apple
provide information from the iPhone of the San Bernardino shooter until the
agency managed to crack into the phone without Apple's assistance. 17
All this activity and anxiety notwithstanding, the dark side of the halo still shows
no sign of dampening people's enthusiasm for the bright side of the halo. We
still continue to vote with our fingers. In the second quarter of 2016, Facebook
had 1.7 billion active users per month, up from 1 billion in 2012. 18 At the time
of writing, Amazon's market capitalization (around $400 billion) has raced past
Walmart's (just over $200 billion), surpassing it for the first time in 2015. 19
Google became the most valuable company on Earth in February 2016. 20 It's
clear that—collectively—we place connection, convenience, and insight far
above these hacking risks. This is good news for business, because it means we
are all getting used to the idea that bad things will happen, but we still expect
companies to take sufficient steps to keep us safe because treating data well is
the foundation of trust, as shown in Figure 8.2 . There are no easy answers, but
fortunately, early winners provide some ideas on the rules of the road.
Don't be creepy. The business economics of trust and security are now
clear. In our research, we've found that 50% of consumers are ready to pay a
premium to do business with companies they trust, and 57% will walk away
from companies that have lost their trust (see Figure 8.2 ). 21 Being very clear
about what data you are collecting, why you are collecting it, and what you'll
do with it are the first steps to gaining customer trust. Companies have gotten
into trouble when they've tried to draw conclusions based on information in a

way that leaves customers feeling invaded. We've all felt this when we see an
ad for something shortly after a Google search or find our Facebook feed
leaking into our ad feed. It doesn't feel right, and more than that, we now
know this is shaping brand perceptions.
Give your customers a delete button. A growing number of companies
have realized that allowing customers to easily opt out of an information-
sharing relationship is a healthy way of giving agency back to all of us, and
this helps avoid creating those creepy feelings. Make the delete button easy
to find. Hiding it at the end of a labyrinth isn't going to help you win trust
points. People give companies data with an implied or explicit contract, and
part of the contract is that we should all be able to walk away with our data.
If someone wants out, make sure she can find the exit door easily.
Show me you know me. As data exchanged becomes increasingly
informative, companies are able to draw more personal conclusions about
each of us. Companies may know if we are prone to driving drunk, have an
illness, are getting ready to have a baby, tend to be altruistic, lean to the left
or the right politically, and so forth. If a customer asks, “What do you know
about me?” you have an obligation to share that information back. Even if no
one ever asks , you should be ready to be transparent about the kinds of
insights you can draw, based on the information you have.
Shine a light on the “give-to-get” equation. Commerce means exchanging
value for goods and services, and that doesn't change in a digital economy.
Now, however, what's changing hands (or servers) is data. Consumers (or
companies) are sharing information for value. We call this the give-to-get
relationship. To maintain trust, companies must be explicit about the data
being collected and the value being delivered in exchange.
Hard-code self-control. As we noted in Code Halos , “Self-regulation by
organizations will be a critical element of success.” Virtually every major
enterprise has loads of content and mountains of policies related to security,
privacy, and regulatory compliance. These are decidedly not going away, but
they are also insufficient for managing a new economy built on the value of
data. In addition, people who will have access to this data will make
mistakes. On rare occasions, there may even be a bad actor seeking access to
your data for personal gain. What we've learned from forward-thinking
companies succeeding in the digital economy is that we need to hard-code
self-control. This doesn't mean wrapping yourselves with a protective layer
of lawyers and un-implementable processes. It does mean that someone's job

should be focused on worrying about data protection, risk exposure, and
managing your company's new relationship with data. Because technology
outpaces policy, laws and regulations will never catch up. There are no
turnkey solutions to risk management, but appointing a chief digital risk
officer or amending an existing role to recognize and manage your new risks
and responsibilities related to code is a good first step.
Breaches will happen, but they are not a death sentence. Security
breaches are now expected, so you should get ready to absorb and manage
the inevitable hacks. The targets of the biggest macro-hacks— JMPC, the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Target, among others—paid a steep
price, but virtually all are still open for business. 22 Learn from them: prepare
for the dark side of digital, but don't conclude that one adverse event will
bring down the company.

Figure 8.2 Data Is the Foundation of Trust
Monetize Your Data
Given that data is the raw material for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, it's
perhaps no surprise that some companies are now leveraging this proprietary
asset by selling it on the market, creating entirely new revenue streams (at
enormous margin) that simply didn't exist only a few years ago.

g )
p y
y
y
g
Comcast, for example, has a data “lake” (more like a small sea, actually), full of
information on consumers' media consumption habits. This includes data not
only on set-top box media but, in many cases, on our browsing habits and more.
Comcast is now offering access to its code for a price, because it recognizes that
this data is a treasure trove of insight for many other companies. 23
Iora Health, another company attempting to disrupt the currently dysfunctional
U.S. health care system (like TriZetto), is offering a new commercial model
based on patient health outcomes, community health coaches, and data
management. So far, it's working. By increasing patient engagement, Iora has
seen a 35% to 40% reduction in hospitalizations and a 12% to 15% drop in
health care costs. 24 In both of these cases, organizations are focusing on data-
rich processes and applying new technologies and business models to generate
value by monetizing data and accessing much larger markets. You should be
doing this too.
Digits over Widgets: The Next Age of Business and
Technology
Competing with code is now becoming the default model for our modern
economy. Instrumenting everything, accessing data scientists and other big
data/analytics talent, and avoiding the dark side of the halo are all tactics you
must adopt to get started. Fortunes will be won and lost depending on your
organization's ability to leverage the upsides of the halo and mitigate its
downsides.
In Chapter 7 , we showed how automation will be used to cut costs from
virtually every business function. That cash must be used to bring Code Halo
solutions to life. Winning with data is the number-one competitive game in
nearly every industry. Companies that fail to embrace this strategy are destined
to come face-to-face with their own extinction event.
Next, we'll explore how systems of intelligence can allow us to be better than we
are—smarter, more efficient, more engaged—in short, “enhanced.”
Notes
1. James Sullivan, “Can Under Armour Meet CEO Kevin Plank's Ambitious

Goal?” The Motley Fool , March 2, 2016,
http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2016/03/02/can-under-armour-inc-
meet-ceo-kevin-planks-goal.aspx .
2. Malcolm Frank, Paul Roehrig, and Ben Pring, Code Halos: How the Digital
Lives of People, Things, and Organizations Are Changing the Rules of
Business (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
3. James Detar, “GE Sees Digital Revenue More Than Doubling to $15 Billion
By 2020,” Investor's Business Daily , June 23, 2016,
http://www.investors.com/news/ge-courts-silicon-valley-investors-for-digital-
industrial-push/ .
4. Kristin Kloberdanz, “GE's Got a Ticket to Ride: How the Cloud Will Take
Trains into a New Era,” GE Reports, March 29, 2016,
http://www.gereports.com/the-digital-railroad-how-the-cloud-will-take-
trains-into-a-new-era/ .
5. Lucinda Shen, “Immelt: ‘There's Going to Be Trillions of Dollars of Wealth
Created in the Industrial Internet,” Business Insider , Dec. 3, 2015,
http://www.businessinsider.com/ges-jeff-immelt-on-internet-strategy-2015-
12 .
6. Geoffrey Grider, “Over 10,000 People Have Now Received a Permanent
Human RFID Microchip Implant,” Sept. 4, 2015,
http://www.nowtheendbegins.com/over-10000-people-have-now-received-a-
permanent-human-rfid-microchip-implant/ and Lindsey Hoshaw, “Millions of
Americans Use Medical Devices That May Be Vulnerable to Hacking,”
KQED Science, Aug. 3, 2015,
https://ww2.kqed.org/futureofyou/2015/08/03/millions-of-americans-use-
medical-devices-that-are-vulnerable-to-hacking/ .
7. Thomas Davenport and D.J. Patil, “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st
Century,” Harvard Business Review , October 2012,
https://hbr.org/2012/10/data-scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century/ .
8. Euan Davis, “People—Not Just Machines—Will Power Digital Innovation,”
Cognizant Technology Solutions, April 2016,
https://www.cognizant.com/whitepapers/People-Not-Just-Machines-Will-
Power-Digital-Innovation-codex1850.pdf .

9. “Acqui-hiring” is the practice of acquiring a company primarily for the skills
of its staff rather than for its product.
10. The trillion-dollar club includes six companies—Google, Amazon, Apple,
Facebook, Netflix, Pandora—that have collectively made $1 trillion in market
capitalization during the past 10 years, through leveraging the digital
information provided by their customers.
11. Richard Hunter, World Without Secrets , (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2002), https://www.amazon.com/World-Without-Secrets-Ubiquitous-
Computing/dp/0471218162 .
12. Kim Zetter, “The Year's 11 Biggest Hacks, From Ashley Madison to OPM,”
Wired , December 23, 2015, https://www.wired.com/2015/12/the-years-11-
biggest-hacks-from-ashley-madison-to-opm/
13. Steven Musil, “Sony Hack Leaked 47,000 Social Security Numbers,
Celebrity Data,” Cnet, Dec. 4, 2014, https://www.cnet.com/news/sony-hack-
said-to-leak-47000-social-security-numbers-celebrity-data/ .
14. Jonathan Martin and Alan Rappeport, “Debbie Wasserman Schultz to Resign
DNC Post,” New York Times , July 24, 2016,
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/25/us/politics/debbie-wasserman-schultz-
dnc-wikileaks-emails.html .
15. Jeff John Roberts, “Yahoo Has Been Hacked: What You Need to Know,”
Fortune , September 22, 2016, http://fortune.com/2016/09/22/yahoo-hack-qa/
16. Samuel Gibbs, “European Parliament Approves Tougher Data Privacy
Laws,” Guardian , April 14, 2016,
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/14/european-parliament-
approve-tougher-data-privacy-rules .
17. Devlin Barrett, “FBI Plans to Keep Apple iPhone Hacking Method Secret,”
The Wall Street Journal , April 26, 2016, http://www.wsj.com/articles/fbi-
plans-to-keep-apple-iphone-hacking-method-secret-sources-say-1461694735
.
18. Statista portal, http://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-
monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/ .
19. Shannon Pettypiece, “Amazon Passes Walmart as Biggest Retailer by

Market Value,” Bloomberg, July 23, 2015,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-07-23/amazon-surpasses-wal-
mart-as-biggest-retailer-by-market-value .
20. Lucy Hooker, “How Did Google Become the World's Most Valuable
Company?” BBC, Feb. 11, 2016, http://www.bbc.com/news/business-
35460398 .
21. For more on our study, see Manish Bahl, “The Business Value of Trust,”
Cognizant Technology Solutions, May 2016,
https://www.cognizant.com/whitepapers/The-Business-Value-of-Trust-
codex1951.pdf .
22. “World's Biggest Data Breaches,” Information Is Beautiful, Sept. 4, 2016,
http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/worlds-biggest-data-
breaches-hacks/ .
23. Shalini Ramachandran and Suzanne Vranica, “Comcast Seeks to Harness
Trove of TV Data,” The Wall Street Journal , Oct. 20, 2015,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/comcast-seeks-to-harness-trove-of-tv-data-
1445333401 .
24. Michael Zakaras, “Why Our Health System Talks Up (but Actually Fears)
Disruptive Innovation,” Forbes , Oct. 23, 2015,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ashoka/2015/10/23/why-our-health-system-
talks-up-but-actually-fears-disruptive-innovation/#6d7ceddd32a5 .

9 
ENHANCE 
AMPLIFY HUMAN PERFORMANCE WITH THE
NEW MACHINE
It's February 2003. You're driving your car to a meeting in downtown Chicago.
The traffic is terrible. You're running late. You glance down at the directions and
map you've printed out from Yahoo! You know you've got to take Exit 50B from
the Kennedy Expressway. You miss it. You take 51B, but then realize it goes
west, not downtown. You pull into a gas station, re-check the map, and turn
around on Lake Street to get back on the expressway. You miss the turn. You
look at your watch: It's 8:55 AM, and the meeting's in five minutes. “I'm not
going to make it; I'm going to mess up the deal; my boss is going to kill me. ”
It's February 2017. You're driving your car to a meeting in downtown Chicago.
The traffic is terrible. You're running late. From your smartphone, Waze says,
“Take North Milwaukee Avenue onto West Grand Avenue.” You've never been
this way before. A moment later, Waze speaks up again: “Take North Franklin
Street, then take East Ohio Street.” “OK ,” you think, “if you say so. ” A couple
of minutes go by. “Your destination is on your left in 500 yards.” You look at
your watch: It's 8:55 AM, and the meeting's in five minutes. “I'm going to make
it; I'm going to close the deal; my boss is going to love me.”
Today, driving places we don't know is so easy, we hardly give it a second
thought. Yet, it used to be so tough. Much marital discord, let alone missed
sales, stemmed from arguments over whether it was a left or a right at a four-
way stop. With smart GPS systems, whether as apps on our smartphones or
embedded in our dashboards, it's far more difficult to get lost nowadays. We can
now know exactly what to do, when to do it, where to go, what precisely is the
next best action, thanks to the miracles of technology enhancement. As a result,
many couples have had to find something else to argue about.
The GPS systems we now take for granted provide a preview of coming
attractions on how the new machines are enhancing more and more aspects of
our work and personal lives. Consider the following choices from your own
perspective, as you seek out professionals to assist you in your personal life:
When ill, would you rather visit a doctor who has tracked all your digital

health information, and can, before your visit, juxtapose your information
against both your personal history and the exact health trends occurring in
your community to make a pinpoint diagnosis? And what if the doctor could
then use your time in the office to confirm the diagnosis and discuss your
personal path to recovery? Or would you prefer the traditional experience, in
which a primary care physician, over the course of a seven-minute visit,
pokes and prods you, asks a few questions, then tries to determine your
ailment without any assistance in real time, and hands you a prescription
while heading out the door?
In choosing a lawyer, would you prefer one who uses a digital platform to
ensure that all the relevant case law—across thousands of cases—has been
consulted, and that the full histories of the judge and opposing lawyers are
analyzed in preparation for your case? Or would you prefer a lawyer with a
small team of paralegals that relies solely on their own skills and personal
work experiences to map out your best legal strategy?
As a parent, would you be more comfortable knowing your child's teacher
adjusted the learning plan every day to make sure your child was completely
on track, or one who could tell you about your child's performance only
every few months or so based on the results of a few standardized tests?
When it comes to our own personal choices, the answers become very clear. The
vast majority of us will choose to work with the enhanced human, the one who is
equipped with a sophisticated system of intelligence at their side.
Additionally, in your professional life, who will your customers prefer? The
salesperson who is armed to answer every question on product and pricing, or
the one who wings it with anecdotes and personality? And in today's war for
talent, where will the best employees want to work—where they have the tools
to do great work, or where they are still mired in relative drudgery and
inefficiency?
For these reasons, we see the forces of enhancement as positive and the concerns
over automation-driven job substitution as ill-considered. As we outlined in
Chapter 3 (“There Will Be Blood”), the vast majority of white-collar work won't
be replaced by these new machines but will be made better with them. We
believe that more than 80% of teaching jobs, nursing jobs, legal jobs, and coding
jobs will be made more productive, more beneficial, and more satisfying by
computers—in other words, enhanced.

Stone Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age…Digital Age
The story of human evolution is, of course, in many ways the story of our tools,
from the sharpened stones used by the Australopithecus garhi species in East
Africa 2.5 million years ago, to the NVIDIA DIGITS™ DevBox machine used
by deep-learning pioneers today. We have used tools to lift ourselves from the
savannah to the Sea of Tranquility and in the process, our tools have shaped and
dictated the work we do and how we do it.
Tools have always enhanced our human capability. With levers, we can lift far
more than we could with our muscles alone. With pistons and gearboxes, we can
move more quickly. With calculators, we can add more quickly and accurately
than with our brains. With the da Vinci® Surgical System, physicians can now
make incisions far less invasively.
Enhancement in the Office
Now our tools are changing again, and therefore, so is our work and our human
capability. As Joseph Sirosh, corporate vice president of the Data Group at
Microsoft, told us, “Pretty much every experience today is made intelligent by
data.” Pointing to Microsoft's Cortana, an AI-infused digital assistant, Sirosh
said, “You will ask questions of Cortana, and it will help you, and it will
understand your calendar and understand your meetings. It'll help you be much
more efficient. Companies will use the data they have to help their employees
succeed better and have healthier lives, manage their own effectiveness at work
better, and have better work environments and social structures.”
Cortana, in effect, will enhance you as a worker.
This machine intelligence, often packaged anthropomorphically with a human
name—also increasingly known as a “bot” or offered simply as a nonhuman
computer service—is expanding into an increasingly wider range of tasks and
processes, both trivial and profound. While meeting scheduling may still have a
“big brains on small things” quality to it, helping doctors diagnose chronic
conditions does not.
Enhancement in the Hospital
At the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon, New Hampshire,
Microsoft is working with a multidisciplinary team of doctors and technologists
on an initiative called ImagineCare, aimed at enhancing the work of doctors and
medical staff with machine intelligence. As Sirosh told us, “It turns out, a lot of

g
,
,
chronic conditions—and events associated with chronic conditions—can
actually be predicted from data. If a patient has high blood pressure, and is
gaining weight, we can predict with fairly high accuracy the risk of the patient
having congestive heart failure. And so, if you can predict that, you can avoid
that patient being admitted to the emergency room by taking appropriate
precautions, such as prescribing diuretics so that the patient doesn't accumulate
water in their lungs which leads to the congestive heart failure.”
ImagineCare aims to build and expand these predictive services to enhance the
work of doctoring, using the new machine and the new raw materials and
allowing these machine-driven capabilities to let human competencies scale
higher at levels never achievable before.
Enhanced Jobs Will Be Protected Jobs
At the heart of enhancement is the simple idea that nearly every person and job
can and must be improved through technology. Every teacher must be an
enhanced teacher; every banker must be an enhanced banker; every soldier must
be an enhanced soldier. It's you/your job plus technology.
Of course, many of us use technology to enhance our work already quite
extensively, in a pre-AI way. Take the three of us, for example. We write on
computers, talk through videoconferencing machines, read on iPads, and hang
out in Google. But even for people seemingly at the cutting edge of technology,
there are many aspects of work only marginally touched by technology. New
technology could enhance us further: Timesheets and expense reports could be
automated; Cortana and Amy could automatically set up our meetings and
conference calls; we could use our Alexa-enabled Echo wireless speaker to build
a Prezi presentation using just a few spoken word clues: “Get an image of a
modern building, and overlay on it the latest quarterly results.” 1 The list could
go on and on.
For those who see only the downsides of automation, the concept of a race
against the machine —the phrase coined and popularized by MIT's Erik
Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee in their book by that title—has become very
powerful. 2 But what many people miss is that the authors ultimately pointed out
that we're actually in a race with the machine.
Technology has always given, and technology has always taken away.
Automation and technological substitution of human labor are facts of life. More

important, these dynamics are a good thing. More tools mean more leverage,
which means more efficiency, which means more productivity. This results in
more margin, which means the ability and opportunity to do higher-value work
and to use higher-order skills (i.e., to grow ). This is the route to protecting jobs,
not destroying them.
The work of any executive or leader—indeed, of any individual—is, therefore,
to identify the roles, processes, systems, and experiences that can be upgraded
by newly available technologies and to imagine new approaches and constructs.
For a teacher, this might mean “flipping” the school day—doing “homework” in
class and doing “class work” such as listening to a lecture, at home. For a
banker, this might mean being able to see the financial Code Halo of a customer
and knowing instantly what he or she needs next. For a doctor, this might mean
seeing the Code Halo of a patient (derived from wearable devices and
preexisting medical records) before he or she enters the exam room or, even
better, being able to diagnose the patient while the patient is at home. The
enhanced teacher or banker or doctor will provide better service, more quickly,
at a reduced price (and/or margin) and, in the process, generate all-around
improvements (including job security). In this new model, teachers, bankers, and
doctors will get back to what they like about their job and slough off the
“administrivia” elements that drive them nuts. This is surely a win-win situation
for everyone (buyer and seller alike).
These ideas are evident in the ALEKS system from McGraw-Hill Education,
mentioned in passing in Chapter 1 . ALEKS (A ssessment and LE arning in K
nowledge S paces) is an online tutoring and assessment program that includes
course material in math, chemistry, statistics, and business, aimed at creating
tailored and personalized education experiences for each and every individual in
a physical classroom or virtual learning environment. As New Classrooms does
(discussed in Chapter 2 ), ALEKS enhances the job of a teacher, making the
experience better for the teacher and the students.
You Can't Bring an Apple to ALEKS
McGraw-Hill Education's ALEKS is based on original theoretical work in a
field of study called “Knowledge Space Theory.” ALEKS dynamically
houses and manages “knowledge maps,” which continually change based on
the learner's interaction. ALEKS takes learners through a course of
exploration and mastery, using the knowledge map to establish a pathway
and cadence that is personalized to the student's abilities, strengths, and

p
g
weaknesses.
Stephen Laster, chief digital officer at McGraw-Hill Education, told us that
systems like ALEKS “make teaching and learning more engaging, more
efficient, and more effective.… Imagine you're a community-college
professor in a first-year freshman algebra course and you've got 400
students. Better than half of them arrive at your college unprepared, for all
the reasons we see in the popular press. What ALEKS allows that teacher to
do is, very quickly, through data dashboards and feedback loops, to get a
good sense of the class, get a good sense of individual students, and also
receive recommendations for sectioning or clumping students together.…
Could a teacher do that without technology? Sure. Do they have the time to
do it? Absolutely not.”
The three of us have spent a long time in and around academia and teachers,
and we've observed first-hand the incredible dedication required to educate
learners of all ages. ALEKS enhances teachers' lives by picking up much of
the rote work.
“The value of the teacher isn't sitting there grading or sitting there trying in
Excel to create her own analytics or heuristics. We can do that for her,”
Laster explained. “We can also help her better understand her student. And
the value of that teacher is the time she's sitting with students, be it through
technology or face-to-face, really providing small-group instruction,
providing greater content and all the things that technology can't do well
today. That's what ALEKS does for her.”
Systems like ALEKS free teachers, in Laster's words, “to think more deeply
about the needs of their students. It frees the teacher to spend more time on
preparing engaging class experiences, and it frees the teacher to spend more
time with her students. Because what ALEKS is doing is relieving her of
some of the core grading and analysis that 10 years ago, 15 years ago, she
would have had to do by hand on VisiCalc or Excel or what have you.
ALEKS allows the teacher to remain in control. She creates her class
sessions. She can configure something like ALEKS to her teaching style and
the needs of her students. But it's saving her time and allowing her to then
focus on those activities that have the biggest impact to her students, which
is inspiring them and engaging them.”
This is the enhanced teacher. This is the teaching profession protected by
technology, not replaced by technology. In fact, the idea of teachers being

replaced by “robot tutors in the cloud” is simply a nonstarter for Laster. “The
role of the teacher remains central, if not even more important, in a
technological age. But it's going to be the role of a mentor. It's the role of
spreading wisdom. The teacher as somebody who's requiring you to just
learn level one and two, in a rote building blocks way, will decline. That's
where technology will have an impact. Teachers have a bright, bright future,
though, because learning is inherently social; as you move into the upper
grades and into the university and master's levels, it's really about the teacher
as the wise guide helping to shape you into the person you've determined
you want to be. ALEKS knows its place, and that it works in service of the
teacher, in the same way a spreadsheet exists in service of a brilliant finance
person.”
Business and technology leaders looking for lessons on enhancement can
learn a lot from McGraw-Hill Education.
Get ready to deflate fear of the bots. The future of work for teachers
will be teaching. We are not facing a robot dystopia in which our kids
will be taught by bots. Bots will help but not replace teachers. In your
own business, follow our Chapter 7 criteria for identifying which types
of work should be automated, and then target work that should stay with
people but should be enhanced with new technologies like ALEKS. You
will need to be ready to explain how enhancement can make life better
for more people.
Look for opportunities where “real time” makes a real difference.
Systems of intelligence offer both pure processing power and speed. In
an educational context, velocity matters a lot. As Laster noted, “When
students engage with ALEKS and Connect and LearnSmart, the grading
happens almost instantaneously. There's no teacher out there who can
grade that frequently.” Velocity matters more in some cases than others,
but our expectations for instant gratification are higher now than ever.
Amazon and others are investing heavily to condense supply chain times
to nearly zero. Imagine what velocity could mean in your own business
context. Could enhanced loan processors improve customer satisfaction
and revenue by accelerating with technology? How much advantage
could you gain if your underwriters could work nearly instantaneously?
The point here is that systems of intelligence free up time for higher-
value work and improve productivity, which are powerful outcomes of
enhancement. The chances are very good that you are sitting on some of

these opportunities right now.
Aim high and be bold. Although they came from many different
industries and had developed many different kinds of AI platforms,
virtually all the builders of the digital economy we met shared almost
exactly the same point of view. None of them talked about crushing the
competition or getting rich. They all talked about using technology to
solve really important problems in education, health care, agriculture,
and a dozen other industries. They all recognized that systems of
intelligence are a means to an end, and that creating software for the
heck of it is a waste of time and money. As Laster put it, “[Yes], we are
about software, and yes, we are about data, but we continue to be about
curation, about pedagogy, about how learning happens, about
[formative] assessment.”
We are not so naïve as to expect good things to happen when you walk into
your CEO's office and say, “We shouldn't care about making money; let's
just invest heavily in making the world a better place.” Candidly, that's just
bad strategy. One of the things we can learn from McGraw-Hill Education is
to be bold within the context of your brand and the services you are selling.
That is fair game for enhancement solutions in the digital economy.
Smart Robots Make Smarter Hands
The combination of “smart hands” and “smart robots” is becoming more visible
all the time, and not only does the machine continually get smarter (as we have
outlined previously in the book), but so does the human. A great example of this
is buried within one of the most widely known moments of this new
man/machine relationship, when world Go champion Lee Sedol competed
against Google's AlphaGo AI machine.
In their 2016 match, AlphaGo made a move—Move 37—that surprised Sedol
(and all the expert commentators); in fact, it was considered a mistake by the
Google team. It turned out, however, to be the winning move in game two of the
five-game series. In game four, Sedol made a move—Move 78—that surprised
AlphaGo, because as Demis Hassabis, cofounder of DeepMind, the team behind
AlphaGo, put it, “AlphaGo didn't think a human would ever play it.” 3 With
Move 78, Sedol won game four.
Although AlphaGo went on to win the series-deciding fifth game, Sedol
f
f

reflected afterward that he wouldn't have been able to make Move 78 unless he
had played against AlphaGo; it had “opened his eyes” to new ways of playing
the game. Sedol had, in effect, been enhanced; he became smarter and more
sophisticated through his interaction with the machine.
The Machine as Coach
Countering the notion that machines will render large sectors of the
bourgeois workforce obsolete, Max Yankelevich, founder and CEO of smart
process automation vendor WorkFusion, sees a much more nuanced future
ahead. As he told us, “The combination of a human plus AI will see one plus
one equal three.…Our customers are not looking to get rid of their people;
they're actually looking to move them up to more revenue-generating
activities that are more intellectually challenging. They see AI as an
opportunity to move their people up the intellectual stack, where they
become more productive contributors to the enterprise. That's how we see
things evolving.”
In the way that AlphaGo made Lee Sedol a better Go player, machines
working side-by-side in the trenches of enterprise work will make us better
at what we do. And not just in the most elite types of work, such as
performed by doctors and lawyers, but also in the prosaic, unglamorous
work carried out every day in millions of cubicles all around the world: the
work of processing an insurance claim, of handling a customer complaint, of
making sure widget A gets from point B to C.
WorkFusion's software, which is used by enterprise businesses to digitize
processes such as customer on-boarding, trade settlements, and claims
processing, automates a wide variety of routine knowledge work through
robotics and machine learning—what WorkFusion refers to as cognitive
automation. Robotics automates the purely rules-driven work of operating
legacy applications and moving structured data from system to system, and
cognitive automation tackles judgment work performed on more complex,
unstructured data. The software learns through a combination of historical
data and by “watching” workers categorize and extract unstructured data in
real time. Initially, humans validate WorkFusion's output, but as the number
of process repetitions grows from hundreds to thousands, the software can
perform autonomously, and it automatically escalates exceptions that need
full human judgment. As Yankelevich puts it, “Automation performs that
high-volume, routine work, and humans handle the more interesting and

more challenging type of work, but lower volumes of it.”
Yankelevich's vision, though, is definitely to “keep humans in the loop” and
to leverage the power of machines to create work that is more valuable, both
for organizations and for people. Yankelevich firmly believes that smart
process automation is the route not just to cost savings but to better types of
work. Yankelevich describes it as “work requiring the human touch, really
expert type of work, work that requires a lot of different thought processes
and is intellectually challenging, and which allows us, as societies, to
become more productive in the creative areas.”
Though for many the story of automation, AI, and machines centers solely
on “destruction,” the “creative” forces that machines unleash will be their
real legacy. Unlike in the world of tennis where Andy Murray's coach,
former world number one Ivan Lendl, would struggle to get his ideas across
to somebody with a 3.0 rating at the local club, the algorithms in smart
process-automation software are far more democratic, helping every level of
worker to level-up. WorkFusion software can elevate both a Harvard-
educated lawyer and a community college-educated clerk by automating the
work that keeps them both from higher-value contribution. This is the real
power of the machine in a world where machines are getting smarter, not to
replace us, but to help us get higher up the rankings into bigger tournaments
with bigger prize money.
This man/machine relationship, along with the human work enhancement it
creates, can also be understood through the work of Amazon engineers, who
use the machine-learning capabilities being developed within Amazon Web
Services (AWS).
Dr. Matt Wood, general manager of product strategy at AWS, explained to
us, “We ran a little test internally where we had two senior developers try to
predict a customer's gender, just using their name. The way you would
traditionally do this is to look at census data and say, ‘Well, the majority of
people called Matt turn out to be male,’ and build predictive models around
that.” The engineers found, however, that there were some gray areas: “If
you have a Pat or a Sam, it's harder to identify gender based on that,” Wood
said. The two engineers went off to solve this challenge, building algorithms
from scratch. It took them almost two months to build the software and
validate it and train the models, according to Wood, but after two months,
they got to over 90% accuracy with their predictions. “‘Pretty good job,’ we
thought,” Wood recounted. “Then we took a single developer on a different

team, and we gave them the pre-developed AWS internal machine-learning
service, and they, too, got to the same level of accuracy, over 90% accuracy,
but they were able to do it in a matter of days. ”
Wood believes that “in the fullness of time, the majority of challenges will
be addressed through a machine-learning component. It will play a role in a
very, very large number of use cases and challenges that customers are
facing.”
Wood anticipates that more experts will interact with machine-learning
platforms over time. In pairing smart people with systems that have large
(and rapidly expanding) collections of data, these enhanced people will
deliver value that scales and grows in sophistication over time.
As Wood put it, “You have this nice kind of virtuous cycle of the
development, method-usage, data creation, and problem-solving, which
flows back into creating more data, then flows back into the various ways in
which you may choose to optimize a particular approach or method, and the
cycle just keeps going around and around.”
Using our new tools to enhance our work will help us reach the next level of
human performance. And frankly, there's a lot to enhance.
Figure 9.1 An ALEKS Learning Space

Enhancement Is Technology in Service to the Human
One important but often overlooked aspect of enhancing work is to recognize the
relationship that exists between enhancing a job/role/process and automating it.
In many ways, automation and enhancement exist in a symbiotic, two-sides-of-
the-same-coin way. To effectively enhance, one needs to automate. The teacher
is afforded the opportunity to “flip” the classroom only if he or she automates
aspects of the learning and teaching workflow. If the teacher doesn't automate
the lesson, then there is no way to free up the time during the day to attend to
each individual student's particular requirements. If the banker doesn't automate
the creation of the customer's Code Halo, he or she will spend the whole time,
which could be spent with the customer developing the relationship in a human
way , collating all the information needed to build that full view of a customer.
Automation is not the enemy of enhancement; it is, in fact, central to the ability
to enhance in the first place.
In the next wave of competitive battle—at a commercial, societal, economic
level—the winners will be those who continue to believe in the progress created
by technology, those who enhance, those who understand the power of “tools”
and who adapt to using them effectively.
What to Do on Monday? Partner with Systems of
Intelligence
There are two major steps you can take today (whether or not it's Monday) to get
the enhance ball rolling:
1. Double-down on being more human.
2. Build your white-collar exoskeleton.
Double-Down on Being More Human
The more technology enhances us, the more it creates the opportunity for a
human touch. When the computer does what it does well, it allows us to focus
more on what we do well: being empathetic, building relationships, and making
sense of complex situations.
Think of the last time you went to a rental-car counter at the airport. After
getting off your long and cramped flight and standing in line at the rental agency
for 15 minutes, you finally get to a customer service representative. Were you
i h
d
l
i
i
f ll
d b
i k
h
h f l

met with a warm and welcoming greeting, followed by a quick yet thoughtful
discussion of your plans, your car needs, your specific rental, and options? Or
did the service agent acknowledge your presence with a grunt, followed by no
eye-contact or conversation as he stared into his computer, entering information
and clicking through menus for several minutes before producing a three-page
contract in triplicate? The three of us travel a lot, so we know the answer: there's
a 90% chance it was the latter.
In the case of the rental-car agent as well as thousands of similar roles and
processes across all industries, we don't blame the employee; we blame the
company. After all, the company hasn't armed this customer-facing associate to
do his job properly—to be, well, human. Instead, he's been saddled with
burdensome technology that, after eight hours a day, has bludgeoned the good
humor out of him. Instead of getting to the essence of his job—of being the
friendly face of the company and ensuring the happiness of a customer—he
spends most of his time managing cumbersome systems layered on an archaic
process.
This is just one type of situation that can be made more human with the new
machine. As next-generation technology relieves this customer service agent's
workload, requiring no more manual entry in a system of record, he will be
liberated to provide a truly human touch.
We now see this in many sectors of retail, including:
Zappos , the leading shoe etailer, for years has been leveraging its customer-
service department. While Zappos may seem like a tech-first company, it
long ago recognized that when customers reached out by calling its call
center, it was the company's chance to cement a customer relationship. And
how far will Zappos go? One particular call lasted 10 hours and 29 minutes!
The vast majority of that call wasn't about shoes at all, but the customer's
interest in life in the Las Vegas area. The Zappos reaction? “Sometimes
people just need to call and talk. We don't judge; we just want to help.” Oh,
and yes, the customer did end up purchasing a pair of UGG boots. 4
At Pret A Manger , a quickly growing, high-end, fast-food retail chain, the
majority of the food selection in its stores is done by self-service, and the
point-of-sale checkout is seamless. But the personality of Pret A Manger is
not based on this combination of high-quality food sold efficiently and at a
good price. The cornerstone of the customer experience is its floor staff, who
are quirky, fun, and engaged. By driving efficiencies in certain parts of its
operations, Pret has doubled-down on being more human, in giving

customers not just quality food but also an upbeat and positive break in their
busy, stressful workdays. 5
Apple has similarly changed the game in retail by radically altering the
point-of-sale experience, eliminating checkout counters, and putting
automated tools in the hands of its floor staff. With all this automation, what
did Apple do? The company doubled-down on more blue-shirted staff who
are available to consult with customers, and provide a real sense of humanity
in a company mostly selling silicon and bits. 6
As shown in these examples, more enhancement actually allows for more
humanity.
Where do such opportunities reside in your company? Start by looking at those
customer “moments of truth.” For Zappos, it was when an online order went
wrong. At Pret A Manger, it was when a busy customer simply wanted to grab a
sandwich very quickly without being snarled up with other customers' more
complicated orders. And for Apple, it was when one of their nontechnical
customers felt overwhelmed by their powerful machines. In looking for the
human touch, don't just look for moments that are easy. Instead, look to those
that are hard, when you truly solve a customer problem with a sense of service
and a generosity of spirit.
In an enhanced world of more pervasive technology, activities that humans do
well will become even more important in 2020 than today. Analytical,
communication, and learning skills as well as the ability to relate to other people
have always been and will remain vital for business success. In our recent study
of 2,000 global business leaders, respondents said that in the coming years, these
very human traits—things we do naturally but that computers can hardly
accomplish—will become even more essential in our personal and work lives
and for our businesses (see Figure 9.2 ).

Figure 9.2 Beat the Bot by Being a Better Human
All of us, bosses included, need to enhance our current skills when it comes to
engaging with others: leading, reasoning and interpreting, applying judgment,
being creative, and applying the human touch. These behaviors and activities are
still far outside the purview of current and near-future technologies and will
remain so for years to come, even as the new machines become more capable.
Major companies today are proving that even in a world of enhancement
solutions, where people and machines work together in new ways, there's still
value in being human. Our work ahead will require us to double-down on the
activities where humans have and will continue to have an advantage over
silicon.
Build Your White-Collar Exoskeleton
The idea of enhancing our human capabilities with technology has been the

dream of science fiction for many years. In the late 1950s, Robert Heinlein
imagined teams of soldiers enhanced with armored exoskeletons in Starship
Troopers. Over 30 years later in the movie Aliens , Warrant Officer Ellen Ripley
used a Power Loader to defend a colonist from the Alien Queen, high above the
planet LV-426 (as shown in Figure 9.3 ).
Figure 9.3 Ripley and Her Front Loader
These science fiction speculations are increasingly losing their classification as
fiction; now, they are becoming fact. The idea of an “exoskeleton” is, indeed, an
inspiration for a number of new technologies that assist with both physical and
intellectual work.
For example, Sarcos, a U.S. developer of robotics and micro-electromechanical
systems, has built a prototype exoskeleton for military personnel to enhance their
physical capabilities in the field. Panasonic has developed a line of exoskeletons
designed to help workers lift heavy items without straining their backs. 7 Ekso
Bionics, a company spun out of the University of California's Robotics and
Human Engineering Laboratory at Berkeley, has created the first FDA-approved
exoskeleton that gives major stroke and spinal cord injury sufferers the ability to
walk again.
Figure 9.4 shows Amanda Boxtel walking with the help of an Ekso Bionics

exoskeleton suit. Amanda is a paraplegic, having sustained a spinal cord injury
from a skiing accident more than two decades ago in 1992, and is unable to walk
on her own.
Figure 9.4 Amanda Boxtel with Her Exoskeleton
Physical exoskeletons point the way to how we can overcome our limitations
and frailties. Exoskeletons designed to enhance our minds rather than our bodies
may not be as visually arresting as body suits and body armor, but they
ultimately may have more impact in terms of taking human performance to the
next level.
Palantir Technologies is a leader in providing exoskeletons for the brain.

Founded in 2004 with funders including In-Q-Tel, the VC-arm of the U.S.
Central Intelligence Agency, Palantir has traditionally worked with defense and
security agencies to identify criminals and terrorists. The firm has always been
about enhancement; it states, “We build products that make people better at their
most important work—the kind of work you read about on the front page of the
newspaper, not just the technology section.”
More recently, the firm has begun applying its expertise to commercial pursuits,
such as the detection of unauthorized trading.
In conjunction with Credit Suisse, Palantir has formed a joint venture, Signac, to
monitor trading activity in investment banks and identify patterns of behavior
indicative of unlawful trading. Signac collects data from employees and external
events and runs this information through Palantir's systems of intelligence
(which also rely heavily on trained analysts to extract conclusions). The intent is
to stop policy breaches and protect the bank's assets and brand.
It's now becoming apparent that humans alone, unless they are enhanced, simply
can't keep up with intelligent automation systems for some tasks. An example is
the field of radiology, which is ripe for enhancement. 8 In fact, radiologists will
soon be able to “partner” with systems such as IBM's Avicenna to improve
diagnostic accuracy. The software—in another great example of a system of
intelligence—is being designed to pull together massive amounts of data from
the patient's family history, medical imaging, additional test results, and text
notes and run it all through an AI machine that helps provide the radiologist with
valuable insight. 9 The average radiologist reads 20,000 films a year; given the
catastrophic repercussions of missing something, the idea of being enhanced, not
replaced, will offer tremendous benefits.
Whether it's education, health care, or financial services, a common theme runs
across all the examples given in this chapter: finding a specific business process
and applying a system of intelligence to that work in a way that creates a
knowledge economy exoskeleton around skilled employees and associates.
Similar to the approach we suggest for automation initiatives, you should start
with activities that are high-volume and data-rich and that follow a generally
recurring process (such as claims adjudication, identifying data patterns, etc.).
You + New Tools = Enhancement
We are in an incredible time, when technology is significantly extending the
envelope of human capability. Systems of intelligence now allow us to do things

p
p
y
y
g
g
at a level of productivity and profitability that even a few years ago would have
seemed far-fetched and implausible.
All of these possibilities and many more are being created by the injection of
intelligence into our tools. We have the potential to become smarter because our
tools are becoming smarter. This is an important point to realize. It would be
extremely arrogant to think that humans today are any smarter than Aristotle or
Shakespeare—or Steve Wozniak. But our tools are. And, of course, it's our tools
that are really at the heart of the progress we've made so far and the progress
we'll make ahead.
Enhancement will be the force that causes the bar to rise for every one of us, in
every organization and in every country in the world. If you can enhance the
value you generate, you are doing the right things as machines begin to do
everything. Enhancement also introduces new avenues of opportunity that we
need to explore to keep ahead. Down one of these avenues, you'll soon bump
into the next letter of our AHEAD model: A for abundance.
Notes
1. Amy is an AI-based personal assistant from x.ai, a VC-funded technology
company in New York City.
2. Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, Race Against the Machine: How the
Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and
Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy (Lexington, MA:
Digital Frontier, 2012).
3. Cade Metz, “In Two Moves, AlphaGo and Lee Sedol Redefined the Future,”
Wired, March 16, 2016, http://www.wired.com/2016/03/two-moves-alphago-
lee-sedol-redefined-future/ .
4. “Inspiring Zappos Customer Support Stories,” SlideShare, Oct. 28, 2013,
http://www.slideshare.net/InfinitOInc/10-inspiring-zappos-customer-support-
stories .
5. Peter Moore, “Pret A Manager: Behind the Scenes at the ‘Happy Factory,'”
Guardian, April 14, 2015, https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-
network/2015/apr/14/pret-a-manger-happy-coffee-chain .
6. David Aaker, “The Genius Bar—Branding the Innovation,” Harvard Business

Review , Jan. 5, 2012, https://hbr.org/2012/01/the-genius-bar-branding-the-in
.
7. Stacy Liberatore, “Now Anyone Can Be an Iron Man,” Daily Mail , Mar. 18,
2016, http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-3499462/Now-Iron-
Man-Panasonic-reveals-exoskeletons-allow-wearer-run-like-ninja-lift-heavy-
objects.html .
8. Saurabh Jha, “Will Computers Replace Radiologists?” Medscape , May 12,
2016, http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/863127 .
9. Tom Simonite, “IBM's Automated Radiologist Can Read Images and Medical
Records,” MIT Technology Review , Feb. 4, 2016,
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/600706/ibms-automated-radiologist-
can-read-images-and-medical-records/ .

10 
ABUNDANCE 
FINDING YOUR 10X OPPORTUNITIES WITH THE
NEW MACHINE
The concept of abundance is really quite simple: as prices go down, demand
goes up. We learn this in the first week of Economics 101.
Although AI-generated abundance is new, the underlying idea of abundance is
actually quite old; it has been a hallmark and productivity driver of every
preceding phase of industrial growth. The loom led to abundance in clothing, the
steam engine to abundance in transoceanic travel, and the assembly line to an
abundance of refrigerators finding their way into homes all around the world.
Before the revolutions that spurred them, these products were rare luxuries.
Afterward, they were democratized and ubiquitous.
With systems of intelligence in play, we will soon experience a new wave of
abundance, in areas such as financial services, insurance, health care,
entertainment, and education. As the new machine drives price points down,
markets of abundance will be established, driving sales up to unimagined levels.
The question now becomes: Will your organization seize advantage with the
new abundance or fall victim to it?
Microsoft's Joseph Sirosh told us he sees this abundance emerging in health care,
with new levels of individualized delivery: “You can say now if you are going to
keep people healthier using data and predictive analytics, you will need fewer
nurses and doctors and interim-care patients.… That sounds like labor
substitution. But, what you are getting in return is a very large population that is
leading healthier, happier lives [and who] can be productive and creative and
contributing [more] to the whole economic engine.”
During the past century, we have used raw materials, new machines, and
innovative business models to create unprecedented abundance and democratize
luxury with physical goods. Now, as abundance markets open up in the digital
economy, there are dozens of areas across knowledge-based industries in which
the machine will do almost everything. But at the same time, we're seeing the
impact of digital abundance in the physical world, as well (remember, hybrid is
the new black). A good example of this is Narayana Health, which is using the
hi
b i
f
f b
d
h
i
d f h

new machine to bring a form of abundance to those in need of heart surgery.
A Hundred Times More Heart
Narayana Health (NH), launched in 2000 by Dr. Devi Shetty in Bengaluru,
India, is revolutionizing cardiac surgery by leveraging digital technology. In
the process of doing so, the organization has saved hundreds of thousands of
lives over the past decade and a half. By lowering the cost of heart surgery
approximately a hundred-fold, Dr. Shetty and his team have delivered the
remarkable gift of abundance to patients in India. In a part of the world
where heart disease had previously been a death sentence, NH now provides
world-class heart surgeries to anyone in need.
Since its inception, NH has grown to 54 facilities, employing over 2,600
full-time doctors and 13,500 people in total, and now treats more than two
million patients a year. 1 This abundance-based growth is not in some e-
business with no moving parts, but in the most physically intensive of fields
possible, built one open-heart surgery at a time. What has accounted for such
rapid growth?
By applying the new machine to all of the processes before and after a
patient is in the operating room, NH can now provide bypass surgery at an
average cost of approximately $1,200. 2 (Consider that the average price tag
in the United States for this procedure is usually more than $100,000.) 3 In
addition to its dramatically lower costs, NH's mortality and infection rates
are the same as those in North America and Europe. 4 No wonder The Wall
Street Journal refers to Dr. Shetty as “the Henry Ford of heart surgery.” 5
These results are delivered neither by magic nor by cutting corners. Yes,
there are salary disparities between India and other countries, but these
account for only a fraction of the cost difference. The vast majority of these
dramatic savings come from the digitization of key processes. When they
launched NH, Dr. Shetty and his team looked at every process associated
with heart surgery and viewed it as being hybrid. Some portions must of
course remain highly physical—human-centric work performed by medical
professionals on an actual patient—whereas others can be significantly
digitized, such as monitoring patients and machines.
For example, NH has completely rethought and retooled the intensive-care
unit by applying digital technology. The team driving the change took a
traditional paper-based management model and deployed new technologies

traditional, paper based management model and deployed new technologies
to a very physical set of work processes. Now, nearly everything is sensor-
enabled—patients, medical equipment, nurses, and so forth—and is
continually monitored across more than 150 parameters covering vitals,
ventilators, labs, nursing tasks, infusions, and orders. The average patient
generates approximately 5 GB of data per day (equivalent to about 2,000 e-
mails or 900 minutes of YouTube videos). The data is also configured for
protocols and requirements specific to different specialties, regions, and
hospitals. This instrumentation also provides analytical insights on the
effectiveness of doctors and nurses.
By breaking down the processes of surgery prep, operating-room
management, and intensive-care-unit operations into discrete processes and
experiences and then applying new technologies, NH cut costs to the point
that it now can provide high-quality care to many more people. In this
instructive, as well as heartwarming, case study, digital is literally saving
lives.
In the coming pages, we'll outline how you can find digital abundance in your
company. The low-hanging fruit, the easiest abundance opportunities to find and
implement, will be in areas of the business that can be readily and fully digitized,
such as robo-advisory finance. However, as seen in the NH example, even the
most physical activities can be completely rethought and re-architected with the
application of the new machine.
Moore's Law Is Bringing Abundance to Your Business
Examples like Narayana Health are evidence, as we see it, of a wide-scale trend.
As core processes become instrumented and digitized, entirely new thresholds of
price, quality, and customization are being created for customers. This
phenomenon is at the center of the success and scale of both Spotify and
WeWork, for example, as these companies create abundance by automating the
matching of supply and demand in their respective markets.
But what organizations such as NH, Betterment, and Airbnb have all learned is
that setting a new price point is not a one-time thing. Instead, it is a continual
process. Why? Because once automation takes hold of your product's innards—
that is, as their creation and delivery transition from being human-based to
machine-based—they will become inherently tech-centric, and thus able to
benefit from the power of Moore's Law. This foundational building block of the
tech industry has been the bedrock of innovation and affordability for decades,

but hasn't had an effect on the cost of insurance policies, doctor's visits, or
educational tutoring services, which all cost about the same as they did 20 years
ago.
That's about to change, however, as many products and services become digital
to the core. As we described in Chapter 7 (on automation), your knowledge
processes are about to become radically more efficient. When automation is
focused on internal processes, you can achieve substantial savings. And when
automation is focused on your products and services, the benefits should accrue
to your customers in the form of abundance.
As product managers in Silicon Valley plan for products two years out that are
double the performance and/or half the cost, you should now be thinking along
similar lines with your information-based products and services. We realize it
can be intimidating to look at your best-selling products and services and think,
“Those will have to cost less than half their current price in five years,” but such
is the competitive challenge in the new machine age.
What to Do on Monday? Find Abundance in Your
Organization
At this stage, you may wonder how exactly to kick-start momentum toward
acting on the idea of abundance. Here are seven approaches that we've seen
deliver positive results:
1. Obsess about the start-up community.
2. Kill your company.
3. Play the “tomorrow it's free” game.
4. Manage your innovator's dilemma.
5. Make like a maker.
6. Think like a corner shop (new personalization).
7. Apply digital Taylorism.
Obsess About the Start-Up Community
FinTech, HealthTech, InsuranceTech, LawTech, and GovTech.
These industry movements all have abundance at their core. They are well
funded. And those launching these industry disruptors are more than happy to

u ded.
d t ose au c
g t ese
dust y d s upto s a e
o e t a
appy to
talk about themselves.
Make sure you and your colleagues are listening.
To that end, you should have a team focused exclusively on the new companies
that are coming after your business. It doesn't really matter where such a group is
placed; we have seen this role inside the strategy function, in R&D, under the
chief digital officer, or within IT. The key is that this team should be empowered
to take an objective view of the tech-based companies that are looking to bring
abundance to your industry and potentially to eat your lunch in the process.
Have this team draw up a “market map,” which examines all the offers your
company provides and juxtaposes them against the start-up community. For each
offer, the team should determine how many start-ups exist in that space, how
much money has been invested in them (and by whom), and the maturity and
customer-count of such firms. The team should update the map on a quarterly
basis, because such a dynamic view will very clearly expose which new ideas
are gaining customer traction.
When done properly, such market maps will provide you with a clear picture of
threats and opportunities. For example, there may be a dozen start-ups clumped
around one of your core products. In this case, Silicon Valley clearly is coming
for that portion of your company, and you need to marshal an appropriate
response right away—whether it be to buy, to build, or to partner to address the
threat.
Similarly, such market maps can save you a lot of heartache by avoiding failed
initiatives. When it comes to abundance, there are more failures than successes.
OPM (i.e., “other people's money”) R&D is the best form possible. Let others
waste their money and time in learning that a certain abundance idea won't work.
The key to this dedicated team's success is to grant them true objectivity in both
organization and orientation. Allow them to ask dumb questions. Liberate them
from hidebound orthodoxies; in times of new abundance, good companies go
bad when established managers are constrained by tradition. (Just ask the former
teams from Blockbuster or Kodak or Nokia.) Initially, a new offer will nearly
always look inferior, flawed, or irrelevant. Your more experienced managers,
who grew up with traditional industrial offers, may be dismissive of proposed
abundance offers. They'll find scenarios in which they won't work (and will
often point to issues such as channel conflict, security, or regulation). To save
your abundance team from such constrained thinking, it's vitally important to
provide them with the right structure, incentives, and (when necessary)
t
ti
t k
th
th
tti
d
i ti
f h

protection to keep the company on the cutting edge in times of change.
Ask Your Sharpest Employees to Kill Your Company
Perspective matters. You have employees—sometimes millennials younger than
32 along with others who simply have fresh thinking—who can offer a unique
and highly valuable point of view regarding your traditional industrial-model
company. As a best practice, ask a group of them to build a company killer.
That's right: ask them for ideas on how to put your company out of business.
In many ways, forward-leaning associates are living in a parallel universe, which
we call the “Sunday night, Monday morning” phenomenon. That is, on Sunday
night they are using digital platforms to manage their personal affairs—
entertaining themselves, connecting with friends, shopping, and handling their
households and finances, often all at the same time. Their smartphones truly are
the remote controls for most of their lives. Then, when they arrive at work some
eight hours later, they must reenter the old physical world, supporting an
organization that has been operating as it has been for decades.
This Sunday/Monday dichotomy can be both jarring and frustrating for these
employees, as they (rightfully) ask, “Why can't work be as seamless, friction-
free, and engaging as my home life?” They know one is the future, the other the
past.
To that end, instead of letting these associates wallow in frustration, ask them to
architect the future. Specifically, ask them to come up with five new tech-based
products or services that would put your company out of business. You might be
surprised with how quickly (and passionately) they come up with their
suggestions.
Play the “Tomorrow It's Free” Game
Look at your company's most expensive, premium-level, differentiated products
and services. Now imagine them at 10% of the market price. Scary? No doubt,
given that you've just imagined a hollowed-out revenue stream. It's concerning,
but this increasingly common development is what you need to prepare for; if it
can happen in heart surgery, it can happen anywhere.
Playing “tomorrow it's free” isn't so much of a glib game as a serious exercise in
setting strategy around abundance markets. This means leadership must ask
hard, even painful, questions about the implications of current products and
services moving from expensive and rare, to cheap and nearly ubiquitous.

Engaging in this experiment will introduce real risks and challenge long-
standing orthodoxies. In the life-sciences industry, for example, imagine all your
drugs and devices off patent. Imagine more of your therapies tailored to an
individual's genome (sensitive to our specific DNA, epigenome, microbiome,
and virome). 6 How can you use information to create more value associated
with your high-priced compounds? How can you leverage systems of
intelligence to create new ecosystems of offerings around such bespoke
medicines? These are the kinds of questions you and your teams should be
asking.
And what happens if you're in retail? If so, you're already living through the new
Amazon epoch. You know that people still want to go to a physical store, but
imagine if nobody bought anything there (“showrooming” at an exponential
level). How can you continue to create a sticky customer experience with new
machines? How can you grow your digital revenue from single digits to double
digits over the next few years? Some retailers are already making bold moves
along these lines. Walgreens, for example, is using a conjunction of technology
and its physical retail presence to begin offering lower-cost, high-volume health
care. 7
Of course, nothing will truly be free; one way or another, you need to find ways
to grow revenue. Yet we have found this exercise to be healthy, for it breaks
associates from their ingrained supply-based thinking. Most of us (consciously
or unconsciously) conceive of our companies' products or services as the sum of
their parts, which all adds up to a certain price. When we are forced to
completely flip this perspective to demand-side thinking (and even very selfish,
“I want it for free” thinking), completely new perspectives can arise. If you're
not looking at your current portfolio of products and services and playing the
“tomorrow it's free” game, prepare to be surprised, because your competitors
known and unknown certainly are.
Manage Your Innovator's Dilemma
The strategy of building products or services that you sell at one-tenth the cost of
your existing offerings is not without its challenges. Chief among them is the
question of how such prospective products or services—priced very differently,
aimed at very different customer segments, and entailing very different
economics and management models of production, distribution, and margins—
coexist within the same overall portfolio of market offerings? Frequently asked
questions of this approach include:

How can we make a profit if we drop our prices 90%?
Won't we cannibalize our existing market?
Do we have the right brand to operate in new markets?
Do we have the right people, with the right skills, to operate in low-cost
markets?
Such concerns are well-founded and on point. Moving into abundance-based
markets is nontrivial. In fact, perhaps the most influential business book of the
past 20 years—The Innovator's Dilemma, by Harvard Business School professor
Clayton M. Christensen—tackles exactly this challenge, although it was written
in 1997 before software really began eating the world and does not expressly
address disruption created by platforms and cloud computing, let alone systems
of intelligence.
Inspired by Christensen and refined by our work with clients, we have identified
three key concepts that are effective in handling these challenges:
1. The Three Horizons Model: Initially popularized by McKinsey & Co., the
Three Horizons Model (THM) recognizes the need to separate an overall
business into three distinct parts focused on whether they address the
immediate concerns of today's market, the market's needs in the short-term
future, or those over a longer time period (hence three horizons). 8 The model
aligns the right resources (staffing, ROI expectations, management metrics,
etc.) to the right horizon; there is no point, for example, in expecting a new
service operating in a nascent market niche to yield the same fat profit
margin that a well-established service in a mature market commands.
Derivations of this approach include Gartner's Bimodal IT strategy, which
structures the IT function into two groupings, one focused on “legacy”
technology and one on “next-generation” technology.
2. The Ellison-Benioff Model: At the dawn of the cloud computing wave,
Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison invested $2 million in his youngest-ever
vice president Marc Benioff's start-up, Salesforce.com . 9 Benioff had been
trying to convince Ellison that cloud computing was an important trend but
Ellison remained unmoved, seeing only the complexities of managing an
inherently “anti-Oracle” idea within his core business. 10 Instead, Ellison
became Benioff's initial seed investor, wished him well, and watched as his
investment blossomed into a $450 million holding in Salesforce. Funding
external start-ups to pursue abundance-based models short-circuits many of

the intra-business unit problems associated with developing a disruptive idea
within a large company.
3. The LVMH Model: French holding company LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis
Vuitton SE manages more than 60 subsidiary companies that operate
independently within its umbrella. 11 Although some back-office functions
are shared across the different companies—including many famous brands,
such as Bulgari (jewelry, watches, and luxury goods); TAG Heuer (watches);
Fendi (luxury fashion); and Thomas Pink (luxury clothing)—they all, for the
most part, pursue their individual markets in their own ways. The LVMH
model does not try to squeeze disparate products, which often have
overlapping market segments, into neatly confined niches, nor does the
company attempt to address competitive tensions between its different
brands. The LVMH approach, which has become increasingly influential in
recent years, allows the company's various subsidiaries to approach the
market in differing ways. New ideas find room to breathe within this
structure.
Make Like a Maker
One source of inspiration and talent focused on leveraging abundance is the
“maker” movement. 12 Growing organically as a subculture within technology
circles in recent years, the movement comprises individuals, teams, and
companies enthusiastic about building new devices (and tinkering with existing
ones) that live at the intersection of new functionality and low cost. For example,
makers take old crafts such as woodworking or metalworking and mix those
with new skills around 3-D printing and robotics to reassert the value of making
things rather than just using things made by big multinationals in faraway places.
Makers are typically engineers (professional and amateur) by background and
entrepreneurial in spirit, and are often at a point in their careers when they're not
fully “out on their own” with their pet idea or their true work. We find many
such makers on our travels working in big companies who, while holding down
their day job, are itching to really focus on their weekend avocation. Don't look
upon such individuals as uncommitted to the work at hand; rather, harness their
talents, energy, and passions by putting them in places and positions in which
their personal innovations can become your corporate innovations.
If Steve Wozniak's Apple 1 had been a Hewlett-Packard product in 1976, the
entire history of the high-technology industry would likely have been very

different. 13 Many companies are already sponsoring “maker spaces” within their
communities for civic reasons, but they are more fully embracing makers as part
of an innovation ecosystem and as an important (and cost-effective) way of
sourcing abundance-related ideas that otherwise would likely be invisible.
Think Like a Corner Shop: The New Personalization
A dramatically lower price point is only one threshold of abundance. A second
and equally important touchstone is greatly increased personalization.
In much the same way that the proprietor of the old corner shop knew the
personal needs and quirks of all his customers, the new abundance affords you
the same opportunity. This is not a function of scale; after all, look to the
personalization Facebook provides its 1.7 billion users. It's simply a function of
applying the new machine to establishing one-to-one connections with your
customers.
It's easier said than done for 100-year-old companies. Industrial companies have
been fantastic at the one-to-many business model. After all, that was their goal,
and their entire value chains and customer value propositions were focused on
this pursuit. Mercedes delivers top-end quality in all of its automobiles. Marriott
offers a consistent lodging experience for its business travelers, regardless of
location.
But one-to-many product capability is now table stakes. The new competitive
battleground is focused on truly being one-to-one and thereby unearthing new
abundance Thus, the individualized capabilities outlined in Chapter 8 on Halos
are central to the new abundance.
As we noted earlier, personalization is now the new battleground in the athletic
apparel industry. Under Armour has burst onto the scene to become a tier-one
competitor with Nike and Adidas. Now it is looking to go further, by leveraging
technology to provide one-to-one experiences with its customers. Said CEO
Kevin Plank:
Imagine you're traveling in Chicago for work. You went for a run one
morning, and you had a cold the day before. It's 7 degrees in Chicago, so I
know your nose was probably running the whole time. Well, we make this
great run glove—we call it the snot finger glove, because it's got basically a
microfiber personal Kleenex attached to it so you can rub your nose.
Imagine if I could send you an ad that says, “Hey, are you going to be in
Chicago for another day? Would you like us to send you a pair of gloves?”

14
Knowing just when and where you need the snot finger glove—now that's one-
to-one personalization that can open up entirely new abundance markets.
Apply “Digital Taylorism”
New abundance is, first and foremost, all about finding dramatic cost savings to
open new markets. How best to find these breakthroughs? By tying the new
technologies of AI to the old management principle of Taylorism (a concept we
first broached in Chapter 6 ).
A century ago, industrialized societies became obsessed with measurement in an
effort to drive efficiencies and boost quality in the manufacturing process. The
father of the management consulting industry, Frederick Winslow Taylor,
introduced the idea of scientific management to the early 20th century industrial
production line with his book The Principles of Scientific Management. 15 Taylor
advanced the idea that almost every work activity in a factory could and should
be broken down into discrete tasks and measured in time, motion, and output.
More important, performance levels and best practices could be codified and
replicated. Such thinking became foundational to the industrial model, driving
new levels of coordination, output, and quality.
At the time, some decried Taylorism, pointing to what they saw as its
dehumanization and removal of the individual decision-making of traditional
craftsmen. But economics ultimately won out; Taylor's ideas led to a global
trend, and the scientific decomposition of work allowed industrial best practices
to spread far and wide, across industries and geographies.
Today's hyper-instrumented and analyzed world is taking Taylorism to entirely
new levels. Knowledge work can be studied and optimized in the way industrial
work was a century ago. This will have far-reaching implications for the future
of your work and for the competitiveness of your company.
Digital Taylorism's ideas are particularly important for digitally focused
innovations within large organizations. Innovation is inherently messy, but it
needn't be chaotic. Many companies attempt to lower costs to expand markets,
but many initiatives fail because of a sense of “ownership.” The mandate to
“think differently” is something, we've often seen, that goes missing in action.
The rigor and metrics associated with digital Taylorism seem to become
sacrificed to a loosening of the conventional business disciplines that hold sway
in the established parts of the business. Insisting on applying the highest
standards of organizational and process best practices from the era of Taylor to

standards of organizational and process best practices from the era of Taylor to
our digital economy can help organizations inject a philosophy of
standardization and continuous improvement into their digital efforts.
Increasing Prosperity by Lowering Prices
Abundance markets are here, they are real, and business leaders are starting to
change the competitive landscape by lowering costs, increasing personalization,
and unlocking new large-scale opportunities. As we've shown, the key here is to
use the new machine, fueled by data and wrapped in a new commercial model,
to lower costs dramatically. This opens the floodgates for massive scale.
Many digital naysayers overlook the overall potential for growth based on
abundance markets. The more we work with customers and observe the market,
the more confident we are that the doomsday prophets are as wrong today as
they ever were.
Automation, Code Halos, enhancement, and abundance are all value levers for
work that many companies are already practicing today. But what about the truly
fresh idea? How can companies configure themselves to be ready to create the
next Uber, Predix, Palantir, or x.ai? Balancing investment and nurturing new
ideas for the future with running the business is always a tricky challenge. Many
of us have grown up with the mythology of the lone inventor toiling away,
crafting the Next Big Thing. It turns out, though, that there is both an art and a
science to innovation. In the digital economy, we call this “discovery.”
Notes
1. Wikipedia entry on Narayana Health:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narayana_Health .
2. http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/india-doctor/
3. Ketaki Gokhale, “Heart Surgery in India for $1,583 Costs $106,385 in U.S.,”
Bloomberg , July 28, 2013, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-
07-28/heart-surgery-in-india-for-1-583-costs-106-385-in-u-s-
4. N. Madhavan, “Compassionate Heart, Business Mind,” Business Today , May
25, 2014, http://www.businesstoday.in/magazine/cover-story/biggest-india-
innovation-narayana-health/story/205823 .html .

5. Geeta Anand, “The Henry Ford of Heart Surgery,” The Wall Street Journal ,
Nov. 25, 2009, http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB125875892887958111 .
6. One of our nominations for the “Best Book You (Probably) Haven't Read” is
Juan Enriquez and Steve Gullans' Evolving Ourselves: How Unnatural
Selection and Nonrandom Mutation Are Changing Life on Earth (New York:
Penguin Publishing, 2015).
7. Sarah Mahoney, “Walgreens' Telehealth Grows As We Warm to Digital
Doctors,” MediaPost, Nov. 12, 2015,
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/262453/walgreens-telehealth-
grows-as-we-warm-to-digital.html .
8. “Enduring Ideas: The Three Horizons of Growth,” McKinsey Quarterly ,
December 2009, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-
corporate-finance/our-insights/enduring-ideas-the-three-horizons-of-growth .
9. Eugene Kim, “The Epic 30-Year Bromance of Billionaire CEOs Larry Ellison
and Marc Benioff,” Business Insider , Aug. 12, 2015,
http://www.businessinsider.com/larry-ellison-marc-benioff-relationship-
2015-8/#when-benioff-first-started-building-salesforce-in-1999-he-was-still-
working-at-oracle-he-says-ellison-was-always-supportive-of-his-outside-
endeavor-giving-him-permission-to-split-work-at-salesforce-in-the-morning-
and-at-oracle-in-the-afternoons-ellison-even-let-benioff-take-a-6-month-
sabbatical-before-starting-salesforce-6 .
10. Salesforce.com positioned itself in the market as the antidote to Oracle and
other ERP vendors. See also Patrick Hoge, “The Benioff-Ellison Divide: It's
About More than Salesforce vs. Oracle,” Upstart Business Journal from San
Francisco Business Times , April 18, 2014,
http://upstart.bizjournals.com/entrepreneurs/hot-shots/2014/04/18/meet-marc-
benioff-the-anti-ellison.html?page=all .
11. LVMH is itself majority owned by Christian Dior.
12. Tim Bajarin, “Why the Maker Movement Is Important to America's Future,”
Time , May 19, 2014, http://time.com/104210/maker-faire-maker-movement/
.
13. Josh Ong, “Apple Co-Founder Offered First Computer Design to HP 5
Times,” Apple Insider , Dec. 6, 2010,

http://appleinsider.com/articles/10/12/06/apple_co_founder_offered_first_com
5_times .
14. Tom Foster, “Kevin Plank Is Betting Almost $1 Billion That Under Armour
Can Beat Nike,” Inc. , February 2016,
http://www.inc.com/magazine/201602/tom-foster/kevin-plank-under-armour-
spending-1-billion-to-beat-nike.html .
15. Wikipedia entry on Frederick Winslow Taylor:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frederick_Winslow_Taylor .

11 
DISCOVERY 
MANAGE INNOVATION FOR THE DIGITAL
ECONOMY
As we have seen throughout this book, the future of work will be fundamentally
different when machines do everything. Discovering this future—through formal
R&D processes and informal “ground-up” continuous improvement—is the
focus of this last chapter dedicated to outlining our AHEAD model.
Discovery, aka blue-sky innovation, related to systems of intelligence and the
digital economy, is both a catalyst for and an outcome of undertaking the
preceding steps of AHEAD. Automating, instrumenting, enhancing, and making
products and services abundant will all allow your organization to discover
opportunities that were never before visible or addressable.
Discovery itself, though, is a philosophy, a rigorous practice, an openness to the
future, an understanding that innovation can't be a side project—that is,
something “nice-to-have” or a rounding error of spend buried deep in a 10-Q
report. Discovery is central to remaining relevant in the great digital build-out
that lies before us. While machines will do more and more of our current work,
the process of innovation will allow us to discover entirely new things to do
(with and without machines) that are impossible to imagine and hard to predict,
but they will be at the core of what we do in the future.
We've touched on a number of historical figures throughout this book: Henry
Ford, Thomas Edison, Ned Ludd, and many others. We start this chapter by
looking at another far less well-known one: an inventor whose humble
technological breakthrough 186 years ago has had an outsized impact across the
world (particularly on Sunday afternoons at 4:00 PM), the evolution of which
has something to teach us not only about how innovation works but how we can
and should have faith that the unknown future will produce amazing
opportunities.
Think for a moment about today's global sports industry, now worth up to $620
billion a year. 1 Factor in ancillary revenues (hot dogs sold at games, taxi and
subway rides to sports arenas, ibuprofen taken after your team gets knocked out
in the first round of the playoffs), and the total amount of money sports

generates is probably way north of that figure.
All that spending flows, initially, from an English engineer's 1827 invention, the
lawn mower. Edwin Budding came up with the idea for a small, hand-pushed
machine as an alternative to the scythe—the traditional backbreaking way of
cutting grass—after seeing how a blade in a cylinder was used in a local cloth
mill.
To be sure, sports existed well before the lawn mower: Thomas Lord of Lord's
Cricket Ground 2 fame was playing professional cricket in the late 18th century,
and, don't forget, Jane Austen was writing about baseball in 1797. 3 But there
was no “sports industry” as such. Clearing spaces to play cricket with a scythe
was difficult, and thus they were few and far between; early types of footballs
were kicked around on mainly muddy thoroughfares.
Budding's lawn mower, as shown in Figure 11.1 , allowed grass to be cut easily
and uniformly, and what had historically been simply fields of uncut long grass
became a newly defined space: a “playing field.” Over the subsequent decades,
into the previously unthought-of vacuum of that open space, rushed idea after
idea about things that could be done there. Very quickly an explosion of sporting
innovation occurred: football/soccer (the Football Association formed in 1863),
rugby (the Rugby Football Union formed in 1871), tennis (the Wimbledon
Championship was first played in 1877), croquet (the first all-comers' meeting
was in 1868). All these sports emerged to take place on the grass playing field.
Everything that we sports fans live and breathe stems from that original
foundational innovation that created that “space.”

Figure 11.1 Mr. Budding and the First Lawn Mower
If Edwin Budding could come back now and see the impact his lawn mower has
had on the world, he would, no doubt, be astonished. It's unlikely that he could
have imagined when he sold his first machine to Regent's Park Zoological
Garden that 138 years later, a young professional footballer named Cristiano
Ronaldo would have 200 million social media followers, all because he kicks a
smallish ball around on a field of cut grass. 4
Ronaldo's fame and all of the jobs and money associated with sports across the
world originate from Budding's machine. The lawn mower is the foundation
upon which the sports industry is built.
Systems of intelligence are the latest set of technologies creating foundations on
which new industries and new jobs are being and will be built. Jobs of the future
that today we simply can't imagine—just as Budding wouldn't have been able to
extrapolate from his machine the rise of Ronaldo, or the commentator who talks
about Ronaldo, or the equipment manufacturer that supplies Ronaldo, or the
designer who created his logo. What one might call the Budding Effect.
Today, a new economy is emerging with a raft of job categories that even a few
years ago would have been hard to predict: social-media consultants, search-
engine optimizers, full-stack engineers, Perl developers, digital prophets,
hackers-in-residence, content curators, chief happiness officers, innovation
sherpas, clue shredders, pixel czars, chief ninjas. These are all jobs that the tech
economy's equivalent to Edwin Budding (Babbage, Flowers, Turing, Noyce,
Hopper Gates Andreessen and Zuckerberg?) could not have imagined

Hopper, Gates, Andreessen, and Zuckerberg?) could not have imagined.
Though the notion of “build it and they will come” was largely discredited in the
dot-com bust of the early 2000s, faith that the future will produce opportunity is
paramount to any company or anyone navigating uncertain times. Otherwise,
you might as well just keep on trying to take cost out of your old machines, your
old business models, the old S-curves.
Therefore, the question you and your teams should be asking is: What are our
lawn mowers? We're already seeing digital leaders place discovery bets on what
their lawn mowers might be.
Mark Zuckerberg paid $2 billion for Oculus VR (developer of the Oculus Rift
virtual-reality headset) in 2014, but acknowledged that the acquisition's focus on
gaming was just a start:
Virtual reality was once the dream of science fiction. But the internet was
also once a dream, and so were computers and smartphones. The future is
coming, and we have a chance to build it together. I can't wait to start
working with the whole team at Oculus to bring this future to the world,
and to unlock new worlds for all of us. 5
AI is changing our world already, but in reality we've only begun to scratch the
surface of where it will take us over the next 20, 50, or 100 years. As Robert
High, the chief technology officer of IBM Watson, told us:
Our work on cognitive computing—about amplifying human cognition—is
at a very early stage. I don't want it [the AI technology] to be as good as a
human; I want it to be better. Economic value is going to drive the
progression and evolution of these cognitive systems to a form of
intelligence that I don't think we would recognize as being similar to human
intelligence. It's not going to be a replication of human intelligence. It's
going to be a replication of some small portion of human intelligence, and
then a whole bunch of other forms of intelligence that we don't necessarily
recognize today but which will be more beneficial economically. Think
about astronomers and how much more they've learned by being able to
create sensors in the infrared range, or the X-ray range, or ranges of the
spectrum that humans aren't able to perceive. It wasn't necessary for
humans to perceive it, wasn't necessary for human evolution or even
survival. But it is extremely useful for understanding how the universe
works.
Your job is to imagine the new forms of value you can create with the new

machines of the new revolution. AI may be a strange lawn mower (one, we
hope, not related to Stephen King's The Lawnmower Man ), but we trust you get
the point. The Budding Effect has played out time after time throughout history,
and it is playing out again now. Institutionalizing the role and importance of
being open to the fruits of innovation is a hugely important role that you, as a
leader of the future, even though you may not be the head of your company's
formal R&D department, need to play.
In a world of cloud services, of open APIs, platforms, and crowdsourcing, every
organization has access to readily affordable tools (that a short time ago were
prohibitively expensive) with which to build the future of their work. The
leaders, individual and corporate, in the digital build-out will be those who
leverage the new “means of production”—those who break away from business
as usual and choose to develop “business unusual.” This is how you do that.
R&D Without AI Is No R&D at All
Soon, the new machine will be your platform of innovation. Once you are
instrumenting, automating, tracking, and analyzing the core operations of your
business and applying machine learning, innovation opportunities will be
consistently unearthed. These will not be based on the informed opinions of
individuals, whether executives or R&D staff, but rather on empiricism, on
what's actually occurring in the business.
Now, “innovation” is a rich term, with many different attributes and
applications. But the new machine can be applied to your R&D in numerous
areas, including the following:
Products and services
Processes
Business models
Sustainability
Frugality
Experience
Customer-led efforts
Ecosystem/supply chain
With product innovation, for example, your team will gain continual insight as to

how your products are (and aren't) being used, as to what customer frustration
points exist, and where the obvious areas for improvement (both incremental and
fundamental) exist.
The idea of performing R&D-based innovation without an AI platform will soon
be viewed as nothing short of guessing. People in your company will look at the
traditional centralized R&D group within corporate and begin to ask, “Who are
those strange wizards?” We will eventually wonder, “How did we think having a
few smart people in a room at corporate headquarters would deliver constant
innovation?” It will seem…silly.
Why? How can a small group of people in one location compete with the insight
and the learning of the AI platforms we've described in previous chapters? Once
you have automated, haloed, and enhanced your company's activities, the
associated AI engines can be applied to innovation. Your R&D process and
current R&D team will be greatly enhanced by the application of the new
machine, primarily because it radically accelerates the scale and speed of the
innovation process.
Innovation at the Velocity and Scale of AI
As Netflix continues to grow, it is attempting, essentially, to create something
entirely new—the world's first global television station. But this raises many
significant challenges in developing content that will appeal to a wide variety of
international customers. After all, it's difficult enough for a local television
station to understand the preferences of viewers in a specific metropolitan area;
such a station's programming managers live in that very community, with their
fingers continuously on the pulse of its culture, demographics, preferences, and
sensibilities. How could Netflix's team, based in Northern California, possibly
understand the nuanced viewing preferences of customers in places like Bavaria,
Australia's Northern Territory, or Japan's Okinawa Island? With the aid of the
new machine, it's actually quite easy.
Netflix's programming managers deploy their algorithms to inform them about
what is (and isn't) working with specific customer demographics around the
globe. In fact, they are constantly surprised, finding their personal assumptions
are usually quite wrong. Upon launching into Europe, for example, the Netflix
team presumed that age was the key determinant of what customers would
watch. Wrong.
Todd Yellin, head of product innovation at Netflix, said, “We thought the 19-
year-old guy and the 70-year-old woman have such different tastes that

personalization would be easy. But the truth is, 19-year-old guys like to watch
documentaries about wedding dresses. Hitting play just once on the Netflix
service, that's a far more powerful signal than your age and gender.” 6 Similarly,
geography doesn't matter as much as the Netflix team originally expected.
Common sense told them that specific regions of the world would have very
particular tastes. Wrong again. For example, many Japanese anime films are
consumed outside of Japan. Concluded Yellin, “Now we have one big global
algorithm, which is super helpful because it leverages all the tastes of all
consumers around the world.”
Had Netflix pursued a more traditional approach to R&D to understand global
customer preferences (i.e., talking to studio heads, hiring high-priced consultants
around the world, taking action based on the informed opinions of its most
experienced staff), it likely would have made some very expensive mistakes.
After some global failures, Netflix executives might have concluded, “Our
model just doesn't work over there.” Instead, by continually leveraging the
insights generated by the new machine, the company benefits from a highly
detailed roadmap for its ongoing expansion.
Innovation fueled by a system of intelligence is also fast. This rapid-fire,
machine-based learning sits at the core of inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil's
Law of Accelerating Returns. In short, Kurzweil argues that humans learn at a
linear rate, while machines now learn at an exponential pace. As such, when the
new machine is soon widely adopted, the rate of human progress in the 21st
century (as defined by the cumulative growth of human knowledge and the pace
of innovation) will be at least 1,000 times the average rate of the 20th century. 7
Now, will this thousand-fold speed improvement actually come to fruition?
Probably not; there are many carbon-based factors that slow down innovation
(e.g., people's opinions, ideas, and emotions, as well as many of the
organizational inertial issues we've previously highlighted). So let's be
conservative and bring Kurzweil's prediction down not just a bit, but a lot. Even
if we lower the machine-based innovation rate by two orders of magnitude, that
still means your R&D process will move at 10 times its current rate. This is a
level of scale and speed that traditional R&D simply could never provide.
Is Blockchain Our Digital Lawn Mower?
Every few years in the tech industry, a technology of great promise comes
along. Sometimes that promise is fulfilled (e.g., the Internet, smartphones,
i l l f
) S
i
i '
(
S
d Lif
ifi
i

social platforms). Sometimes it's not (e.g., Second Life, gamification,
Google Glass).
If there were a specific technology that would win the current “buzz and
hype” award, it is Blockchain—the distributed ledger in the sky that has the
potential to automate not just key processes but also entire industries.
Goldman Sachs has said that Blockchain has “the potential to redefine
transactions” and to change “everything.” 8 Many voices are now predicting
that it will fundamentally alter not just our banking system but other vital
portions of the economy, such as document storage and management,
contract management, and identity management.
Blockchain advocates believe it has the potential to automate the most basic
functions of the banking system: lending, payments, and settlements.
Consider all the settlements required each day by credit card transactions,
stock trades, currency trades, loan origination, insurance settlements, and so
forth. In the renowned catchphrase of Carl Sagan, “billions and billions.” 9
And consider the vital societal role that banks, investment banks, credit-card
companies, and insurance firms play to ensure that all of these settlements
are managed transparently and securely. What if all of those settlements
could be automated and in the process managed far faster, more cheaply, and
more securely? Enter Blockchain, perhaps one of tomorrow's most potent
technologies and a fertile direction for discovery.
And the potential use cases don't stop with financial services. For example,
what if warranty management were handled not by centralized companies
full of humans but was automated in the cloud by Blockchain? Say, for
example, any instrumented machine that had encountered mechanical
troubles (e.g., an air conditioner, a bus, a power generator) wouldn't have to
wait for a series of humans to discover, diagnose, and then fix the problem.
Instead, the machine would recognize the problem, determine how it should
be fixed, review its own warranty, summon the appropriate mechanic,
manage the payment, and update all the appropriate records. All of this
would be automated—with trust and efficiency—by Blockchain.
Blockchain pessimists, on the other hand, have a very simple argument:
“Where's the beef?” They will note that industry use cases with Blockchain
automating core processes of major corporations are still few and far
between.
How, then, should we think about Blockchain? How do you manage through
the confusion and take the appropriate actions in your company? We suggest

the confusion and take the appropriate actions in your company? We suggest
you follow two parallel approaches, which can be applied to many new
technologies and ideas.
Approach Blockchain like a call option. Blockchain is like a risky,
high-beta stock. It could go bust, or it could provide massive returns.
Approach it as such. Make some small investments that could pay off
handsomely if Blockchain takes off but small enough that you could
walk away if Blockchain fizzles. To do this, ensure that several members
of your core technology teams are immersed in all things Blockchain.
Create alliances with key Blockchain technology vendors (both product
and service). Launch a few small pilots in your company. Keep a close
eye on use cases in other companies. See if it all makes sense.
Don't let the Blockchain tail wag the business dog. As with all
technology fads, there will be Blockchain fanatics in your midst. They
will see Blockchain's applicability to almost everything in your
company. We have seen several cases in which this thinking gained too
much momentum inside a company, leading to false starts. In such
instances, precious time, money, and effort are spent on technology-first
initiatives without anybody asking “What's the business benefit here?”
One of the core principles of this book is that machines can do many things
but that practical application should be focused on specific business
processes and customer experiences. When you are making discovery
investments, start at the process-and-experience level and imagine how the
process can be restructured and reinvented with digital. Getting this
backward and letting Blockchain or any other new technology (e.g.,
quantum computing, augmented reality, nuclear fusion) attract outsized
investment can be a prescription for failure.
Discovery Is Hard, but Not as Hard as Being Irrelevant
If you need further ammunition to argue the importance of being open to
discovery, the views of the world's largest investor, Larry Fink, may be useful.
Fink, whose firm, BlackRock, Inc., has $4.6 trillion under management, is not
the sort of guy you'd expect to be interested in anything other than next quarter's
results. Yet Fink recently sent a letter to the CEOs of S&P 500 companies and
large European corporations, stating, “We are asking that every CEO lay out for
shareholders each year a strategic framework for long-term value creation….

Today's culture of quarterly earnings hysteria is totally contrary to the long-term
approach we need.” 10
Fink's letter says, in essence, that companies need to recognize that an
overemphasis on optimizing old approaches without giving enough priority to
new approaches is having deleterious effects; indeed, the letter goes on to say
“companies have not sufficiently educated [their shareholders] about…how
technology and other innovations are impacting their business.”
This type of insight is important in every organization that is trying to invent the
future of their work. Living with failure is a prerequisite of creating long-term
value. In his field guide to the start-up world of California, Chaos Monkeys:
Obscene Fortune and Random Failure in Silicon Valley , former Facebook
product manager Antonio Garcia-Martinez expresses the view that 90% of the
75% of companies that don't achieve “escape velocity” fail to do so because they
simply give up; start-up life is so tough.
Discovery is a hard, unforgiving place to pitch a tent. There are no guarantees.
Living with failure is contrary to so many personal and corporate instincts. Yet
without this attitude—this resilience —your future probably looks an awful lot
like your present, a present that is certainly soon to be your past. And that's not a
future at all.
What to Do on Monday? Don't Short Human Imagination
Discovery can be a risk. Invest too much in the wrong ideas, and you go broke.
Wait for somebody else to do it, and you can miss the market opportunity of a
lifetime. Countless books have already been written about innovation methods,
grandiose plans, and the future of society. Our goal here, however, is to give
some practical advice wrapped in a single bold strategy.
That is, don't short human imagination. Succeeding in an era in which machines
do almost everything also means accepting and believing that humans will have
plenty to do.
If, as some techno-dystopians believe, machines will render humans irrelevant in
the near future, the fundamental DNA of Homo sapiens that has propelled us
forward for millennia will have run dry. What is that DNA attribute? It is
curiosity , something that is the key defining characteristic of intelligence (as it
is currently manifested in our human form). From our first words to our first
steps, to our first journey, it is intrinsic to our very being to want to know who,

what, why, and where. Nobody tells us to ask questions. No parent, or teacher, or
TV show, or social media feed tells us or programs us to want to know what's
up. We just do.
When computers start asking questions like “Just what do you think you're
doing, Dave?,” then we should start worrying. But that eventuality is as far off in
the future as it was 50 years ago, when the first prophets of AI-induced human
calamity became vocal. Until then, humans will continue to ask questions, be
curious, imagine, and build, all the while using the new machine.
The trick is figuring out how to identify and nurture the next big (or small) idea,
while balancing this against the reality of how investments are made in large and
medium-sized companies. In fact, whenever we bring up discovery with clients,
their first reflex is to assert, “But we don't have any money!”
With that in mind, the following subsections describe some things you can do to
help balance the budget while still benefiting from the results of wisely
conducted discovery.
Apply Digital Kaizen
So what's the best practice for bringing about this new form of innovation? We
find too many managers looking for “the next great breakthrough” or, in baseball
terms, the grand slam. That doesn't work.
The opposite approach is to ask how the new machine adds the most value—that
is, by looking for continuous, incremental improvements or looking to hit singles
on a consistent basis. This is akin to the Japanese concept of kaizen , which
translates as “change for better” but is implemented as small, continuous
improvements that in time have a large impact.
Through digital Kaizen—leveraging the new machine to be on the lookout for
incremental improvements—the R&D function can be revolutionized. For
example:
In product innovation, AI platforms can help monitor a fleet of machines,
enabling fast recognition of which components fail prematurely and why.
This would then inform the next generation of engineering, as well as field
service operations.
With process innovation, AI will monitor an instrumented workflow and
quickly recognize existing bottlenecks and recommend new approaches.
With customer-led innovation, ongoing reviews of how customers are

actually using your products will inform product management and pricing
schemes.
These are the areas where the new machine can best be initially focused in R&D.
They are clear examples of digital Kaizen, a series of small discoveries that over
time can change the basis of competition.
For example, nothing is more important to colleges and universities than
students—in particular, keeping them as students. The University of Kentucky
(in Lexington) is dealing with retention in real-time by applying a bit of digital
Kaizen. The school has employed a real-time data analytics platform and a team
of data scientists to develop a predictive scoring system that provides here-and-
now insight into individual student engagement levels. Data is collected by
asking students short survey questions when they log into the school portal,
perhaps whether they've purchased all their textbooks or to rate their stress level
on a scale of 1 to 5. In just five weeks, the school collected data from more than
40,000 individual students. The insights gained helped increase freshman-to-
sophomore retention by 1.3%—an apparently incremental improvement with a
significant downstream impact. 11
The best part: with a breakthrough innovation, your competitors will quickly
look to neutralize it in the market. But with digital Kaizen, your moves are
stealthy and thus difficult to replicate.
It's easy to get a case of whiplash when making realistic plans for discovery. By
their very nature, specific ROIs and well-intended Gantt charts tend to inspire
frustration when applied to discovery. The best partial antidote is to balance
near-term realistic innovation—digital Kaizen, or perhaps “little d” discovery—
with your own lawn mower or moon shot idea—“Big D” Discovery.
Digital Kaizen focuses on incremental moves for meaningful impact, a near-term
project for which you can take responsibility. The path should be clear by now:
cut costs with automation, instrument everything, and harvest the data “exhaust.”
Your digital moon shot might be a project based on Blockchain, or quantum
computing, or even artificial super-intelligence. These are bigger bets that, if
you're thinking like a VC, can be taken in small steps over time.
The trick here is to balance both approaches.
Let Hits Pay for Misses
Another of the key principles of discovery is the notion best encapsulated by the

scriptwriter William Goldman in his 1983 book about the film industry,
Adventures in the Screen Trade: “nobody knows anything.”
Your goal should be to become a Know-It-All business via instrumentation,
sensors, big data, and analytics. However, the inherent unpredictability of the
future is likely a permanent truth. Nobody really knows what will work on the
road ahead; not even Netflix. Goldman says that people, if they're lucky, make
“educated guesses.” Code Halos can help educate us to make better guesses
while making ignorance less acceptable, but we should be humble enough to
know that we can't really know. This is particularly true in the wide open spaces
now being created by our new lawn mowers.
To deal with this reality, you need to take a leaf out of Hollywood's book and
structure your discovery-related efforts around the core idea that “hits pay for
misses.” Estimates suggest that 70% of movies lose money. 12 (Only estimates
exist because movie industry accounting is surrounded by a long-standing
omertá. ) Similar ratios exist in other creative industries, such as music, books,
and theater. Even the most revered actors or novelists have plenty of turkeys on
their résumés. It's unlikely that Robert DeNiro's 2011 bomb, New Year's Eve ,
will feature heavily on the sad day The New York Times runs his obituary.
Of course the tech industry is full of its own misses: Microsoft's Vista,
Facebook's phone, Apple's Lisa; even the mighty stumble a lot of the time.
Shikhar Ghosh of Harvard Business School believes 75% of venture-backed
firms in the United States don't return their investors' capital. 13 Technology
funding, both in the VC world and inside large companies, is expressly set up so
that 70% (and higher) failure rates can be tolerated.
In thinking like a VC, recognize that success is determined by active portfolio
management. It's not about putting all of one's money on one idea but making
lots of investments, many of which actually don't pan out. According to data
from a prominent investment firm, “Around half of all investments returned less
than the original investment.” 14 The analysis also notes that a paltry “6% of
deals…made up 60% of total returns.”
This may be sobering info. You may ask, “How can we get returns when the
smart money does so poorly?” Well, you can move those odds in your favor, but
the key is managing a portfolio, not avoiding failure. In fact, in the study cited, a
fund gets better returns not by having fewer failures but by having more really
big hits. In other words, they had to take more risks to get the best returns.
It turns out the best VCs (those with the highest and most consistent returns)

achieve their success not just through superior management of their individual
start-ups (i.e., finding great entrepreneurs with fantastic ideas and providing
them with the right funding and support). More important, as evidenced by the
data, is the simple fact that they place more bets and are willing to fail more
often.
Even if you're not in a formal R&D role related to discovery, this means you
should establish a portfolio of initiatives focused on discovery, with a clear life
cycle methodology that manages these initiatives from inception through to
ultimate success or failure. Some companies have initiated groups of
entrepreneurially minded employees and allowed them to propose ideas for new
products or services, secure financing and management support, build out a team
to establish the ideas as a going concern in the external marketplace, and then
attempt to grow it to a mature enough point that it can “graduate” to become part
of the revenue-driving engine of the overall company. This helps balance digital
Kaizen—discovering process-level innovation—with more blue-sky discovery:
that is, seeking the next big hit. Toyota is doing just this—balancing investment
in its traditional models while simultaneously working on driverless cars.
The Road to Driverless Cars
One of the places in which we've become totally reliant and comfortable
with automation over the years has been in our cars. Manual (stick-shift)
transmissions represent less than 4% of automobile sales in the United
States. 15 Without us really noticing, our cars have become full of
automation technology: windows, steering, cruise control, GPS, adaptive
headlights—the list goes on. Automation has snuck up all around us to
improve the driving experience.
The accelerated race to automation has now led us to the next frontier: the
fully autonomous, self-driving car. Long a standard feature of sci-fi
entertainment, from Logan's Run (1976) to the Knight Rider TV show
(1982–1986) to Total Recall (1990) to Minority Report (2002), the self-
driving car is fast (and furiously) becoming a reality.
Following Google's 2010 announcement that it was developing autonomous
vehicles, major car manufacturers have buckled up and put the pedal to the
metal to try to win this new race. 16 Ford, General Motors, Audi, Mercedes-
Benz, and BMW, among others, are all in the process of introducing
different flavors of autonomy into their fleets; some will be fully self-driving

—most eye-catchingly, Ford's “no steering wheel/no pedal” model
developed in conjunction with Google—while others, such as Audi's, will
have a “highway traffic jam pilot” feature available by 2018. Famously,
industry upstart Tesla has a “look Ma, no-hands” option already being
(mostly) successfully driven by thousands of people.
Toyota—the world's number-one auto maker by sales, with more than 10
million vehicles sold in 2015—is increasing its investments in autonomy by
spending $1 billion over the next five years on embedding sensors and AI
into its cars. 17 , 18 The aim is to have a car that can drive itself on highways
by the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. 19
As Ned Curic, EVP of Technology and Development at Toyota Connected
in Los Angeles, told us, “The business model is going to change, for sure.
The way we actually sell vehicles will change in the next 10 years, and the
way you deliver the mobility services will change. AI is going to play a huge
role in the future. AI is the central technology that will change the
experience.”
And yet, amid these wrenching industry shifts, Curic said the future is
uncertain: “If you believe Silicon Valley, nobody will be driving vehicles in
10 years. But the reality, at least, is showing something that is the opposite.
We did research, and to our surprise, millennials do want to have a car and
do want to drive. So we, as a company, have to hedge.”
A fully autonomous vehicle may be Toyota's moon shot, but the company is
also simultaneously working to make more modest, but still important,
discoveries related to assisted driving.
Toyota sees a medium-term future in which autonomous cars are one option
it sells within an overall range of cars for which higher levels of general
automation become the norm but stop short of full automation. The fully
self-driving car will appeal to a certain demographic, and for certain
situations: elderly or disabled people will likely want them, and
organizations operating in hazardous environments (such as a mine or an
airport) will find them useful. Curic said he believes “you'll be able to drive
a self-driving car within 10 years, without the driver needing to pay attention
on many roads in America, but not on any road.”
The important discovery lesson here is the notion of “hedging.”
Organizations trying to discover the future need to act like venture capitalists
or movie studios, placing lots of bets rather than just one big bet. Nobody

really knows with certainty how big the market for self-driving cars will be
in 5, 10, or 20 years, but Toyota's leaders do know that if they don't invest
here, they run the risk of losing a leadership position.
In addition to this approach being run across your company, you can also scale it
down to the portfolio of things that you are directly responsible for in whatever
part of the business you operate. If you run a finance function, actively seek
ideas from your team on how to reduce month-end book-closing cycles; if you
get 10 ideas, one or two of them might be worth exploring further. If you run a
sales function, ask for recommendations for new tools that can increase
conversion rates. Again, most of the suggestions will likely go nowhere, but
semi-formalizing a culture that encourages seeking out new ideas is a powerful
way of signaling that business as usual isn't the only business you're in.
Leave the Past Behind
Through our work with clients, we repeatedly hear variations on this lament:
“We love your ideas. We'd love to build Code Halos and introduce systems of
intelligence. We know we have to migrate to our digital future. But … We have
such ingrained, complex, mission-critical systems that we can't change; we dare
not risk cutting ‘Wire X’ because we simply don't know what will happen if we
do.”
Discovery initiatives in many Fortune 500 companies are hampered because of
their expensive, sunk-cost, legacy technology. In an era when the competitive
advantages of technology have never been greater, these organizations are
maintaining (at huge expense) systems that are a terrible competitive
disadvantage.
The reason for this is they don't have the ability to turn old stuff off.
Anyone who's been around corporate IT for a while knows that the concept of
decommissioning systems (i.e., sunsetting them, killing them, turning them off )
is entirely alien. Even when new systems, apps, and processes are developed,
these typically “sit” on top of their predecessors. Systems are built on top of
systems, and before you know it, you have a logical architecture that is the
proverbial plate of spaghetti.
There has never been a culture in enterprise IT of throwing things away when
they're past their sell-by date. No brownie points accrue to those who question
the value of old systems or choose to wade into the often complicated and
uncomfortable (potentially career-limiting) political issues around such matters:

uncomfortable (potentially career-limiting) political issues around such matters:
“Fred commissioned that app. I don't want to tell him, an executive VP, that the
system's no good anymore.”
On occasion, finance executives have tried to introduce ideas like “zero-based
budgeting” to get IT to take a cold, hard look at the existing footprint but to little
avail. Y2K proved that old systems never die. What little glory there is in IT
comes from building new stuff, not dealing with old systems.
There are psychological dynamics in play as well, above and beyond spreadsheet
dynamics. After all, shutting down old systems can feel like throwing away
money. The Japanese writer Marie Kondo, whose book The Life-Changing
Magic of Tidying Up has turned into an unlikely sales phenomenon (4.5 million
copies sold and counting), says that the money you spent on the item was the
price of the joy it generated while you used it. 20 If the item no longer “sparks
joy,” there is no need to hang onto it.
In accounting-speak, we might say the item is “fully depreciated.” And a lot of
IT is “fully depreciated,” hardly generating any “joy” at all.
This is a problem. Without clearing away systems and processes that are no
longer fit for purpose or soon won't be, organizations are undermining their
ability to find the budget, time, resources, and energy to invest in the future.
Given that most IT budgets increase by small margins year after year, it's
unlikely that maintaining business as usual will lead companies to prioritize
building and leveraging new machines.
Turning off old IT is difficult, of course, but strategies to deal with this
conundrum do exist. Given the mission-critical nature of many IT systems,
caution understandably must rule. No one would be too happy if American
Airlines made mistakes with flight management software while we were at
35,000 feet. However, the reality is that unless IT (and business) executives get
honest about the need to turn apps, systems, and processes off , they (and the
companies they serve) are going to simply sit and watch the incredible
opportunities of this new golden age slip further and further away.
As we move away from systems of record to systems of intelligence, the time is
right again to consider which elements of the past will be useful in the future. As
we illustrated in Chapter 4 , systems of record do have a place in the new
machines that you need to build, but not in their entirety, not all of them, and not
as they are currently configured. Before you take another step forward, examine
—or reexamine—your current IT and process portfolio with a steely eye.

Chances are good you'll need to retain outside experts to give you the
unvarnished truth. Most important, recognize that the cycles of technological
innovation that we've examined throughout this book are moving so fast that it is
entirely illogical to imagine that systems built 10, 20, or 30 years ago will
withstand the competitive onslaught from systems built with the latest tools,
techniques, and raw materials.
Play the Wayback Game
If you think discovery is something that's theoretically desirable but practically
impossible, it's time to reconsider. They say a picture is worth 1,000 words, so
here's a 90-second exercise that helps prove the point. Open a browser and check
out the Internet Archive Wayback Machine (at https://archive.org/web/ ). As the
name says, it's a nonprofit group with over 500 billion Web pages archived from
the past decades. Then, just pick a company you know and check it out; poke
around. Big companies including HP, Kodak, and IBM have loads of archived
pages.
Initially, it's kind of fun in an “Oh, wow, do you remember film !?” way, but it's
also fuel for a much deeper notion. The design and content of Kodak's website in
1997 is 20 years old, but it feels as dated as a wool bathing suit or penny-
farthing bicycle. These sites were state-of-the-art in every way, but the world has
changed miraculously since then. Those of us who were there at the time know
we had no idea of what was to come. Humans simply have trouble extrapolating
into the future. We're quite happy to be (rightfully) proud of our current
moments. We believe we're at the zenith of development (technically, socially,
etc.). We are hardwired to think of ourselves as being at the apex, but in reality
we're just at the highest camp on the side of an infinitely high mountain. We
simply can't envision how things could be in five or ten years.
One other lesson to learn from the Wayback Game is just how fast technology
has changed. Many companies that ruled the day not too long ago—HP, CSC,
EDS, Compaq, Gateway, Research in Motion, Nokia, etc.—are now either
struggling or gone. If you are in the tech industry, this is business as usual, but as
we've shown, digital is moving on to “work that matters.” Banks, insurance
companies, retailers, health care providers, and so forth must become used to a
tech-sector velocity of change.
Create Your Own Budding Effect
Machines will do more and more and the companies leading the change will

Machines will do more and more, and the companies leading the change will
thrive in a winner-take-most digital economy. Discovery shouldn't be passed on
to your competitors or your successors. With the new machine, you have all the
tools and resources for discovery. It's your challenge, and your opportunity.
Throughout the book, we've talked about great innovators like Watt, Ford, and
Jobs, and we've also mentioned lesser ones like Edwin Budding. We believe that
in the next 20 years there will be a whole new set of iconic innovators who
transform their industries. We don't know who they are, where they are from, or
what they will do. Nobody does.
However, with great confidence, we can predict that they will connect the Three
M's and apply the principles of the AHEAD model to focus on the work that
matters. Central to their generative acts will be the belief that something better
can be created. The true core of discovery is, after all, hope.
Notes
1. “The Sports Market,” May 2011,
https://www.atkearney.com/fr/communications-media-technology/ideas-
insights/article/-/asset_publisher/LCcgOeS4t85g/content/the-sports-
market/10192 .
2. Wikipedia entry on Thomas Lord: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Lord
.
3. Stephen Adams, “Jane Austen Wrote About Baseball 40 Years Before It Was
‘Invented',” Telegraph , November 2008,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3562873/Jane-Austen-wrote-about-
baseball-40-years-before-it-was-invented.html .
4. Kurt Badenhausen, “Cristiano Ronaldo Is First Athlete with 200 Million
Social Media Followers,” Forbes , Feb 23, 2016,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2016/02/23/cristiano-ronaldo-
is-the-first-athlete-with-200-million-social-media-followers/#57b26a661129 .
5. From Mark Zuckerberg's Facebook page, March 25, 2014,
https://m.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10101319050523971 .
6. Madhumita Murgia, “Inside Netflix: How Reed Hastings Is Building the First
Global TV Network,” Telegraph , March 26, 2016,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/03/26/inside-netflix-how-reed-

hastings-is-building-the-first-global-tv/ .
7. “The Law of Accelerating Returns,” Kurzweil Accelerating Intelligence,
March 7, 2001, http://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-accelerating-returns .
8. Porta Crow, “Wall Street Is Obsessed with This Technology That No One
Quite Understands–Here's the Best Explanation We've Seen,” Business
Insider , March 13, 2016, http://www.businessinsider.com/what-is-
blockchain-barclays-2016-3 .
9. Joe Blevins, “Carl Sagan Did Say ‘Billions and Billions' a Lot on Cosmos,
Video Proves,” A.V. Club , Jan. 12, 2015, http://www.avclub.com/article/carl-
sagan-did-say-billions-and-billions-lot-cosmo-213673 .
10. “Laurence D. Fink's 2016 Corporate Governance Letter,”
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/02/02/business/dealbook/document-
larry-finks-2016-corporate-governance-letter.html?_r=0 .
11. Robert Hoyle Brown, “Digital Process Acupuncture: How Small Changes
Can Heal Business, and Spark Big Results,” Cognizant Technology
Solutions, February 2016, https://www.cognizant.com/whitepapers/Digital-
Process-Acupuncture-How-Small-Changes-Can-Heal-Business-and-Spark-
Big-Results-codex1438.pdf .
12. Question on Quora: https://www.quora.com/How-often-do-Hollywood-
movies-lose-money# .
13. Deborah Gage, “The Venture Capital Secret: 3 Out of 4 Start-Ups Fail,” The
Wall Street Journal , Sept. 20, 2012,
http://www.wsj.com/news/articles/SB100008723963904437202045780049804
.
14. “In Praise of Failure,” Benedict Evans blog, Aug. 10, 2016, http://ben-
evans.com/benedictevans/2016/4/28/winning-and-losing ?
15. Carroll Lachnit, “Five Myths About Stick Shifts: Manual vs Automatic
Transmissions,” Edmunds.com , Sept. 26, 2013,
http://www.edmunds.com/fuel-economy/five-myths-about-stick-shifts.html .
16. Google announcement, Google Plus, March 28, 2012,
https://plus.google.com/+google/posts/MVZBmrnzDio .

17. Yoko Kubota, “Toyota Again No. 1 in Global Car Sales,” MarketWatch ,
Jan. 26, 2016, http://www.marketwatch.com/story/toyota-again-no-1-in-
global-car-sales-2016-01-26 .
18. Yoko Kubota, “Behind Toyota's Late Shift Into Self-Driving Cars,” The Wall
Street Journal , Jan. 12, 2016, http://www.wsj.com/articles/behind-toyotas-
late-shift-into-self-driving-cars-1452649436 .
19. Sebastian Toma, “Toyota Announces Billion-Dollar Investment In Self-
Driving Car Technology,” Autoevolution, June 20, 2016,
http://www.autoevolution.com/news/toyota-announces-billion-dollar-
investment-in-self-driving-car-technology-108699.html .
20. Marie Kondo, The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up (New York: Ten
Speed Press, 2014). https://www.amazon.com/Life-Changing-Magic-
Tidying-Decluttering-Organizing/dp/1607747308 .

12 
COMPETING ON CODE 
A CALL TO ACTION FROM THE FUTURE
In the three years that we've been developing this book, the debates about the
pros and cons of AI have intensified, and the battle lines have become more and
more firmly drawn.
In the one camp are the utopians, those who believe AI is set to usher in an age
of miracles and wonder, of endless technological marvels and broad sunlit
uplands. In the other camp are the dystopians, those who see a world of
malevolent robots, evil overlords, and an underclass scratching a living in the
ruins of the great American dream. Both camps have their high priests and
evangelists; famed inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil (cited in Chapter 11 ) sees
20,000 years of progress happening during the next 100 years. 1 The CEO of
Allen Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Oren Etzioni, imagines a world in which
people focus on “activities that are personally meaningful to them, like art.” 2
Conversely, Tesla CEO Elon Musk calls AI “our greatest existential threat,” and
physicist Stephen Hawking prophesies that AI might be the last event in human
history. 3
Anyone paying attention to these debates can quickly feel bewildered by claim
and counterclaim, as both camps make strong arguments. If AI does develop
along its current trajectory, it isn't hard to imagine it leaving us behind in the not
too distant future; then again, the future could be amazing—as long as I'm inside
the walled garden.
AI for Pragmatists
The question you might ask as you approach the end of this book is: Which
camp is right—utopian or dystopian?
The short answer? Neither.
The future won't be one extreme or the other; it won't be a utopia or a dystopia.
We firmly believe, as we have argued throughout this book, that intelligent
machines will increase living standards; create better, more satisfying jobs;
allow us to solve big problems; and invent entirely new products, services, and
experiences But we also fully acknowledge the truth that intelligent machines

experiences. But we also fully acknowledge the truth that intelligent machines
will replace some occupations, put pressure on wages for many jobs, make some
people's skills and capabilities irrelevant, and leave behind those unable to keep
up and compete.
Between the extremes of the debate is the reality of what is going to happen in
the next few years. Machines will learn to do more and more things; narrow AI
will seep into every type of software, as well as an increasing range of physical
products; systems of intelligence will expose the systems (and products, and
processes, and organizations) that aren't intelligent; and customers will gravitate
to the Google or Amazon price.
These things will happen—there is no doubt— while the AI debates continue to
rage.
The debate has, so far, been in the hands of theoreticians. It's now time for
pragmatists to take over, pragmatists who realize that the past has never been
singularly utopian or dystopian. After all, the best-selling record in England in
1967, the year many musicologists believe was the greatest ever with the Beatles
at the zenith of their fame, was Engelbert Humperdinck's “Release Me.” The
past has always contained both; therefore, pragmatists logically believe the
future will contain both, as well.

Figure 12.1 Utopians vs. Dystopians vs. Pragmatists
Pragmatists know that the debates will never be settled and fully agreed upon;
but they know that arguing over possible futures ahead is less meaningful than
making a probable future AHEAD. Pragmatists will be responsible for
navigating their companies through the coming years, which all of us—utopians
and dystopians alike—can agree will be full of change, disruption, opportunity,
and risk.
The Digital Build-Out Is Here
In this book, we have argued that the information-technology innovations and
investments of the past 70 years are merely a precursor to the next waves of
digitization, which will have truly revolutionary impacts on every aspect of
work, society, and life. Just as the world of 1840s England was not unlike that of
1770s England but was utterly different from 1870s England (at the end of the
Second Industrial Revolution), the compounding and exponential nature of
digital progress is set to make the next 15 years a period of fundamental
metamorphosis.
If you sometimes think the way you file an insurance claim today is pretty much
the same as when you first did so back in 1973, or that a visit to the division of
motor vehicles seems unchanged from when you first got your driver's license,
you're right; technology has only brushed the edges of how these institutions
work. But in 15 years' time, these experiences, along with a raft of others, will be
entirely unrecognizable.
What will your company's products and services look like in 2030? Will they be
smart, personalized, full of intelligence, and offered at price points that unlock
huge new addressable markets? Or will they be only marginally better than they
are today, run on systems built in the 20th century, with processes full of paper
and duplication and work-arounds? Will they still stink?
The great digital build-out that is in front of us is going to see us double down on
work that matters. The winning companies (and the executives who lead them)
are going to improve and upgrade how we manage our money, our health, the
physical infrastructure of our cities and towns, as well as how we equip our kids
with what they need to succeed, how we conduct government, and how we
secure ourselves against those who would do us harm. Systems of intelligence
will be at the heart of all these efforts to make our society better.

Align the Three M's
As the last S-curve's growth rate continues its inexorable journey south (and our
politicians argue over how its spoils are distributed), the new S-curve is
gathering momentum, and so are the companies poised to lead this new charge.
These are the companies that have learned how to master the Three M's: how to
align the new raw materials of the digital age (data), the new machines (systems
of intelligence), and the new models (business models that optimize the
monetization of data-based personalization). These are the companies that
understand how to build and operate a Know-It-All business, that understand
that intelligent machines aren't to be feared but embraced and harnessed, and that
are energized by the unwritten future rather than just trying to hang onto the
glories of the past.
Even when machines can do everything, it will still be people who are the
ultimate X factor. And certainly for the foreseeable future, it will be people like
you who need to decide to instrument everything; to harvest all of the resulting
data; to ask questions of the data; and to teach the learning algorithms what to
look for, what is meaningful, and what is immaterial. It is people who need to
make the decisions about investing in Hadoop, in BigML or Hive, in AWS or
Oracle's cloud. It is people who need to do the hard work of deciding that a
once-successful product is no longer worth keeping alive.
These difficult questions along with a million others are the ones you need to
answer today while debates about what “intelligence” is stretch out into an
infinite horizon. (As Wikipedia dryly notes, “the definition of intelligence is
controversial.” 4 )
It is leaders like you who need to know what to do when machines do
everything. It is for leaders like you that we have written this book.
Move AHEAD
Our AHEAD model is our recommendation for what you should do:
Automate everything you can.
Instrument everything you can.
Enhance every person you can.
Drive the price point of your products and services down as low as you can.

Discover and invent all of the possible futures you can.
By automating, you strip the costs out of processes, speed processes up, improve
process quality, and achieve “beyond-human” scale.
By instrumenting and creating a Code Halo, you turn everything into a “data
generator,” allowing you to see facts that have never been visible before.
By enhancing people and systems and processes through new technologies, you
improve human performance levels. Multiply that by 1,000 or 100,000 people
(or however many are in your organization), and in sum, you improve your
corporate performance level.
By lowering the price of what you sell, you increase the size of the market you
are serving; at an appropriate price point your offering has the potential to
become abundant.
By prioritizing innovation, you increase your chances of discovering the future
of your work.
The companies that are getting ahead are the ones acting on these ideas. Some
companies we work with emphasize one “play” over another, while others
recognize the holistic connection between all of the plays: automation enables
enhancement, discovery uncovers how to achieve abundance, and so on.
All of them, however, understand the need to act now, to not wait for more
certain times ahead, more clarity over exactly what AI is, and what it will
become. All of them recognize that the rise of machine intelligence is the
ultimate game changer we face today. All of them know that inaction will result
in irrelevance. All of them know that fortune favors the brave and punishes the
timid.
Courage and Faith in the Future
This is no time to be timid; just look at these quotes from recent news articles:
“In 2014, for the first time, an e-sport's streamed broadcast attracted more
viewers than the NBA Finals. More than 27 million people around the world
tuned in to the League of Legends World Championship.” 5
“General Motors is launching a car-sharing program. It's called Maven, it's
available in exactly one city, and frankly, it's an unexciting riff on ZipCar.
But GM isn't really competing with ZipCar. It's placing a bet on the future.” 6

“‘Speed is the new currency of business. The most dangerous place to make
a decision is in the office,’ says Salesforce.com CEO Marc Benioff.” 7
“Digital Asset Holdings, the Blockchain start-up run by former JPMorgan
Chase & Co. banker Blythe Masters, raised $52 million from investors and
won a contract to radically speed up settlement in Australia's stock market.” 8
“The [Sony] team's Flow Machines project successfully created… Daddy's
Car, an AI-composed song that's meant to follow the musical style of The
Beatles.” 9
“What happened is the instantaneous and disembodied transfer of the
photon's quantum state onto the remaining photon of the entangled pair,
which is the one that remained six kilometres away at the university.” 10
What do all these quotes have in common? They are all messages from the
future, telling us the world is changing faster than ever. Some of these you may
not appreciate today, but in 10 years they could be part of our daily lives.
Approaches, norms, models, and ways of life that have been the backdrop during
our 50 years (give or take!) on planet Earth and that one might have assumed
would long outlast us are seemingly crumbling before our very eyes. Watching
sports on TV, owning a car, answering a message the next day, planning to hold
the same job for years, using a bank; all are going the way of all flesh.
This incredible pace of change, and the substantive nature of this change, is, at
its core, about one thing: what to do when machines do everything.
Innovation shows no signs of stopping (despite our elevated perch on Maslow's
Hierarchy of Needs) and shows no sign of being any less powerful than it has
been in the past; quite the opposite. 11 Remember, don't short human
imagination. The future is racing toward big businesses through the apps and
Web services they use to get to the airport, hire new recruits, segment audiences,
collaborate, meet, book hotels, ship goods, and access bandwidth and CPUs. All
this abundance—functionality delivered at price points that are blowing away
incumbent competition—is the light of innovation, of new ideas and approaches,
of the future , that is there for everyone to see and follow and use.
The new frontiers we have explored in this book aren't simply about substituting
labor with software; they're about building the new machines that will allow us
to achieve higher levels of human performance. As Narrative Science's Kris
Hammond—a pragmatist at heart—put it to us, “AI is not a mythical unicorn. It's
the next level of productivity tool.”

As we have seen throughout the preceding pages, innovation has propelled
humans forward through the centuries; although the process of innovation is
always messy and often uncomfortable (or worse), its power is entirely
unstoppable.
Hammond, as one of the world's leading AI practitioners, sees the inevitability of
widespread AI in the workplace: “I don't believe that work on AI can be
inhibited. It's not like stem cells where there are physical things you can do to
stop stem cell research. There is nothing physical you can do to stop AI research.
The computational resources are out there.”
As we have repeatedly illustrated, AI isn't coming; it's here. What this book
attempts to do is show you there are things—many, many things—that you can
do—must do —when machines do everything. Those who win in the coming
great digital build-out, who seize the incredible rewards, who make history, will
be those who stop debating and start building—and, rather than predicting the
future, go out and invent it, hand-in-hand with the new machines.
Notes
1. Ray Kurzweil, “The Law of Accelerating Returns,” Kurzweil Accelerating
Intelligence, March 7, 2001, http://www.kurzweilai.net/the-law-of-
accelerating-returns .
2. Monica Nickelsburg, “A12 CEO Oren Etzioni Envisions an Artificial
Intelligence ‘Utopia,'” GeekWire, March 30, 2016,
http://www.geekwire.com/2016/ai2-ceo-oren-etzioni-envisions-artificial-
intelligence-utopia/ .
3. Michael Sainato, “Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk and Bill Gates Warn about
Artificial Intelligence,” Observer , Aug. 19, 2015,
http://observer.com/2015/08/stephen-hawking-elon-musk-and-bill-gates-
warn-about-artificial-intelligence/ .
4. Wikipedia page on intelligence: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence .
5. James Bates, “Guide to League of Legends,” ESPN , Jan. 14, 2016,
http://es.pn/1Pfg9rE .
6. Alex Davies, “Maven, GM's Car-Sharing Scheme, Is Really about a
Driverless Future,” Wired , Jan. 21, 2016, http://bit.ly/1QfNSEs .

7. Alexander Sword, “Speed Is the New Currency of Business,” Computer
Business Review , Jan. 20, 2016, http://bit.ly/1nBOLy1 .
8. Matthew Leising, “Blythe Masters Firm Raises Cash, Wins Australian
Contract,” Bloomberg , Jan. 21, 2016, http://bloom.bg/1OJrYH2 .
9. Harrison Kaminsky, “Listen to This AI-composed Song in the Style of The
Beatles,” Digital Trends , September 24, 2016,
http://www.digitaltrends.com/music/sony-composes-music-artificial-
intelligence-style-the-beatles/ .
10. Andrew Follett, “Scientists Use Quantum Mechanics to Teleport Particle 4
Miles,” Daily Caller New Foundation, Sep. 26, 2016,
http://dailycaller.com/2016/09/26/canadians-use-quantum-mechanics-to-
teleport-particle-4-miles/#ixzz4MzdmNJbs .
11. Wikipedia page on Maslow's hierarchy of needs:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow%27s_hierarchy_of_needs .

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Writing a book is really a community affair, and we would like to acknowledge
the contribution of just a few of the many people who helped us along the way.
We are extremely grateful to the following visionaries and innovators who
generously gave their time to speak with us as we developed the ideas
represented in this book: Joseph Sirosh at Microsoft; Stuart Frankel and Kris
Hammond at Narrative Science; Flavio Villanustre and David Glowacki at
LexisNexis; Joel Rose at New Classrooms; Stephen Laster at McGraw-Hill
Education; Ned Curic at Toyota; Max Yankelevich at Work Fusion; Jude
Dieterman and Larry Bridge from TriZetto; Matt Wood at Amazon Web
Services; Brett Tromp and Emile Stipp at Discovery Health; Robert High at IBM
Watson; Dennis Mortensen at x.ai; Joe Procopio at Automated Insights; Xavier
Peich at SmartHalo; and Anne Filson and Gary Rohrbacher from Filson-
Rohrbacher.
In many cases we've built on research and insights from Cognizant's Center for
the Future of Work, and we'd like to particularly thank Robert Brown, Manish
Bahl, Euan Davis, Kevin Benedict, and the rest of the team for their work
developing the ideas in this book.
We'd also like to thank the many Cognizant associates (too numerous to
mention) who wake up every day intent on doing the best for clients. In
particular, we'd like to thank Sowri Santhanakrishnan, Kaushik Bhaumik, Lee
Saber, and Zacharyah Abend. Many others graciously added to their
responsibilities by helping to connect us to their customers so we could learn
more about what they are doing.
We'd also like to thank: Carlota Perez from the London School of Economics;
Amanda Boxtel and Charles Engelbert; Clive Gravett from the Budding
Foundation; Arielle Sobel from Betterment; J. P. Gownder from Forrester
Research; Deia Campanelli, Mailee Garcia, and Amy Magee from General
Electric Transportation; and Izabela Teixeira from GE Corporate.
Many thanks to Tara Owen, who helped us shape our thinking and language.
Also to Todd Sattersten for helping us frame our initial concepts. Mary Brandel
and Mark Baven worked tirelessly to improve and tighten the manuscript, collect
data, and ensure we had all the right permissions in place. Alan Dino and Ian
Koviak at The Book Designers helped us with the internal and external art. We'd
like to also thank Ned Ward and the team at Stern Strategy Group for helping us

like to also thank Ned Ward and the team at Stern Strategy Group for helping us
get the word out. Thanks also to the team from Wiley for again helping us
through the publishing process. We greatly appreciate the support of Roubini
ThoughtLab, an independent research group overseen by renowned U.S.
economist Nouriel Roubini. Lou Celi, Julien Beresford, and Daniel Miles helped
us conduct our global study on how businesses can respond to the emerging
digital economy.
We'd also like to recognize the following people who helped us coordinate the
interviews we conducted: Jennifer Janzen, Helen Baric, Alice Robins, Jessica
Lorti, Jennifer Kohn, Rebecca Owens-Martel, Glenda Misawa, Adam Devine,
Robert Swinkin, Grant Milne, Emile Schachter, Loretta Fesler, Stefanie Syman,
Gabrielle Gardner, Amy Ingram (even though “she” doesn't “exist”), and James
Kotecki.
We'd especially like to thank Francisco D'Souza, CEO of Cognizant, who has
continued to offer steadfast support as we've researched and written this book.
Finally, and most important, we'd like to thank our families for their seemingly
endless patience, love, and encouragement throughout the years of putting this
book together. Book authorship, on top of our work with business leaders around
the world, demanded even more from our families. They kept us going, and kept
the faith, throughout many (many) days and nights. It would take authors far
more poetic than the three of us to fully express our gratitude to them.
Malcolm Frank, Paul Roehrig, Ben Pring
New York; Washington, D.C.; Boston, November 2016

PHOTO CREDITS
Page 6: Jon Stein, Betterment CEO & Founder | Source: Betterment
Page 15: Luddites | Source: Mary Evans Picture Library/Alamy Stock Photo
Page 22: Abstract of global communication | Pedro/Alamy Stock Photo
Page 30: New Classroom learning space | Source: New Classroom
Page 79: An assembly line of the Ford Motor Co. | Source: Chronicle/Alamy
Stock Photo
Page 79: 1930s accounting department | Source: ClassicStock/Alamy Stock
Photo
Page 101 (top): Airport check-in kiosks at Toronto Pearson International
Airport | Source: Oleksiy Maksymenko/Alamy Stock Photo
Page 101 (middle): E-ZPass sign on the Pennsylvania Turnpike, United
States | Source: JG Photography/Alamy Stock Photo
Page 101 (bottom): ATMs at Changi Airport | Source: Adrian Lim, Creative
Commons, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/legalcode
Page 122: GE Transportation infographic | Source: GE Transportation
Page 140: McGraw-Hill Education's ALEKS classroom | Source: Kirk Tuck,
photographer
Page 149: Sigourney Weaver, Aliens, 1986, directed by James Cameron |
Source: ScreenProd/Photononstop/Alamy Stock Photo
Page 150: Amanda Boxtel with Elizabeth Pettit, Physical Therapist | Source:
Charles Engelbert, photographer
Page 169: Reproduction of original patent drawing of Budding lawn mower,
published 1830 alongside patent application | Source: The Budding
Foundation

DISCLAIMERS
Google, AlphaGo, Google Glass, DeepMind, Waze, Nest and YouTube are
registered trademarks of Google, Inc.
Uber is a registered trademark of Uber Technologies, Inc.
Microsoft, PowerPoint, Cortana, Bing, Vista, and Excel are registered
trademarks of Microsoft Corp.
Jeopardy! is a registered trademark of Jeopardy Productions, Inc.
Facebook is a registered trademark of Facebook, Inc.
iPhone, Mac, Apple Watch, iTunes, iPad, and Siri are registered trademarks
of Apple, Inc.
Hadoop, Cassandra, and Hive are registered trademarks of The Apache
Software Foundation!
BigML is a registered trademark of BigML, Inc.
Zipcar is a registered trademark of Zipcar, Inc.
Instagram is a registered trademark of Instagram, LLC
ALEKS is a registered trademark of ALEKS Corp.
McGraw-Hill Connect and McGraw-Hill LearnSmart are registered
trademarks of McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings LLC
Vitality is a registered trademark of Discovery Holdings Ltd.
Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.
Dropbox is a registered trademark of Dropbox, Inc.
Airbnb is a registered trademark of Airbnb, Inc.
NIKE is a registered trademark of Nike, Inc.
Alexa Web Information Service, Amazon Web Services and Amazon S3 are
registered trademarks of Amazon Web Services, Inc.
Amazon and Amazon Echo are registered trademarks of Amazon
Technologies, Inc.
Ford and Mustang are registered trademarks of Ford Motor Co.

General Electric, GE, GoLINC, Trip Optimizer, LocoVision and Predix are
registered trademarks of General Electric Co.
Strava is a trademark of Strava, Inc.
LinkedIn is a trademark of LinkedIn Corp.
LEGO is a trademark of The LEGO Group
LexisNexis and Lexis are registered trademarks of Reed Elsevier Properties,
Inc.
Twilio is a registered trademark of Twilio, Inc.
Braintree is a registered trademark of PayPal, Inc.
SendGrid is a registered trademark of SendGrid, Inc.
Oracle, Peoplesoft, Java, and MySQL are registered trademarks of Oracle
Corp.
Fitbit is a registered trademark of Fitbit, Inc.
IBM and IBM Watson are registered trademarks of IBM
Philips is a registered trademark of Koninklijke Philips N.V.
Under Armour is a registered trademark of Under Armour, Inc.
Toyota is a registered trademark of Toyota Motor Corp.
Yahoo! is a registered trademark of Yahoo! Inc.
ESPN is a trademark of ESPN, Inc.
Minor League Baseball is a registered trademark of Minor League Baseball
E-ZPass is a registered trademark of Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey
AiCure is a registered trademark of AIC Innovations Group, Inc.
NextAngles is a registered trademark of MphasiS Ltd.
NVIDIA is a trademark of NVIDIA Corp.
Bvlgari is a registered trademark of Bulgari S.p.A.
Fendi is a registered trademark of Fendi Adele S.r.l.
Pink and Thomas Pink are registered trademarks of Thomas Pink, LLC
Oculus Rift is a registered trademark of Oculus VR, LLC

Oculus Rift is a registered trademark of Oculus VR, LLC
Betterment is a registered trademark of Betterment Holdings, Inc.
Artificial Intelligent Blockchain is a trademark of AI Coin, Inc.
Battlestar Galactica is a registered trademark of Universal City Studios, Inc.
Netflix is a registered trademark of Netflix, Inc.
Twitter is a registered trademark of Twitter, Inc.
Goldman Sachs is a registered trademark of Goldman, Sachs & Co.
Morgan Stanley is a registered trademark of Morgan Stanley
Credit Suisse is a registered trademark of Credit Suisse Group AG Société
Anonyme (SA)
Cognizant and Code Halo are registered trademarks of Cognizant
Technology Solutions U.S. Corporation
Cisco and Cisco Systems are registered trademarks of Cisco Systems, Inc.
Siemens is a registered trademark of Siemens Aktiengesellschaft
Progressive Auto Insurance is a trademark of Progressive Casualty Insurance
Company
McKinsey is a registered trademark of McKinsey Holdings, Inc.
Oldsmobile, Buick, Chevrolet, Pontiac, Maven, GM, and Cadillac are
registered trademarks of General Motors, LLC
New York Stock Exchange is a registered trademark of NYSE Group, Inc.
Oxford University is a registered trademark of The Chancellor Masters and
Scholars of the University of Oxford
E*Trade is a registered trademark of E*TRADE Securities, Inc.
Merriam-Webster is a trademark of Merriam-Webster, Inc.
Lex Machina is a registered trademark of Lex Machina, Inc.
SalesForce is a trademark of salesforce.com , Inc.
SAP and SAP Hana are registered trademarks of SAP SE
Orange Is the New Black is a registered trademark of Lions Gate
Entertainment, Inc.

TV Guide is a registered trademark of TV Guide Online Holdings, LLC
House of Cards is a trademark of MRC II Distribution Company, L.P.
Orphan Black is a trademark of Temple Street Releasing Limited
The Walking Dead is a trademark of Robert Kirkman, LLC
Akamai is a trademark of Akamai Technologies, Inc.
Limelight is a trademark of RightsFlow, Inc.
Level 3 Communications is a trademark of Level 3 Communications, LLC
Fitbit is a trademark of Fitbit, Inc.
Tesla is a trademark of Tesla Motors, Inc.
Walmart.com is a trademark of Walmart Stores, Inc.
Target is a trademark of Target Brands, Inc.
Macy's is a trademark of Macy's Department Stores
Sears is a trademark of Sears Brands, LLC
Honeycomb is a trademark of Roambee Corporation
Palantir is a trademark of Palantir Technologies, Inc.
Airbus and A350 are registered trademarks of Airbus SAS
Lidar Compressor is a registered trademark of Celartem, Inc., DBA
Lizardtech
Bluetooth is a registered trademark of Bluetooth Sig, Inc.
Zigbee is a registered trademark of Zigbee Alliance Corporation
Bosch is a registered trademark of Robert Bosch GmbH
Samsung is a trademark of Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.
First Data is a registered trademark of First Data Corporation
American Express is a registered trademark of American Express Marketing
& Development Corp.
Boeing and 787 Dreamliner are registered trademarks of The Boeing
Company
WeWork is a registered trademark of WeWork Companies, Inc.
SAS GO
d SAS PLUS
i
d
d
k
f S
di
i
Ai li

SAS GO and SAS PLUS are registered trademarks of Scandinavian Airlines
System Denmark-Norway-Sweden
McDonald's is a registered trademark of McDonald's Corporation
Holiday Inn is a registered trademark of Intercontinental Hotels Group
Toyota Connected is a trademark of Toyota Jidosha Kabushiki Kaisha TA
Toyota Motor Corporation
Six Sigma is a trademark of Motorola Trademark Holdings LLC.
The Washington Post is a registered trademark of WP Company, LLC
USA Today is a registered trademark of Gannett Satellite Information
Network, LLC.
Narrative Science is a registered trademark of Narrative Science, Inc.
Automated Insights is a registered trademark of Automated Insights, Inc.
The New York Times is a registered trademark of The New York Times
Company
The Wall Street Journal is a registered trademark of Dow Jones, L.P.
Talla is a trademark of Talla, Inc.
Wired is a trademark of Advance Magazine Publishers, Inc.
TriZetto is a registered trademark of TriZetto Corporation
John Deere is a registered trademark of Deere & Company
Caterpillar is a registered trademark of Caterpillar, Inc.
Adidas is a registered trademark of Adidas AG joint stock company
BMW is a registered trademark of Bayerische Motoren Werke
Aktiengesellschaft
Mercedes-Benz is a registered trademark of Daimler AG Corporation
Allstate is a registered trademark of Allstate Insurance Company
Travelers is a registered trademark of The Travelers Indemnity Company
Corporation
BNSF Railway is a registered trademark of BNSF Railway Company
Sourcemap is a registered trademark of Sourcemap, Inc.
Pandora is a registered trademark of Pandora Media Inc

Pandora is a registered trademark of Pandora Media, Inc.
Reddit is a trademark of Reddit, Inc.
Mashable is a registered trademark of Mashable, Inc.
Tumblr is a registered trademark of Tumblr, Inc.
Hotel Tonight is a registered trademark of Hotel Tonight, Inc.
New Classrooms is a registered trademark of New Classrooms Innovation
Partners
Anthem is a registered trademark of Anthem Insurance Companies, Inc.
Sony Pictures is a registered trademark of Sony Kabushiki Kaisha TA Sony
Corporation
Ashley Madison is a registered trademark of Ruby Life, Inc.
Comcast is a trademark of Comcast Corporation
Iora Health is a registered trademark of Iora Health, Inc.
Da Vinci HD Surgical System is a registered trademark of Intuitive Surgical,
Inc.
ImagineCare is a trademark of Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital nonprofit
corporation
Prezi is a registered trademark of Prezi, Inc.
MIT is a registered trademark of Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Corporation
WorkFusion is a registered trademark of Crowd Computing Systems, Inc.
Zappos.com and Zappos are registered trademarks of Zappos IP, Inc.
Pret A Manger is a registered trademark of Pret A Manger Limited
Starship Troopers is a registered trademark of TriStar Pictures, Inc.
Alien is a registered trademark of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation
Sarcos is a registered trademark of Raytheon Company
Ekso Bionics is a registered trademark of Ekso Bionics, Inc.
University of California is a registered trademark of The Regents of the
University of California
In Q Tel is a registered trademark of In Q Tel Inc

In-Q-Tel is a registered trademark of In-Q-Tel, Inc.
Central Intelligence Agency is a trademark of Central Intelligence Agency
Spotify is a registered trademark of Spotify AB Corporation
Kodak is a registered trademark of Eastman Kodak Company
Blockbuster is a registered trademark of Blockbuster LLC
Nokia is a registered trademark of Nokia Corporation
Walgreens is a registered trademark of Walgreen Co.
Harvard Business School is a registered trademark of President and Fellows
of Harvard College
Louis Vuitton is a registered trademark of Louis Vuitton Malletier
TAG Heuer is a registered trademark of LVMH Swiss Manufactures SA
Corporation
HP and Hewlett Packard is a trademark of Hewlett-Packard Development
Company, L.P.
Marriott is a registered trademark of Marriott International, Inc.
x.ai is a trademark of x.ai Corporation
Wimbledon is a registered trademark of All England Lawn Tennis Club
(Wimbledon) Limited
Second Life is a registered trademark of Linden Research, Inc.
BlackRock is a registered trademark of BlackRock, Inc.
University of Kentucky is a registered trademark of University of Kentucky
Knight Rider is a registered trademark of Universal City Studios, LLC
Total Recall is a registered trademark of StudioCanal, S.A.
Minority Report is a registered trademark of Paramount Pictures Corporation
Audi is a registered trademark of AUDI AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT
Corporation
American Airlines is a registered trademark of American Airlines, Inc.
Wayback Machine is a registered trademark of Internet Archive
CSC is a registered trademark of Computer Sciences Corporation
EDS i
i
d
d
k f El
i D
S
C
i

EDS is a registered trademark of Electronic Data Systems Corporation
Compaq is a registered trademark of Compaq Trademark B.V. Private, LLC
Research in Motion is a registered trademark of Research in Motion Limited
BigML is a registered trademark of BigML, Inc.
NBA and NBA the Finals are registered trademarks of NBA Properties, Inc.
Digital Asset Holdings is a trademark of Digital Asset Holdings, LLC
JPMorgan Chase is a registered trademark of JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
The Beatles is a registered trademark of Apple Corps Limited

INDEX
A
abundance
AHEAD model
approaches for
increasing prosperity by lowering prices
Moore's Law and
Narayana Health (NH) example
overview
Adidas
AHEAD (Automate, Halo, Enhance, Abundance, Discovery) model
call to action for
defined
for digital business models
jobs and
See also abundance ; automation ; discovery ; enhancement ; halo
AiCure
Airbnb
Airbus
Akamai
ALEKS (Assessment and LEarning in Knowledge Spaces)
Alexa Web Information Service (Amazon)
Aliens (movie)
alignment
Allen Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Allstate Insurance Company
AlphaGo (Google)
Amazon
AI overview and
automation and
digital business models
economic growth and
enhancement by
halo and
systems of intelligence
Amazon Web Services (AWS)
American Express
Amy (x.ai)
Andreessen, Marc
Anthem
Apache Software Foundation
Apple
AI overview and
economic growth and
enhancement by
halo and
systems of intelligence and
application programming interfaces (APIs)
apps (application layers)
Aristotle
Artificial General Intelligence Society
artificial intelligence (AI)

AHEAD (Automate, Halo, Enhance, Abundance, Discovery) model, defined
call to action for
effect on jobs
Fourth Industrial Revolution and
general AI (AGI), defined
narrow artificial intelligence (ANI)
overview
rise of
robo-advisors
super AI, defined
technology transformation
See also systems of intelligence
Ashley Madison
Associated Press
Automated Insights
automation
AHEAD model
“brass wall” breakthrough
building repeatable process for
in core operations
customers as part of digital value chain
enhancement relationship with
familiar applications of
as means versus end
need for
overview
as “play”

process-automation targets
setting 25%-25% imperative
TriZetto example
automation, jobs and
autonomous (driverless) cars
Avicenna (IBM)
B
back office operations, automating
Baidu Research
“being digital,” “doing digital” versus
Benioff, Marc
Betterment
Bisignano, Frank
BlackRock, Inc
Blockbuster
Blockchain
Blue Prism
BMW
Bock, Laszlo
Boeing
“boil-the-ocean” trap
Borders
Bosch
Boxtel, Amanda
Braintree
brass-wall breakthrough

Brennan, John
Bridge, Lawrence
Brynjolfsson, Erik
Budding, Edwin
Buffett, Warren
Buick (General Motors Corporation)
business analytics
business models, defined, See also digital business models
business process reengineering (BPR)
C
Cassandra (Apache Software Foundation)
Caterpillar
Center for the Future of Work (Cognizant)
Chaos Monkeys (Garcia-Martinez)
Christensen, Clayton M.
CIA
Cisco Systems
Clover (First Data Corp.)
code. See halo
Code Halos (Cognizant)
abundance
data
defined, (See also halo ; instrumentation )
digital business models
enhancement by
instrumentation

Code Halos (Frank, Roering, Pring), See also halo ; instrumentation
“Coffee Test”
Cognizant (Cognizant Technology Solutions U.S. Corporation). See Center for
the Future of Work (Cognizant) ; Code Halos (Cognizant)
Comcast
core operations, automation in
Cortana (Microsoft Corporation)
cost, of data
Credit Suisse
Curic, Ned
customers
opting out by
as part of digital value chain
of systems of intelligence
D
“dark side of halo”
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center
data
as advantage for big companies
for business analytics
as component of systems of intelligence
“data point test”
First Data example
as foundation of trust
instrumentation with
managing data supply chain

measuring
monetizing
overview
for systems of intelligence
turning into an asset
Data Group (Microsoft)
da Vinci Surgical System
DeepMind (Google)
Democratic National Committee
denial trap
design thinking, importance of
Digital Airline (Boeing)
digital build-out, See also economic growth
digital business models
avoiding traps of, overview
“boil-the-ocean” trap of
defined
denial trap of
“doing digital” versus “being digital” trap of
FANG trap of
hybrids of
overview
transformation to
digital Kaizen
digital process logic
Dimon, Jamie
discovery

AHEAD model
Blockchain example
digital Kaizen for
driverless cars as
examining current practices for
imagination needed for
importance of
learning from past for
letting “hits pay for misses”
as opportunity
overview
R&D for innovation
Discovery Limited
distribution, of data
“doing digital,” “being digital” versus
“double-down on being more human,” for enhancement
driverless cars
Dropbox
dystopians
E
Echo (Amazon)
economic growth
future perspective of modern-day economy
gross domestic product (GDP) growth
historical perspective
New Classrooms example

optimism for
“stall zones” of
Three M's of “becoming digital”
“ubiquitech”
See also Industrial Revolutions
Edison, Thomas
Ekso Bionics
Ellison, Larry
Ellison-Benioff model
employees. See human resources
enhancement
AHEAD model
ALEKS example
automation-enhancement relationship
“double-down on being more human” for
future of
overview
for protecting jobs
“smart hands”-”smart robots” combination
tools for digital age
“white-collar exoskeleton” for
WorkFusion example
ESPN
e*Trade
Etzioni, Oren
European Union, General Data Protection Regulation of
Excel (Microsoft Corporation)

E-Z Transit Pass
F
Facebook
abundance and
AI overview and
data of
digital business models
discovery and
economic growth and
halo and
systems of intelligence and
FANG (Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, Google)
defined
“FANG trap”
See also Amazon ; Facebook ; Google ; Netflix
Fields, Mark
Fink, Larry
FinTech
First Data
First Industrial Revolution
Fitbit
Flow Machines (Sony)
Ford, Henry
Ford Motor Company
Forrester Research
Fourth Industrial Revolution

build-out (2015-2040) of
defined
jobs and
systems of intelligence for
Frank, Malcolm
future perspective, of modern-day economy
G
G7 countries, job changes to
games of intellect, AI platforms of
Gannett
Garcia-Martinez, Antonio
Gartner
Gates, Bill
general AI (AGI), defined
General Data Protection Regulation (European Union)
General Electric Company (GE)
abundance and
AI overview and
data of
digital business models
economic growth and
halo and
systems of intelligence
General Motors Corporation
Ghosh, Shikhar
give-to-get relationship

Glass (Google)
Glowacki, David
Goertzel, Ben
Goldman, William
Goldman Sachs
Google
AI overview and
automation
data
digital business models
discovery and
economic growth and
enhancement by
halo and
systems of intelligence
GovTech
GPS
gross domestic product (GDP), growth
Gustafson, Rickard
H
halo
AHEAD model
capitalizing on code
“dark side of”
Discovery Limited example
enhancement with Code Halo

future of
GE example
instrumentation and code generation
“know-it-all” businesses
overview
value of code
value of instrumentation
Hammer, Michael
Hammond, Kris
Harbor Research
hardware, as component of systems of intelligence
Harvard Business School
Hassabis, Demis
Hawking, Stephen
Healthcare Productivity Automation (HPA) (TriZetto)
HealthTech
Heathrow
Heinlein, Robert
HENRY (high earners, not rich yet)
Hewlett-Packard (Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P.)
Hicks, Zack
High, Robert
HIPPO (highest paid person's opinion) culture
Holiday Inn
Hotel Tonight
Houten, Frans van
human-machine work continuum

human resources
achieving higher levels of performance with
instrumentation for
for systems of intelligence
I
IBM
IDC
ImagineCare
Immelt, Jeff
Industrial Revolutions
First Industrial Revolution
Second Industrial Revolution
Third Industrial Revolution
Fourth Industrial Revolution
S-curves and
infrastructure, systems of intelligence and
innovation. See discovery
innovator's dilemma, managing
Innovator's Dilemma, The (Christensen)
In-Q-Tel
Instagram
instrumentation
code generation from
with data
industries using
“know-it”all” businesses

as necessary
value of
See also halo
InsuranceTech
Intel
intelligence, systems of. See systems of intelligence
Intelligent Locomotives (GE)
Internet Archive Wayback Machine
Internet bubble
Internet of Things (IoT)
data from, for systems of intelligence
digital business models
instrumentation with data
as “ubiquitech”
See also halo
Iora Health
iPhone (Apple)
IQ (intelligence quotient)
iTunes (Apple)
J
Jackson, Stonewall
James, LeBron
Java
JMPC
jobs
automation applications and

effect of AI on
enhancement for protection of
jobs versus tasks
manual versus knowledge labor
pace of transition for
skills for enhancement
technology as job destroyer/creator
unemployment fears
Jobs, Steve
John Deere
JPMorgan Chase & Co.
K
Kaizen, digital
Kelly, Kevin
Keynes, John Maynard
“killing” of company
Kleenex
“know-it-all” businesses
knowledge labor, manual labor versus
Knowledge Space Theory
Kodak
Kondo, Marie
Kurzweil, Ray
L
Laster, Stephen

lawn mower, invention of
Law of Accelerating Returns
LawTech
Lego
Lendl, Ivan
Level 3 Communications
LexisNexis Risk Solutions
Lex Machina
Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up, The (Kondo)
Limelight
LinkedIn
London School of Economics
Ludd, Ned
Luddites
LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton SE
M
Mac (Apple)
machine intelligence, See also systems of intelligence
Machine Learning (Amazon)
Macy's
manual labor, knowledge labor versus
Marriott
Mashable
Masters, Blythe
Maven (General Motors Corporation)
McAfee, Andrew

McDaniel, Matt
McDonald's
McGraw-Hill Education
McKinsey & Co.
Mercedes-Benz
Merriam-Webster
Microsoft
abundance and
economic growth and
enhancement by
halo and
systems of intelligence and
middle operations, automating
Moore, Geoffrey
Moore's Law
Morgan Stanley
MRI
Murray, Andy
Musk, Elon
MySQL (Oracle)
N
Narayana Health
Narrative Science
narrow artificial intelligence (ANI)
defined
future of

need for
Nest (Google)
Netflix
AI overview and
data
digital business models
discovery and
economic growth and
halo and
systems of intelligence
New Classrooms
newsrooms, automation used in
New York Stock Exchange
NextAngles
Ng, Andrew
NIKE
Nokia
NVIDIA DIGITS DevBox
O
Oculus VR
oil, data compared to
Oldsmobile (General Motors Corporation)
open systems of intelligence
Oracle
Oxford University
P

Packard Motor Company
Palantir
Panasonic
Pandora
PayPal
PeopleSoft (Oracle)
Perez, Carlota
Philips
Plank, Kevin
“plays,” defined
Postscapes
pragmatists
Predix (General Electric Company)
Pret A Manger
Prezi
Principles of Scientific Management, The (Taylor)
Pring, Ben
process-automation targets
Progressive Insurance Corp
promises, kept by businesses
proprietary nature, of data
R
Rage Against the Machine (Brynjolfsson, McAfee)
R&D (research and development), for innovation
record, systems of

Reddit
relationship building
repeatable processes, building
RFID
robo-advisors
Robotics and Human Engineering Laboratory (University of California,
Berkeley)
Roering, Paul
Ronaldo, Cristiano
Rose, Joel
Roubini, Nouriel
Roubini ThoughtLab
Royal Philips
S
S3 (Amazon)
Sagan, Carl
Salesforce
Samsung
SAP
Scandinavian AirLines (SAS)
Schumpeter, Joseph
S-curve
Sears
Second Industrial Revolution
Second Life
security breaches

Sedol, Lee
self-regulation, by organizations
SendGrid
sensors, embedding
shared data
Shetty, Devi
Siemens
Signac
Siri (Apple)
Sirosh, Joseph
smart technology
instrumentation of everyday items
Intelligent Locomotives (GE)
“smart hands” and “smart robots”
smart homes
for systems of intelligence
See also Internet of Things (IoT) ; systems of intelligence
Sony
Sony Pictures
Sourcemap
Spotify
“stall zones” of economy
new business models of
overview
S-curve and
See also economic growth
start-up community, obsessing about

Stein, Jon
Stipp, Emile
Strava
strong AI (general AI), defined
super AI, defined
supply chain management
Swisher, Kara
systems of intelligence
“anatomy” of
attributes of successful systems
defining
for enhancement, (See also enhancement )
future of
LexisNexis Risk Solutions example
narrow artificial intelligence (ANI), defined
overview
T
Talla
Target
tasks
automating repeatable process
jobs versus
Taylor, Frederick Winslow
Tesla
Third Industrial Revolution
Three Horizons Model (THM)

Three M's, of “becoming digital”
Tier 4 (General Electric)
“tomorrow it's free” game
Toms
tools, for digital age
Toyota Motor Corp.
Travelers
“Trillion Dollar Club”
TriZetto
Tromp, Brett
trust, data as foundation of
Tumblr
25%-25% imperative
2030 perspective, of modern-day economy
Twilio
Twitter
U
Uber
abundance and
automation by
data
digital business models
economic growth and
systems of intelligence
“ubiquitech”
Under Armour

University of California - Berkeley
University of Kentucky
users
coaching, by “know-it-all” businesses
of systems of intelligence
U.S. Office of Personnel Management
utopians
V
Verizon
Villanustre, Flavio
VisiCalc
Vitality (Discovery)
W
Walgreens
Wall Street Journal
Walmart
Watson (IBM)
Waze (Google)
WeWork
“white-collar exoskeleton,” for enhancement
Wikipedia
Wood, Matt
WorkFusion
World Economic Forum
Wozniak, Steve

X
x.ai
Y
Yahoo
Yankelevich, Max
Yellin, Todd
Young, James
YouTube (Google)
Z
Zappos
ZipCar
Zuckerberg, Mark

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley's ebook EULA.

