

WHY SPY?

Intelligence and Security
Editorial Board
Richard J. Aldrich (Warwick University);
Robert Dover (Loughborough University);
Sir Lawrence Freedman (King’s College London);
Michael S. Goodman (King’s College London)
Secret intelligence is no longer the hidden dimension of statecraft. Yet in reality, 
we have only just started to lift the corner of this secret world. This series begins 
with the premise that impact of secret intelligence on the international 
system—especially since the end of the Cold War—remains a mystery that 
awaits exploration. Consequently, it provides a forum for both scholars and 
reflective practitioners to offer new insights into the secret world from 
historical, sociological, political science and international relations perspectives.
ROBERT DOVER, MICHAEL S. GOODMAN
SPINNING INTELLIGENCE
Why Intelligence Needs the Media, Why the Media Needs Intelligence
DAVID OMAND
SECURING THE STATE
BRIAN T. W. STEWART, CMG, SAMANTHA NEWBERY
WHY SPY?
The Art of Intelligence

BRIAN T. 
 W. 
 STEWART, CMG 
and SAMANTHA NEWBERY
Why Spy?
The Art of Intelligence
HURST & COMPANY, LONDON


To all the gallant men and women who have selflessly, usually 
unknown and unsung, devoted their lives to intelligence work 
in the defence of their nation
And to Alexander Wolf Stewart, to whom the future belongs

First published in the United Kingdom in 2015 by 
C.  Hurst & Co. (Publishers) Ltd., 
41 Great Russell Street, London, WC1B 3PL 
© Brian T.W.  Stewart and Samantha Newbery, 2015 
All rights reserved. 
Printed in England
Distributed in the United States, Canada and Latin America by  
Oxford University Press, 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, 
United States of America
The right of Brian T.W.  Stewart and Samantha Newbery to be  
identified as the authors of this publication is asserted by them  
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988.
A Cataloguing-in-Publication data record for this book 
is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978-1-84904-513-1
www.hurstpublishers.com

	
vii
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements	
ix
Biographies of the Authors	
xi
Writing Why Spy?	
xiii
Foreword by Vice Admiral Le Bailly	
xv
Preface	
xvii
Introduction	
1
PART ONE
THREE ASIAN CASES
1.  The Malayan Emergency: An Intelligence Success Story	
11
2.  Vietnam: A Can of Worms	
25
3.  Chinese Affairs	
41
PART TWO
THE MACHINERY AND METHODOLOGY 
OF INTELLIGENCE
4.  The Organisation and Machinery of Intelligence	
49
5.  Types of Intelligence Collection Methods	
65
6.  Assessment: Problems and Common Fallacies	
85
7.  Moral Dilemmas	
99

CONTENTS
viii
PART THREE
FAMOUS CASES OF INTELLIGENCE IN PRACTICE
  8.  Pearl Harbor	
121
  9.  Cuba: The Bay of Pigs and the Missile Crisis	
133
10.  Iraq: The Intelligence Imbroglio and the Butler Review	
141
PART FOUR
NON-INFORMATION GATHERING INTELLIGENCE 
OPERATIONS
11.  Special Operations	
153
12.  Deception Operations	
165
13.  Assassination	
173
Notes	
179
Valedictory	
185
Glossary and Abbreviations	
189
Select Bibliography	
193
Index	
199

	
ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Brian T.W.  Stewart, CMG
It is easy to single out the principal people who deserve my heartfelt 
thanks for persevering and encouraging me along the way in this lengthy 
operation.
  First the members of my family, particularly my long-suffering wife 
who has lived with Why Spy? for over ten years, and with the other slight 
books that I have published. And Rory too, my son, who read the first 
drafts with the eye of a professional, successful writer.
  Co-equal comes Heather Hooker who, like my family, has been living 
with Why Spy? for many years and has put up uncomplainingly with 
innumerable changes and additions. Without her help there would have 
been no book. Next we come to Vice Admiral Le Bailly with whom, 
although he was fifteen years older than me, I had a magical partnership 
when I was Secretary of the Joint Intelligence Committee. Sadly he was 
not able to join me in this book, except by way of a kindly foreword.
  Specifically involved in the book in terms of reading drafts and criti-
cising or encouraging, are several academics. Above all stands Professor 
Eunan O’Halpin of Trinity College Dublin. A friend for many years, he 
and his pupils passed me relevant material from the cornucopia pro-

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
x
vided by The National Archives in Kew. Without his encouragement I 
would long since have run out of steam.
  Other academics have encouraged me, including Professor R. 
 V. 
 Jones 
with whom I discussed our subject in the Athenaeum Club in London, 
long, long ago. I must also name Professor Wang Gungwu, Vice 
Chancellor of the University of Hong Kong and world-famous historian 
who said, ‘but be careful to suggest that intelligence is not the only 
factor’, and Professor Tony Short and Professor Geoffrey Blainey OA, 
who kindly read my drafts and made constructive comments.
  Then there were distinguished British officers under whom or with 
whom I served, civil servants, military officers, and diplomats. Men like 
Sir Gerald Templer, the Tiger of Malaya, Lord MacLehose, Governor of 
Hong Kong, Lord Trend, Cabinet Secretary, and so on. Lord Carver, 
once my co-father-in-law, I suspect did not entirely approve of the intel-
ligence profession any more than he approved of the frills and furbelows 
of the Cavalry (and probably the Highlanders too), but he had a clear 
view of the uses and limitations of intelligence.
  On a personal level I have to thank people like my old (but much 
younger) friend, Michael Thompson who for decades gave me an anchor 
in the UK while I continued to roam in China.
  There is no satisfactory method for singling out names from the kalei-
doscope that has been my life. And I expect that some of my best friends 
will be happy, as Groucho Marx might have said, ‘to be included 
out’, 
 since not everyone wishes to be connected with the business of 
intelligence.
  To those to whom I owe a debt but whose names I have not listed, I 
offer my apologies, they are not forgotten. Above them all in my post-
government life looms a Chinese grandee, His Excellency Mr 
 Jiang 
Zemin, formerly President of China, who befriended me when I entered 
China as a fledgling businessman in 1981, and all my other Chinese 
friends who helped me to understand the mysteries of the Chinese elec-
tronic world.
  Last, but unique, is Samantha Newbery, my co-author, who joined 
forces with me when I had all but abandoned ship. Her fresh eye, acade­
mic advice and hard work have been invaluable as has her enthusiasm.

	
xi
BIOGRAPHIES OF THE AUTHORS
Brian T. W.  Stewart, CMG (1969)
1940
Worcester College, Oxford.
1942
Commissioned Black Watch.
School Instructor.
Action in North West Europe.
1945
Went to Malaya
1946
Retired as Captain; joined Malayan Civil Service.
1947–8
Language student, China.
1949
Employed as Chinese specialist, mostly engaged in intelli-
gence work fighting the terrorists in the local war known as 
the Malayan Emergency.
1957
Retired as Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Penang.
1957
Joined Foreign Office.
1958–60
Embassy, Rangoon.
1960
British Diplomatic Mission, Beijing.
1961
Consul General Shanghai.
1963–4
Foreign Office, London.
1965–6
Counsellor, British High Commission, Kuala Lumpur.
1967–8
Consul General Hanoi.
1968–72
Secretary of the Joint Intelligence Committee, Cabinet 
Office.
1973–4
Political Adviser in Hong Kong.
1974–9
Foreign Office; retired.
1979–82
Director of the Rubber Growers’ Association, Malaysia.
1982–98
Director of Operations China for Racal Electronics Group.
1998
Retired.

BIOGRAPHIES OF THE AUTHORS
xii
Samantha Newbery
Dr 
 Samantha Newbery is Lecturer in Contemporary Intelligence 
Studies at the University of Salford, where she has worked since com-
pleting her PhD at Trinity College Dublin. Her monograph Interro­
gation, Intelli­gence and Security: Controversial British Techniques will be 
published by Manchester University Press in 2015. Her research inter-
ests include intelligence ethics, human rights and the prohibition of 
torture, insurgency and terrorism, policymaking, and Northern Ireland, 
and she has published on these subjects in the journals Intelligence and 
National Security, International Politics and Irish Studies in International 
Affairs as well as in edited books published by Routledge and Edinburgh 
University Press.

	
xiii
WRITING WHY SPY?
Samantha Newbery
Readers may wish to know how this joint book came about and the 
respective roles of its authors. When I joined Brian on this project in 
2011 there was already a draft manuscript which he had been working 
on spasmodically since retiring in the late 1990s and as he continued to 
reflect on his own experiences and on the published intelligence litera-
ture. The book was a work in progress. I had first met Brian while con-
ducting my doctoral research, through an introduction from Professor 
Eunan O’Halpin of Trinity College Dublin, when we discussed the use 
of controversial interrogation techniques in Northern Ireland in 1971 
(see Chapter Seven). I accepted Brian’s invitation to join the project in 
order to bring an academic perspective and a fresh eye, and also to iden-
tify the terms and episodes of history that, although familiar to him, 
would need to be explained to younger readers. We have not attempted 
to produce co-authored material. Where the book presents text in the 
first person it refers to Brian.
  My role has been varied, but has most frequently consisted of provid-
ing direction, helping to shape the book, to re-order and edit it, and to 
turn a first draft into a book that I hope communicates Brian’s convic-

writing why spy?
xiv
tions on the value of intelligence. I have also worked on making Why 
Spy? a book that presents sound arguments, and that will allow readers 
to enjoy some of the many tales that those who know Brian have been 
lucky enough to hear first-hand. I also hope that it will be of interest to 
those who are just starting out on their engagement with published 
work on intelligence, whether that be because their awareness of intel-
ligence matters has been raised by press coverage of the field or because 
they are intelligence professionals, as well as to students and scholars of 
intelligence and of the episodes of history recounted here. It has been a 
delight to work with Brian on this project, and we have had little diffi-
culty in reaching agreement on how to develop the manuscript into its 
final form. Playing such a role in turning Why Spy? from a draft resting 
on a shelf into something that will reach a much wider audience has 
been an honour as well as a role that has brought responsibility. Difficult 
judgements have had to be made, for instance, on how much back-
ground detail to present on the cases addressed in the book. I hope that 
its finished form does justice to the years of experience and the consid-
ered reflections of an intelligence veteran, the majority of whose contri-
butions to the field will remain secret.
  There are other members of the Why Spy? team whose help I wish to 
acknowledge. Heather Hooker has played a vital supporting role. 
Encouragement and advice has been given throughout by Brian’s family, 
by my husband, and by Eunan O’Halpin. Our publisher at Hurst, 
Michael Dwyer, has also provided valuable support. I am grateful to 
them all.

	
xv
FOREWORD
Vice Admiral Sir Louis Le Bailly
Brian Stewart invited me to join forces with him to write this book 
when he retired from active service in Asia. But I was ninety and my 
batteries were running low so I volunteered to write this foreword 
instead.
  Brian’s career in the Army, Colonial Service, intelligence community, 
and years on the ground in Malaysia and China, have given him a wide 
knowledge of the problems of assessing foreign situations and distilling 
intelligence to the point where it might carry significant weight with 
politicians.
  Both of us agree on the importance of the difficult task; using all 
sources, attempting to eschew bias, to produce an effective persuasive 
overview of the world scene.
  Brian and I entered an intelligence world that had just been subjected 
to fundamental changes. As Secretary of a changed Joint Intelligence 
Committee from 1968, Brian was charged with the duty of providing 
the great men with the best assessments the Committee could produce. 
I, on the other hand, looking at the same range of intelligence subjects, 
found myself handling a team of some 1,000 people. Denis Healey, the 

FOREWORD
xvi
Secretary of State, told me that my job was to build a Defence 
Intelligence Staff able to tell those who would not listen all the things 
they did not wish to know.
  One thing Brian and I share in common is the perhaps rather arro-
gant assumption that sometimes we know better than our masters. It is 
an important bond between us. But as we sat decades later, one in 
Cornwall, one in Perthshire, we were faced with the Hutton and the 
Butler Inquiries. It seemed that many of the pillars that had been put in 
place by the giants of 1968, in an attempt to produce objectivity, had 
been destroyed.
  And then I read a book by Brian’s son, Rory, The Places In Between, 
which revealed cold courage and endurance of a quality rarely encoun-
tered today. This caused me to write to Brian to congratulate him. And 
so a friendship, which had lapsed because of his multiplicity of tasks 
overseas and my increasing dilapidation, has happily been resumed. His 
battery is still well charged, but mine is getting rather low. However, a 
flashover may yet take place as his charge brings me the inspiration for 
which I was once so grateful thirty years ago.
Vice Admiral Sir Louis Le Bailly 
Director General Intelligence, 1972–5 
December 2009

	
xvii
PREFACE
‘The mountains will be in labour and bring forth a ridiculous mouse.’
Horace, Ars Poetica, c.13BC
Intelligence is a much more complex affair than most people realise and 
deserves to be better understood. The media seems to enjoy criticising 
the doings of the intelligence community and its attempts to retain 
some modicum of secrecy, without acknowledging that the intelligence 
community is an important part of our national defence forces and that 
they need to preserve some secrecy in order to do their job. I hope that 
my reflections on cases and the methods and machinery of intelligence 
featured in the book may help readers gain a better understanding of 
the complexities of an intelligence community, and the problems of 
maintaining operational security in an age when freedom of informa-
tion and transparency, and human rights and the rule of law, are domi-
nant words in our democratic society. It will also, I hope, make clear 
the value of intelligence.
  For most of my official life I was engaged in intelligence work. Soon 
after I landed in Malaya in 1945, I became closely involved with police 
intelligence as a District Officer when we mounted a campaign to rid 
the District of the criminal gangs that had filled the vacuum left by the 
defeated Japanese forces. I learnt the virtues of close collaboration 
between the civilians and the police. In Singapore, I had a further spell 
of close collaboration with police intelligence; this time the targets were 
the secret societies, which were terrifying the public. In 1947 I was 

PREFACE
xviii
posted to Macau to learn Chinese. By the time I returned to Malaya in 
1949 the fight (known not as a war but as an Emergency) between the 
Malayan Communist Party (MCP) and the Government of Malaya was 
in full swing. From then onwards, I was preoccupied with intelligence 
related subjects. In 1957 I joined the Foreign Office, and for the next 
twenty-two years continued to be involved in intelligence matters.
  Finally, as an adviser on Chinese Affairs to Western and even Taiwanese 
businesses trying to capture a share of the Chinese market, I proved to 
my own satisfaction that experience and open sources can go a long way 
to producing valid assessments. And I had the satisfaction of pinpoint-
ing Jiang Zemin as a possible future leader of China before the corps of 
China-watchers had noticed him, and produced rather better predic-
tions on China’s economic development than most Western observers.
  The mountain has taken many years to give birth. As Secretary of the 
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) I wanted to do my homework for 
my new job, but there seemed to be nothing on the shelves to help. This 
was a time (1968) when Britain did not even acknowledge the existence 
of the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS or MI6), and intelligence was so 
much a taboo subject that the index of such works as Sir Winston 
Churchill’s History of the Second World War did not mention the word. 
My predecessor, Brooks Richards, had already left to become Her 
Majesty’s Ambassador to Greece. So I brooded alone.
  The JIC, after the 1968 reforms, seemed to be flying blind as far as 
knowledge of precedents were concerned. It soon dawned on me that 
the only person in the Cabinet Office with any broad experience of the 
management of national intelligence resources was the Secretary of the 
Cabinet, Sir Burke Trend. The rest of my JIC had earned their spurs in 
their departments, which were the armed forces, civil departments, and 
the intelligence agencies. We might have done better had we, collec-
tively, been better trained.
  I had the opportunity to persuade the intelligence Knights of the day, 
who included the heads of the three civilian intelligence agencies known 
as the Security Service (MI5), SIS and Government Communications 
Headquarters (GCHQ), that we should commission a historian to look 
at the subject of intelligence in the Second World War. It did not cause 
the traditional pillars of secrecy to fall down.
  Intelligence is now a subject to be discussed in classrooms and semi-
nars, but the subject is still in its infancy; political biographies and mod-

PREFACE
	
	
xix
ern histories continue to omit the word intelligence from their indices. 
Although intelligence studies have now become respectable, we have 
some way to go before lay people and professionals alike are adequately 
educated about the strengths, weaknesses, potential and limitations of 
intelligence and the lessons of history. This book intends to stimulate 
interest among general readers, as well as the practitioner or serious 
student of intelligence, and prove a useful introduction to a subject that 
is not often addressed in its entirety.
  There is an increasing amount of literature on intelligence by academ-
ics and former officials. This book naturally touches on some of the same 
subjects, but its perspective is different; one of the authors having spent 
most of his intelligence career in various roles in the field, not in 
Whitehall or in academia. Perhaps the most notable of the intelligence 
books written from ‘the inside’ is Intelligence Power in Peace and War 
written by another former Secretary of the JIC, and former member of 
GCHQ, Michael Herman.1 Also falling into this category is Sir David 
Omand’s Securing the State.2 Omand writes as a former Director of 
GCHQ and as someone who held the Cabinet Office post of Intelligence 
and Security Coordinator. Both of these books are well respected by 
intelligence practitioners, scholars and students alike. Libraries and 
bookshops also hold useful books that have been produced with a degree 
of cooperation from the intelligence organisation involved. Professor 
Christopher Andrew, a highly-regarded intelligence historian, published 
an authorised history of MI5, The Defence of the Realm.3 This formed 
part of the UK intelligence community’s commemoration of the 100 
year anniversary of the founding of the organisation that went on to 
become MI5 and SIS, a commemoration that also saw Professor Keith 
Jeffery publish MI6: The History of the Secret Intelligence Service 1909–
1949.4 The first volume of Michael S. 
 Goodman’s official history of the 
JIC was published in 2014,5 and Professor Richard Aldrich, another 
respected intelligence scholar, has published a history of GCHQ.6 There 
are, of course, other quality books on aspects of intelligence that result 
from the research of these and other distinguished academics.
  Why Spy? discusses the intelligence machinery, methods of collecting 
intelligence, assessment of raw intelligence material, and the misuse and 
abuse of intelligence. It also draws attention to the need to go behind the 
simple headline ‘intelligence failure’ and identify the responsible culprits 
who may well be policymakers or military commanders, rather than 

PREFACE
xx
intelligence officers. It contains analyses of cases that further highlight the 
value of intelligence and the pitfalls that can be encountered. Intelligence 
has no magic wand; the judgements made by intelligence practitioners 
and the policymakers who receive their material render it an art not a 
science. Those individuals with experience as practitioners who have read 
this book’s reflections have all found something interesting in it and do 
not consider its views outlandish.
  It will, I hope, help all interested in the subject of intelligence to 
consider the wider issues, which inevitably are scantily covered in the 
press, or even in official inquiries. I hope it will stimulate greater under-
standing and help readers to recognise the complexities of the scene. It 
is a book providing reflections and thoughts on intelligence that I wish 
had been available to me when I joined the JIC. 
 While it may be diffi-
cult to find the time to conduct broad reading on intelligence cases and 
problems, a little intelligence history is a valuable asset, whether the 
reader is in the intelligence business or not. The examples discussed 
highlight the pitfalls of the past.
  The short answer to ‘why spy?’ is ‘in order to discover the truth 
behind the lies, and obfuscations of our rivals and our enemies.’ There 
is an important, current, subsidiary question: ‘is the growing cost justi-
fied?’ Some senior members of government and its institutions who 
receive material from the intelligence agencies suggest that secret intel-
ligence is only useful to confirm that their conclusions are correct. Yet 
the chapters in this book provide examples where timely intelligence has 
been a significant ingredient in success, helping commanders to victory 
and reducing the ‘butcher’s bill’. The value of intelligence, and of prac-
tising and using it well, are the central themes of Why Spy?

	
1
INTRODUCTION
Liars, deceivers, eavesdroppers, covert surveillance operators, thieves, 
burglars, lockpickers, perhaps kidnappers or even assassins. Such are 
some of the roles that may be required of an intelligence officer or a 
secret agent. On the other hand the work may consist only of humdrum 
administrative activities. The intelligence officer’s services to the state 
cannot be publicly recognised, but may entail serious danger, and often 
long unsocial hours. So why are people prepared to devote their lives to 
intelligence, a profession that provides a conveniently silent scapegoat 
when there is a failure, but cannot be publicly congratulated on success? 
Is intelligence work important? Indeed, is it of much use at all if—as so 
often is the case—it is ignored or misused?
  Fortunately there are still enough people prepared to spend their lives 
on intelligence work. Intelligence, despite the nature of what it involves, 
is an honourable profession, staffed by honourable patriots. Like the 
soldier trained to be an assassin in the line of duty, the spy is trained to 
steal and to bug to protect the state. Secret intelligence work is not for 
the faint hearted, but it is an essential weapon in the armoury of any 
major nation. Even Secretary of State Henry Stimson of the US, who 
objected after the First World War to proposals to create a US intelli-
gence agency with the remark, ‘[g]entlemen do not read other people’s 
mail’, changed his view after the Japanese surprise attack at Pearl Harbor 
in 1941 (see Chapter Eight).
  It is often suggested that prostitution is the oldest profession in the 
world. But from the dawn of history people have been seeking to dis-
cover the intentions and secrets of their enemies; to penetrate the secu-

why spy?
2
rity barriers behind which their enemies work. Today the West faces 
well-funded international terrorist groups and threats to cyber-security. 
So long as our imperfect world exists there will continue to be a need for 
intelligence services to seek the truth behind what Churchill called the 
bodyguard of lies. Why Spy? is concerned with the eternal verities and 
basic problems which always have, and always will, be a part of intelli-
gence work.
  The US’s Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has emblazoned above its 
front hall the motto, ‘[a]nd ye shall know the truth and the truth shall 
make you free’, emphasising that the search for the truth is the central 
function of intelligence. Yet intelligence is not a science, and it has no 
crystal ball. The job of intelligence is to do its best to find the truth and 
report findings without selectivity or embroidery, however unpalatable 
they may be.
  The intelligence agencies’ customers, whether they be elected represen-
tatives of the people, civil servants or members of the armed forces, must 
accept that intelligence, like any other form of human activity, has limita-
tions. It can no more predict the future with absolute certainty than an 
economist or an investment adviser. It can record the facts discovered, 
suggest near certainties, probabilities and possibilities. It can be held to 
account to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, but 
it can only offer a best guess, based on all the available information.
  In the fifth century BC, a number of Chinese generals produced a 
book called The Art of War (Bing Fa), which they attributed to a general 
called Sun Tzu. The Art of War, almost certainly the earliest book written 
on intelligence, is adamant about the crucial importance of intelligence. 
It says that ‘a General who is too stingy to spend generously on intelli-
gence is not fit to be called a General.’ The Art of War’s principles of 
intelligence remain as valid today as they were in the fifth century BC.
  Many successful leaders have shared this view on the importance of 
intelligence. Thousands of years later Niccolò Machiavelli showed an 
enthusiasm for intelligence that matched that of Sun Tzu. The Duke of 
Wellington, soldier and politician, emphasised the need to know what 
was happening on the other side of the hill. George Washington, the 
first President of the US, who spent 10 per cent of his budget on intel-
ligence, wrote, ‘[t]he necessity of procuring good intelligence is apparent 
and need not be further urged’. General Dwight D. 
 Eisenhower, who 
went on to be President of the US, paid effusive compliments to intel-

INTRODUCTION
	
	
3
ligence for its contribution to Allied victory in the Second World War 
and to the saving of many servicemen’s lives. One eminent historian, Sir 
Harry Hinsley, considered that the Allied successes in reading the 
German signals shortened the Second World War by three years. 
Churchill was an avid consumer of intelligence throughout the war.
  But not everyone agrees. The renowned military thinker Carl von 
Clausewitz said ‘most intelligence is false.’ US President Lyndon 
B. 
 Johnson commented when intelligence challenged his view of the 
Vietnam War that those intelligence fellows reminded him of a cow he 
used to milk, which would swish its tail across the milk pail if he were 
not careful. As Secretary of the JIC, I had a ringside seat from which to 
observe the machinery of the Anglophone nations. The late Sir Reginald 
Hibbert, a close friend from my undergraduate days at Oxford, and a 
distinguished Foreign Office mandarin argued that the principal value 
of secret intelligence was to confirm his assessments. This view seemed 
to me to be close to ‘don’t confuse me with the facts, my mind is made 
up already.’ It is, of course, a view shared by others that intelligence is 
troublesome if it challenges the received wisdom. It has been well said 
that customers sometimes use intelligence as a drunk uses a lamp post: 
for support not illumination. In the main, however, the value of good 
intelligence and the worth of their intelligence professionals have been 
recognised by western leaders.
Definitions of Terms
Discussions on intelligence are bedevilled by language problems. For 
example, the Japanese ‘joho’ and the Chinese ‘qingbao’ mean both intel-
ligence in the sense that we use the word in the name Joint Intelligence 
Committee, and information as in Ministry of Information. The world 
is full of languages which use the same words for both intelligence and 
information.
  This book adopts the following conventions:
Intelligence: the business of collecting information, analysing it, assessing it, and 
presenting it to those known as customers to assist their policymaking and 
decisions. This activity is not, of course, the exclusive domain of governments; 
any organisation needs a good information base.
Information: the raw material upon which intelligence is based.
Secret: something hidden physically or concealed by, for example, the use of a 
cipher.

why spy?
4
Secret intelligence: information derived through covert, clandestine activity to 
discover the truth behind the deceits and obfuscations offered to the general 
public.
Strategic intelligence: the big picture, current and future, based on all sources of 
intelligence.
Tactical or operational intelligence: something of immediate concern related to a 
specific event, not the broad or longer term picture.
Open source or overt intelligence: the whole gamut of material made available to 
the public through all types of publications, the media, radio broadcasts, public 
records, and the internet.
Agents: The CIA calls its officers agents. In the UK the term is normally used to 
mean a person who, on behalf of an intelligence service and directed by an 
intelligence officer, carries out clandestine tasks. Why Spy? adopts the British 
usage.
Case officer: The individual responsible for a particular case and for the agent 
concerned. They run the agents, brief and debrief them, pay them and control 
them.
Staff officer: An officer who is not in command, but assists commanders to 
ensure that their plans are carried out effectively.
  The definition of spy in particular is of more than semantic interest: 
authoritarian regimes, such as the government of the former Soviet 
Union, have bizarre views on what constitutes spying. In China in the 
1960s a foreign banker was charged with the crime of espionage because, 
like foreign representatives around the world, he studied the local situa-
tion and sent press cuttings to his head office. He was jailed for two years.
  Such countries lump together diplomats, defence attachés, intelligence 
officers, and journalists as spies, since all share the irritating habit of 
studying and commenting on the local scene. Only the more sophisti-
cated governments will distinguish between the defence attaché, a licensed 
overt intelligence gatherer, the intelligence officer, a covert intelligence 
gatherer, the diplomat lying perhaps but not spying for their country, and 
the news reporter with freedom to roam and ask too many questions.
  The Kim Philby case reminds us of differing perspectives. Philby 
became the most well-known member of the Cambridge Five spy ring 
who were recruited while studying at Cambridge University before the 
Second World War and who spied for the Soviet Union during the Cold 
War. To most Britons and particularly to former colleagues in the British 
intelligence community, Philby was perceived as a vile traitor who had 

INTRODUCTION
	
	
5
sent many brave people to a gruesome fate at the hands of the KGB, the 
Soviet Union’s principal Cold War intelligence agency. But to the KGB, 
Philby was a hero whom they decorated and rewarded generously for his 
treachery.
  Just as the guerrilla triad might read ‘I am a freedom fighter, you are 
a guerrilla, he is a terrorist’, the intelligence triad might read ‘I am an 
intelligence officer, you are an agent, he is a spy’. Although the word spy 
is more often than not used pejoratively, for our purposes in Britain, and 
in this book, the definition of spy and agent are the same. They are 
people who, conscious of their intelligence role, have been recruited to 
carry out an intelligence task.
Structure of the Book
This book reflects on the broad body of intelligence work: the roots of 
intelligence failure, the complexity of organisation and multiplicity of 
methods, and the wide variety of people involved. It also looks at related 
subjects such as ethics, deception and Special Operations. To do so, the 
book is organised into four parts. The first concerns three cases in which 
I was involved during my working life. The Malayan Emergency started 
with a dismal failure of intelligence, and ended with the creation of an 
excellent intelligence machine. The security forces (the military and the 
police) were no longer the ambushed but the ambushers. The Vietnam 
War illustrates the point that intelligence alone is of limited use if there 
are no effective government security forces for it to support. The Chinese 
discussion demonstrates a different point. High level secret sources were 
not required: travelling around the country, for instance, provided a way 
to collect useful intelligence.
  The second addresses the components of the intelligence machine and 
what can be described as the core activities carried out by intelligence 
agencies: collecting intelligence material and assessing it. Coordinating so 
complex a machine must be attempted but, as explained in Chapter Four, 
we should be realistic. The list of types of intelligence collection methods 
in Chapter Five is not exhaustive but includes methods new to the pub-
lished literature on intelligence, while Chapter Six identifies the common 
fallacies of the intelligence assessment process. Chapter Seven discusses the 
moral dilemmas raised by intelligence practices, including the tension 
sometimes observable between what is effective and what is permissible.

why spy?
6
  The third part of the book addresses seminal cases in which I was not 
directly involved but had the opportunity to discuss with those who 
were. Pearl Harbor, and the Cuban Bay of Pigs and Missile Crisis cases, 
have all been covered in considerable depth officially and so provide a 
great deal more detail on the work of an intelligence community than is 
usually available to the public. These cases illustrate many of the impor-
tant lessons discussed in this book. The Pearl Harbor disaster was a 
victory for the Japanese operationally in respect of intelligence and secu-
rity, although they underestimated the will and ability of the United 
States to retaliate. Its intelligence customers and military commanders 
did not fare well in the investigations that followed. The Bay of Pigs was 
an unmitigated catastrophe operationally and from the intelligence 
viewpoint, while the Cuban Missile Crisis was nearly a disaster, even 
though intelligence was a significant ingredient in its ultimate success. 
The British government’s misuse of intelligence relating to Iraqi 
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) in the run up to the 2003 war 
in Iraq has also seen relatively large amounts of information enter the 
public domain and highlighted the difficulties that can arise in the rela-
tionship between intelligence and policy. Together, these and the cases 
in Part One illustrate many of the lessons drawn out in the analyses of 
the intelligence machine and of the collection and assessment of intel-
ligence. Each case illustrates that no matter how effective the analysis or 
brilliant the collection work, such efforts are wasted, unless the intelli-
gence agency concerned can transform the raw material into accurate 
and timely reports that directly impact its customer.
  The final part of the book addresses operations conducted to influ-
ence events, including the difficult and as yet unresolved question of 
who should run and carry out Special Operations, the prerequisites for 
successful deception operations such as those carried out during the 
Second World War that gave Allied forces the strategic advantage, and 
shaped western intelligence services’ attitudes to assassination. By focus-
ing on the nature of the intelligence business Why Spy? addresses the 
fundamental question of why intelligence is important.
  The rules of good intelligence work may be crystallised into the fol-
lowing ten commandments, which are expanded upon and illustrated in 
the chapters that follow:
1.  Report nothing but the unvarnished and, as far as possible, the whole 
truth. Understand, but do not pander to, the prejudices and precon-
ceptions of the customer.

INTRODUCTION
	
	
7
  2.  The future: remind customers that intelligence officers cannot see 
in to the future; they can only make educated guesses about what it 
might consist of.
  3.  Assessment of intelligence material: beware of intellectual laziness, 
mirror imaging, prejudice, racial or professional arrogance, bias, 
groupthink, and the sin of assuming that the future will develop, 
broadly speaking, along the same lines as the past.
  4.  People are more important than organisations: top priority should 
be given to the recruitment of high quality candidates.
  5.  Agents: beware of the possibilities of exaggeration, deception, and 
a desire to please the case officer.
  6.  Liaison: remember that friends, whether they be domestic or 
abroad, have hidden agendas.
  7.  Validation: do not allow an agent’s case officer to be the sole judge 
of the validity of the agent’s reporting.
  8.  Sources: secret and official sources have no monopoly of the truth. 
Open, readily accessible, sources are also important.
  9.  Intelligence requirements: prune these vigorously as no service can 
cover every subject.
10.  State of grace: ensure that you are flexible in your response to the 
unexpected, which by definition has not been envisaged in the list 
of national intelligence requirements.


PART ONE
THREE ASIAN CASES


	
11
1
THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
AN INTELLIGENCE SUCCESS STORY
‘The British have already created a totalitarian, complete penetrating system of 
administration from Federal Government to small town and Malay villages… 
there is no weak link in the enemy’s administration for us to exploit.’
MCP directive, December 1948
‘I would not dispute that the enemy’s intelligence effort improved under 
Templer’s direction.’
Chin Peng, former Secretary General of the MCP, 2003
‘The Malayan Emergency was an exemplar of counter-insurgency, and those 
who participated have every right to be proud. The greatest credit must go to 
the people of Malaya who made great personal sacrifices, saw with sound sense 
where their real interests lay and employed considerable political skill, imagina-
tion and restraint in attaining their ends…and General Templer was the 
man-of-the-hour.’
Field Marshal The Lord Carver
‘When at an impressionable age you have to remove a pig spear from the stomach 
of a rubber tapper pinned to a tree by the spear and left to die a lingering agonis-
ing death, or pick up the bodies of two Chinese miners executed in front of their 
families by “elimination” squads as “running dogs” by driving eight inch nails 
through their foreheads, one has little affection for those responsible.’
Sergeant Gus Fletcher, former Malayan Police Officer

why spy?
12
  I first arrived in Malaya, now Malaysia, in 1945. It was my first Asian 
posting, my first love, where I cut my intelligence teeth, and where I spent 
the best part of twenty years of my life. I have no difficulty in remember-
ing, with exceptional clarity, my introduction to Asia as a member of the 
British Military Administration (BMA). I travelled from Singapore to 
Penang by train. After four days, we arrived late at night at Butterworth 
Station, from where I crossed on the ferry to Penang. Next morning, after 
sleeping on the jetty, I set off on an ex-Japanese miniature torpedo boat to 
Pulau Jerejak, the pre-war immigration station, now converted into a refu-
gee camp, and which became my sole responsibility.
  Subsequently, as District Officer Bukit Mertajam—a job usually held 
by an experienced Malayan Civil Service officer in his late thirties—I 
was helped by an exceptionally patient Malay Chief Clerk, and kindly 
Malay headmen who guided me through local custom. One issue both-
ered me: law and order. The leaders of the District grumbled that there 
had been no crime whilst Malaya was in Japanese hands during the 
Second World War. This was hardly surprising since we did not practise 
the system of summary justice favoured by the Japanese military, but I 
was incensed. The local Senior Police Officer agreed to pool all our 
resources and with ambushes day and night, we soon persuaded the 
bandits to mend their ways or go elsewhere. This was my first and highly 
satisfying experience of the force multiplying effect of close collabora-
tion between civil authority and uniformed services.
  By the time I returned to Malaya in 1949 the country was aflame; the 
insurgents, known as Communist-Terrorists (CTs), seemed to be win-
ning. Despite their advances, we turned the tables and it was highly 
satisfactory to be involved in close collaboration with the military and 
the police in the successful recovery of the situation. This chapter derives 
first and foremost from my experiences there.
  I was technically an Administrative Officer but because I knew two 
dialects of Chinese I found myself fully occupied in support of the secu-
rity forces who by and large did not know any Chinese. I was collector, 
assessor, and operations man all rolled into one. My activities included 
raising private funds for the building of decent Chinese schools, pub-
lishing a Chinese newspaper, acting as the private secretary to the leader 
of the Chinese community in Malaya, and advising General Sir Gerald 
Templer, Malaya’s High Commissioner and Director of Operations. My 
objectives were to persuade the Malayan Chinese that we were on their 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
13
side, and to persuade the terrorists that they could not win and should 
surrender and work with us. I was more what the Indian Civil Service 
would have called a ‘Political’ than an Administrator.
The Emergency1
The victory of the Malayan government over the communist insurgents 
was a unique event in South East Asia. Elsewhere the communists won, 
and the West departed. In Malaya the government won, and we stayed 
to help our friends after independence. But that is not the reason for 
including this case in the book; it has been included because it provides 
a clear example of the importance of good intelligence in such a situa-
tion. There are intelligence lessons that ought to be learned from the 
Malayan case and that can aid efforts to tackle insurgents elsewhere, 
even though every case will be different: the recipe which worked so well 
in Malaya could not be used effectively in the very different circum-
stances of Vietnam. Nonetheless, analysis of the Malayan case draws 
attention to valuable intelligence lessons. At the onset of the Emergency 
the British general in command complained bitterly that his patrols 
were looking for will-o’–the-wisps, and all too often weary soldiers 
returned from two weeks of misery in the jungle having made no con-
tact with the enemy. The situation changed dramatically as the intelli-
gence machine improved. At the beginning of the Emergency they 
ambushed us. When the new, strong, trained Special Branch (SB) was 
in full swing, we ambushed them.
  The Malayan Emergency started in June 1948 and officially ended in 
1960. The government’s Emergency Regulations were a response to the 
terrorist activities of members of the MCP, an illegal organisation 
founded in 1935, and which survived the war, despite Japanese efforts, 
to enjoy legal status under the changed post-war conditions. In fact their 
first shots were fired by mavericks who jumped the gun before the MCP 
had decided to launch the insurgency, but soon Malaya was aflame with 
ambushes on roads, attacks on estates, assassinations, torture, and intimi-
dation of the rural, especially the Chinese and Indian, communities.
  The British official connection with Malaya and Singapore dated 
from the end of the eighteenth century when the two semi-deserted 
islands lying at the north and the south of the Malacca Straits, first 
Penang and then Singapore, were acquired by treaty from the Malay 

why spy?
14
Sultans. In 1824 Malacca, acquired by treaty from the Dutch, became 
the third of the Straits Settlements. All the Malay States became British 
protectorates; some federated, others unfederated, with British advisers 
alongside the Sultans.
  The plantations and mines on the peninsula flourished, supported by 
the ports of Singapore and Penang. This conglomerate was, by most 
standards, a paradise due to a benign climate and good soil. But eco-
nomic development had been accompanied by a considerable influx of 
Chinese and Indians. It was a plural society, where the Malays were still 
in the majority, their lands and customs protected by law, but also there 
was growing jealousy of the Chinese and Indian immigrants who had 
moved up the social and economic ladder.
  This paradise was rudely awakened in December 1941, when the 
Japanese launched their air and sea armadas to attack the Western pow-
ers in East Asia. Although the attack on Pearl Harbor was only a partial 
success, in a matter of weeks Malaya and the allegedly impregnable 
fortress of Singapore were in Japanese hands, and most of the British 
were in prison. The Japanese occupation of 1941–5 brought massacres 
and misery to the Chinese, too, and the brutality of the Japanese Army 
and its notorious intelligence arm, the Kempeitai, ensured that whatever 
the Malayans thought of the British they preferred British colonialism 
to Japanese colonialism. I felt warmly welcomed when I arrived in 
autumn 1945 as part of the British Military Administration (BMA).
  On 1 
 April 1946, the BMA ended, handing over to Sir Edward Gent, 
home civil servant from the Colonial Office who was largely responsible 
for the production of the new Malayan Union constitution. The Malays 
condemned the constitution for giving too many rights to the immi-
grants; the Sultans stayed away from the airport greeting ceremony, and 
soon the Colonial Office was drafting a different constitution. In 1948 
the Colonial Office’s new constitution was introduced. This replaced the 
Union with a Federation, and removed proposals for granting citizen-
ship to non-Malays.
  Almost immediately the Malayan Communist Party (MCP) started 
their terrorist activities; on 4 
 July Gent, flying back for consultations in 
Whitehall, was killed when his plane crashed. He was succeeded in 
October 1948 by Sir Henry Gurney, an experienced Colonial Officer 
from Palestine; three years later he was killed in a terrorist ambush.
  When, in February 1952, General Templer arrived to take command 
as High Commissioner and Director of Operations morale in Malaya 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
15
was at a low ebb. I had the privilege of working with him. Armed with 
a political brief to hasten independence, and Churchill’s backing, 
Templer made a rapid improvement in morale, as the security forces and 
intelligence from a greatly enlarged and well trained SB began to turn 
the tables on the terrorists. We were ambushing them, and by August 
1957, when Malaya became independent, few active terrorists remained; 
the rest had retreated over the border to Thailand, or been killed, died 
in the jungle, been captured or had seen the light and surrendered.
Determinants of Success
Success in Malaya owed a great deal to good intelligence, the psycho-
logical warfare (psywar) campaign to win the support—the ‘hearts and 
minds’—of the rural population, and the programme of resettlement to 
New Villages to deny the CTs support from the rural communities they 
had intimidated.
  In 1948 the brunt of the Emergency was borne in the countryside by 
the police, planters and miners. Rural Chinese suspected to be collabo-
rating with the government all came within the communist rubric, ‘run-
ning dogs of the colonialist imperialist aggressors’. The police were seri-
ously hampered by a lack of Chinese-speaking officers to handle agents 
and debrief CTs, captured or surrendered. I had the task of establishing 
a Chinese Language School to remedy this deficiency. By 1952 the intel-
ligence situation had been transformed: there was a growing stable of 
good agents, a solid analytical base, considerable knowledge of the CTs’ 
methods, organisation and personalities, and a useful number of 
Chinese-speaking officers to help to build a bridge to the Chinese com-
munity. One lesson learned was the need to protect agents from their 
own folly: in one case a highly productive agent insisted on a large cash 
payment despite the warnings of his case officer of the danger of being 
betrayed by high spending. Within a month he was dead.
  By the early 1950s the initiative no longer lay with the MCP. 
 Security 
force numbers had increased drastically: police jungle squads had been 
formed, and tens of thousands of Special Constables had been recruited 
to guard rural townships, estates and mines. But without the aid of SB 
intelligence the enemy would still have been able to strike with impunity 
in rural areas and prove next to impossible to find in the jungle.2 The 
increasing flow of good intelligence enabled us to disrupt the supply sys-

why spy?
16
tem and to hamper the CTs’ attempts to contact and intimidate the rural 
Chinese. The rural population were resettled into defended New Villages, 
food control and curfews were put into place, preventing the rural 
Chinese passing food and other supplies to the CTs and hampering the 
CTs’ ability to coerce the local inhabitants. These and the other measures 
adopted were part of the success. Meanwhile there had been a vast expan-
sion of the police and considerable reinforcement on the military front, 
accompanied by the development of jungle warfare training that helped 
the security forces cope with the unfamiliar tropical environment.
  When independence came in 1957, the MCP and its guerrilla forces 
were no longer a serious threat. Intelligence had certainly played a major 
role in the victory, not only in the collection, analysis and coordination of 
intelligence, but also in policymaking. By 1957, we knew more about the 
organisation, order of battle (ORBAT), and the people in the so-called 
Malayan People’s Liberation Army (the military arm of the MCP), than 
the Secretary General of the MCP, skulking across the border in Thailand.
  The Malayan victory over the CTs continues to be cited in military 
intelligence schools as a textbook case of how to make the best use of 
intelligence to defeat terrorism and insurgency. However, there were 
some elements which contributed to victory that were unique to the 
time and place, and this should, naturally, be borne in mind when seek-
ing to transfer its lessons to present and future conflicts. Malaya was a 
British Colonial Protectorate and the government acted quickly and 
decisively through chief executives at State and District level. British 
parliamentarians were critical of General Templer’s dictatorial ways, and 
would have been more critical had they known of the speed with which 
the colonial administrators, with the support of the State War Executive 
Committees (SWECs), could make decisions.
  The central strength of the Malayan system, perhaps a unique strength, 
was the fusion, under Templer, of all branches of government in a com-
bined effort. Templer, High Commissioner, Director of Operations, and 
intelligence aficionado, made it clear to everyone—military, civilian, 
political or commercial—that they were expected to help. This appears 
in the British Army’s 2009 Counter-Insurgency Field Manual in the 
form of a requirement for ‘unity of effort’ involving all the instruments 
of state working together for a common end.
  One of the determinants of success was the State War Executive 
Committees (SWECs), which operated at national and district levels 
across Malaya. They included representatives from the civil service, 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
17
police, SB, military, and Chinese Affairs. Although I was not on the 
SWECs, I had the right to attend at all levels and speak when I wanted 
to. A particular strength was the opportunity they provided for a weekly 
pooling of intelligence and ideas. In their intelligence assessment role 
they did, at local level, what large national machines seem to find so 
hard—to exchange information and views from all sources and bury 
their disagreements and departmental biases in order to arrive at useful, 
positive conclusions.
  Templer was a great supporter of the Chinese Secretariat in which I 
worked and which contributed to intelligence success in Malaya. In 
1953, at my suggestion, the Central District of Malacca was designated 
as a ‘white area’, and excused from the curfews, food controls and other 
inconveniences of the Emergency Regulations, on the alleged grounds 
that the citizens of Central Malacca were cooperating so loyally. It was 
not difficult to persuade Templer that the experiment would cost noth-
ing, that the local CTs would not be sure whether the story was true or 
false, and that other Districts might be encouraged to become more 
supportive of government. The bluff worked and by the time that 
Malaya became independent most Districts had been declared ‘white’.
  General Templer had three major objectives: intelligence, reorganisa-
tion of the police, and public relations. All were rapidly achieved. There 
have been those who downplay the importance of Templer’s role in the 
victory, citing the fact that the plan for resettlement and all the 
Emergency Regulations that helped to undermine the communist 
organisation had been drafted before his arrival. However, without the 
leadership that he provided, the plan drawn up by General Sir Harold 
Briggs, the previous Director of Operations, to separate the CTs from 
the rest of the population would not have had the same, beneficial 
results; his enthusiastic support for every sort of intelligence, and for 
every form of hearts and minds work, particularly in winning the coop-
eration of the Chinese population, was a vital contribution to victory in 
Malaya. Templer’s achievements demonstrate that individuals working 
within intelligence organisations can be highly influential.
The Pre-Emergency Failure of Intelligence
The intelligence situation at the start of the Emergency was a far cry 
from that which was developed in the following years. The failure of the 

why spy?
18
Malayan Security Service (MSS) to recognise the growing communist 
threat prior to 1948 seems to have stemmed as much from a lack of 
intelligence experience among the senior customers, as to a lack of 
assessment experience among the professionals. Neither the customers, 
in this case the civil heads—Commissioner General of Singapore, 
Governor of Singapore and High Commissioner of Malaya—nor their 
military colleagues had any relevant experience of intelligence; and so 
they did not know the right questions to ask of their intelligence chief, 
nor understand his urgent need for more staff and greater expertise.
  The minute summarised in this chapter’s Appendix B reflects the fact 
that none of the customers ever asked for a focussed threat assessment. 
There was no complaint that the MSS’s fortnightly Intelligence 
Summary (Appendix B) was little more than an undigested situation 
report (sitrep). None of the customers are on record as asking for com-
ment on the implications for South East Asia of the growing strength of 
the communist movement in Asia and above all in China where it 
seemed almost certain that the nationalists were about to be driven out 
by the communists.
  Those who would argue that these weaknesses were not the fault of 
these customers should remember that these professionals, from Colonel 
John Dalley, Director of the MSS, downwards, had no general intelli-
gence training; they were colonial police officers doing their best, pos-
sibly excellent at investigating serious crime but certainly without the 
experience of their equivalents in India. The very title of the organisa-
tion, MSS, tells its own tale. Their brief was narrow; security, not intel-
ligence. Dalley was not even allowed to become a member of the Joint 
Intelligence Committee Far East, on the grounds that he might take too 
parochial a view of the committee’s purposes.
  Had Loi Tak, our star secret agent, remained Secretary General of the 
Communist Party, it would not have greatly mattered that the assess-
ment machinery was inadequate. Loi Tak’s reporting would have kept 
the British adequately informed of the plans of the MCP; he might even 
have been able to persuade his colleagues that the time was still not ripe 
for an armed confrontation with the British. Once Loi had left in March 
1947, British intelligence was unsighted: it was a horrible example of 
being over-reliant on a single source of intelligence.
  In neighbouring Vietnam and Indonesia, nationalism was the princi-
pal driving force behind the insurrections led by Ho Chi Minh and 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
19
Bung Soekarno respectively. But the Malayan insurgency was the child, 
not of Malay nationalism, but of Chinese resident in Malaya. Further to 
a lack of experience in intelligence assessment, the appendices to this 
chapter also demonstrate a lamentable absence of urgency within the 
ranks of the Malayan and Singapore officials during the period of 1946 
to 1948. The Commissioner General’s Committee was afloat in a sea of 
ignorance and the MSS, undermanned and under trained, did not offer 
a clear threat assessment. The affairs of the MCP, which almost entirely 
consisted of Chinese members, seldom rated more than a paragraph in 
the MSS’s fortnightly Political Intelligence Journal, although in China 
the communists were thrashing the armies of the nationalist govern-
ment. When I was in China as a language student, I did not need any 
intelligence training or secret sources to work out that the communists 
were winning, and it should not have been difficult to recognise that 
communists throughout Asia would be encouraged by events in China.
  The appendices below demonstrate a poor performance by all con-
cerned. Fortunately the MCP was small, inexperienced, and badly led, 
giving the Malayan Government time to reform and improve its intel-
ligence machine. Neither the Commissioner General nor his Committee 
probed the assessments, such as they were, and the MSS Political 
Intelligence Journal (Appendix B) was little more than a scrapbook.
Appendix A: Summary of the Commissioner General’s Conference, 
26  June 1947
This meeting of June 1947 shows that it was not only Dalley, Director 
of the MSS, who failed to appreciate the magnitude of the danger posed 
by communism. The Commissioner General, Malcolm Macdonald, 
refused to recommend that the MCP should be banned as it had been 
before the war, and he and his colleagues failed to press Dalley for a 
fresh threat assessment. The record conveys little sense of urgency, the 
need to help the MSS to get staff or, indeed, of any understanding of the 
fundamental flaws in the intelligence machine.
  The meeting was attended by the High Commissioner of Malaya and 
Governor of Singapore, their Secretaries for Chinese Affairs (SCAs), 
their senior officers in each of the armed services, the Director MSS, the 
Trade Union Adviser and representatives of the Foreign Office and 
Security Service. Macdonald said that he had called the meeting in order 

why spy?
20
to discuss communism. He considered that, ‘[c]ommunism was Enemy 
no. 1 in these territories. It was a serious enemy and capable of becom-
ing a formidable one. Without falling into the error of exaggeration or 
excitement it had to be realised that communism would have to be dealt 
with in a pretty big and effective way in Malaya and Singapore.’ He 
outlined the strengths of the communists, describing their tentacles 
throughout society. It was his personal view that ‘it was very necessary 
to have a very strong and coherent policy to counteract the activities of 
the Communists.’
  Gent said that he did not think that Macdonald’s statement was exag-
gerated, and thought that the government needed the opinion of experts 
to identify weaknesses and to show them how they could be countered. 
Dalley reported on the state of the MCP and its links with international 
communism. Macdonald presumed that ‘[t]he Communists’ aim was to 
get rid of the government.’ Dalley agreed.
  During subsequent discussion Dalley agreed with Macdonald that the 
MCP was Chinese dominated and its strength lay in the support of 
Chinese population of the two territories. The SCA Malaya remarked that 
although the Kuomintang (KMT), China’s ruling party, were still strong 
in Malaya they were losing the war in China, and if the communists won 
then KMT influence would be correspondingly reduced in Malaya.
  The Commander in Chief, Far East, did appear to appreciate the 
seriousness of the threat. He asked why the subversive trade unions and 
the Communist Party were not outlawed? Where was the British answer 
to countering international communism? In his opinion the KMT were 
a worse menace than the MCP.3 Macdonald replied that the British 
democratic tradition tolerated communists as well as democrats and, 
therefore, Westminster would not be prepared to authorise the proscrip-
tion of the MCP unless it could be proved categorically that it was 
engaged in a criminal conspiracy. Gent, pointing out that the MCP had 
been proscribed before the war, asked why was it impossible to go back 
to the pre-war policy. The communists were training hundreds while 
we 
 were training only a handful in Britain to counter subversion. 
Macdonald wondered whether the KMT could not be used to help 
counter communism in the Chinese community. The SCA Malayan 
Union vigorously opposed this idea and was supported by Dalley, who 
described the corrupt and vicious nature of the KMT.
  The meeting discussed the importance of a healthy development of 
democratic institutions. The Trade Union Adviser said that he wished 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
21
that the Malays would act more vigorously like a proper party. 
Macdonald however thought that Dato’ Onn had made a good start and 
that his United Malays National Organisation, a political party, would 
develop effectively. Macdonald suggested that support should be sought 
among the leading Chinese business people but the Trade Union Adviser 
warned against reliance on support from the Towkay (business) class. In 
his view the middle class clerks of all races were more likely to provide a 
solid base.
  Macdonald initiated a discussion on the MSS’s requirements. Dalley 
said that he needed all the help he could get from agencies outside 
Malaya since much of the impetus for subversion and training came 
from outside.4 Macdonald raised the question of shortages of trained 
intelligence staff since the Malaya and Singapore governments could not 
spare enough people to satisfy the needs of the MSS.  He suggested that 
he and the two governments should work together on the problem of 
recruiting staff from outside Malaya. Gent did not support this idea and 
talked of the need to resolve constitutional matters before embarking on 
any programme of recruitment from outside the Malayan Police. 
Macdonald suggested that Dalley should consult with the Whitehall 
security and intelligence representatives and if manpower could be 
found, no doubt finance could also be found. This suggestion also failed 
to find favour with Gent. The matter, in his view, should first be consid-
ered by the Malaya and Singapore Commissioners of Police and the 
Director of MSS, so as to agree on a required establishment. Gent pre-
ferred to prioritise maintaining constitutional niceties over creating an 
effective intelligence machine. While the threat from the MCP and 
weaknesses in the MSS were acknowledged by the attendees of this 
meeting, they were not fully appreciated.
Appendix B: The MSS Political Intelligence Journal
The first of this fortnightly series appeared on 30 
 April 1946. The last 
issue is dated 30 
 August 1948. The series therefore covered the months 
immediately before, and the first six-weeks of, the Emergency. Dalley 
had been complaining regularly about a lack of staff in the MSS, and the 
quality of the Journal reflects this shortage.
  The Journal was about the nuts and bolts of organisations, and pro-
vided sitreps. It was padded out from time to time with a Who’s Who 

why spy?
22
list of the great and the bad. The format was unsuited to busy senior 
customers of intelligence, and unlikely to have much impact on policy. 
Senior customers were, in effect, left to make their own assessments.
  The Journal never produced anything remotely resembling a threat 
assessment, but neither Dalley nor his customers worried about this. 
The defect could have been remedied by a small team of skilled assessors 
or an interdepartmental committee to bring together intelligence from 
all sources into a general assessment. It took the declaration of the 
Emergency to focus attention on this weakness.
  Until mid-1948 most of the material in the Journal was concerned 
with Asian nationalism: Indonesian, Malay, Indian and Chinese. On the 
Chinese front, it was the nationalists, not the communists, who were the 
focus of MSS coverage until 1948. The KMT had long been the bugbear 
of the governments of Malaya and Singapore: a malign influence 
encouraging Malayan Chinese to give their loyalty not to Malaya but to 
mother China, and a group seriously tarnished by corruption and close 
relations with Triads (secret societies) and their criminal activities. So it 
was the threat of the KMT, not the communists, which concerned 
senior Malayan officials. Although the overt satellites of the MCP were 
regularly covered in some detail in the MSS Journal, the MCP itself 
never rated more than a few lines until the Emergency was declared.
  This imbalance probably reflected a paucity of sources capable of 
covering the MCP. The overt satellites: trade unions, China Democratic 
League, Chinese teachers and stevedores were softer targets, and such 
matters as developments in China and the structure of the Chinese press 
were easier still. Although the assiduous and astute reader might have 
concluded that there was a danger of armed struggle, the MSS did not 
spell it out in their Journal.
  The Journal did give considerable coverage to the fierce Malay reac-
tion against the British attempt to bring the Malay States and Penang 
and Malacca together into a Union. It also reported at length on 
Indonesian subversive links, on the growth of Malay extremism, and the 
philosophy of the extremists in Indonesian-linked organisations such as 
the Angkatan Pemudaan who considered that independence must be 
won through struggle and bloodshed.
  Malay and Indonesian subversion and the KMT, the Indian national-
ists, and subversion of the trade unions and of the Chinese schools 
received the lion’s share of coverage. In March 1947 there was a special 

THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY
	
	
23
six-page supplement on Chinese matters, but it was on the KMT not 
the MCP.  In November the MCP rated less than one page in a twenty-
seven-page issue. In December only two pages in a seventy-nine-page 
issue discussed the MCP.
  On 15 
 January 1948 a translated secret MCP document was included 
but without analysis or comment on its significance. On 15 
 March there 
was a low-level report on an instruction from the Central Committee to 
Singapore: again without comment. One month later priorities were 
beginning to change and the MCP rated half a page. The Journal 
reported that the communists and their satellites were continuing with 
their activities. There were indications that communism was gaining 
ground, even among the Malayan peasantry, and evidence that the MCP 
were anticipating government action against them. Although the Journal 
noted that most of the leaders had gone underground, it did not relate 
this activity to preparation for armed struggle.
  By the end of May the MSS had become better informed through 
captured documents and the interrogation of prisoners. It was the first 
significant hard intelligence about MCP activities to have appeared in 
the Journal since our agent Loi Tak’s departure to Thailand in 1947. On 
31 
 July the Journal gave the MCP pride of place with a twenty-one-page 
supplement. Much of the supplement was devoted to an MCP docu-
ment describing the ramifications of the Loi Tak case. The MCP had 
lost track of him and had not expelled him from the MCP until 
December when they issued a detailed denunciation of their former 
Secretary General. The MSS went on to say that morale had been 
severely damaged by the Loi case. The MCP made a frantic plea to their 
members to trust their leaders and each other now that the case had 
been investigated and the culprit punished. The MSS concluded this 
issue of the Journal with reference to BMA arrests and banishments by 
remarking optimistically that measures should not be hampered by fear 
of world opinion and that all subversive organisations should be banned. 
Had they had more staff, and had their customers pressed for a focused 
threat assessment, their Political Journal would have been more likely to 
be enlightening.
  Analysis of the pre-Emergency period and of the successes of the 
Emergency itself shows that poor intelligence structures and a lack of 
intelligence can both be remedied successfully.


	
25
2
VIETNAM
A CAN OF WORMS
‘Dick, I need a paper on Viet Nam, and I’ll tell you what I want included in it.’
President Johnson to Richard (Dick) Helms, 
Director of Central Intelligence (DCI)
‘CIA was the bearer of bad tidings throughout the Vietnam War, and [its analy-
sis] was not very happily received by any of the policymakers’.
Ray Cline, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (DDCI)
‘We have been projecting an image of success over the recent months… Now, 
when we release the figure of 420,000–431,000, the newsmen will … [draw] 
an erroneous and gloomy conclusion as to the meaning of the increase. … In 
our view the strength figures for the SDF [Self Defence Forces] and SSDF 
[Secret Self Defence Forces] should be omitted entirely from the enemy 
strength figures.’
General Creighton Abrams, Deputy to General William Westmoreland, 
US military commander, August 1967
The Vietnam War proffers a variety of lessons on intelligence. Better 
intelligence at the earlier stages of the might may have improved 
Western leaders’ understanding of the nature of the problem posed by 
North Vietnam and their chances of success. An over-reliance on esti-

why spy?
26
mates of enemy numbers combined with limited understanding of the 
people of Vietnam led policymakers to make decisions that later proved 
questionable. Above all, there was a growing conflict between intelli-
gence assessments and optimistic policymakers’ opinions on the enemy’s 
circumstances and the prospects of success. The Vietnam case is a prime 
example of a government indulging in wishful thinking for many years 
and ignoring inconvenient intelligence.
  The observations about intelligence in the Vietnam War that follow 
are based on personal experience. I set out for Hanoi, the capital city of 
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, the northern, communist half of 
Vietnam, in August 1967. I had been dragged away in a hurry from 
Kuala Lumpur without time to read up or meet experts. So my mind 
was open when I arrived in Hanoi. I was briefed by several officials in 
Saigon on my way, all of whom seemed to have swallowed General 
Westmoreland’s line that the war of attrition was succeeding. My most 
useful meeting was with the Canadian Ambassador who invited me to 
look after the minute Canadian team in Hanoi, sheltering under the flag 
of the International Control Commission (ICC), which had been set up 
in order to monitor the ceasefire after the departure of the French in 
1954. The ICC had long since ceased to be relevant but, unlike me, they 
had diplomatic privileges, and by some extraordinary stroke of luck their 
senior non-commissioned officer was, like me, a Black Watch veteran.
  Driving into Hanoi we passed the Paul Doumer Bridge. A notice 
informed those who could read Chinese that the bridge had been 
repaired by the Chinese Army as a token of the eternal friendship 
between the people of China and Vietnam. The notice was a reminder 
that, for the moment, North Vietnam was receiving generous military 
support from China.
  I had penetrated the bamboo curtain as the representative of a coun-
try which, although not actually engaged in the battlefield, was a close 
ally of the US. 
 Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam, housed a large 
embassy, and was where Westmoreland and his staff were directing a vast 
military effort against the Vietnamese communists (known as the 
Vietcong, or the VC) in all its forms. It was not clear why the North 
Vietnamese allowed us to maintain our Hanoi post. Although we were 
not in any way belligerents, it was hardly a secret that we had some 
sympathy with the US. 
 Perhaps the Vietnamese calculated that we could 
do little harm and might some day provide a useful link to Britain. 

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
27
Twenty-five years later, however, they refused me a tourist visa, while the 
Chinese on the other hand never gave me the slightest problems when I 
returned as a private citizen.
  For most of 1967 and 1968 I was based in Hanoi, where I was called 
Consul General by the British but Mr 
 Stewart by the Vietnamese. The 
job was odd in that there were no British subjects in North Vietnam for 
me to look after, and there were not likely to be any so long as the war 
continued. It was a much more restricted post than Beijing and 
Shanghai. In Hanoi there were no British at all and there were few for-
eigners apart from the diplomats and the ICC. 
 The French were the only 
other Western diplomats in town. They, of course, were anti-American. 
My only friends were from the French, Indonesian, Egyptian and Indian 
contingents. The rest of the Diplomatic Corps were either from the 
Soviet Bloc or left-leaning Third World countries.
  I am convinced that we more than earned our keep in this post, sup-
plying a perspective on North Vietnam which was not available to our 
allies. It was a very privileged position to have: Western capitalist run-
ning dogs of the American imperialists were not, in general, welcome. 
While there are considerable advantages to having an intelligence base 
housed in a diplomatic mission, the down side is that the enemy can 
usually identify the intelligence officers. There is no simple answer to 
whether this diplomatic cover solution is superior to the ‘natural cover’ 
solution. Establishing the latter is a slow process.
  I did not have diplomatic privileges or immunity, a fact that made 
for serious reflection on the occasion that I was arrested by a mob of 
Red Guards and imprisoned. Our movements were severely restricted, 
so our choice of sources was small indeed. But we were on the ground, 
and so had a view denied to the embassies in Saigon. We could see the 
people and the shops, and draw some conclusions about the food situ-
ation, health and morale. This direct experience was a valuable ingredi-
ent for assessors struggling to put together an intelligence mosaic. I am 
sure that even if our assessment was gloomy, the US was grateful for our 
moral support.
  I had little opportunity to discuss the war with officials. Except for 
brush contacts with members of the Politburo, the government’s senior 
policymaking committee, at receptions, my only contact was with the 
Foreign Affairs Bureau of the Municipality. They were not anxious to 
develop a friendship. Nonetheless, the post gave me some feeling for the 

why spy?
28
realities in North Vietnam, including a grandstand view of the air war 
in the sky above Hanoi. Having worked for so many years in Asia and 
learnt several Asian languages, I was in a better position to enjoy my 
posting than most foreign diplomats. It was not difficult for me to learn 
the basics of Vietnamese and read my way round the town while my 
colleagues remained ‘blind’. My reports from Hanoi, which can be read 
in The National Archives in London, are a reminder of how much one 
can learn without secret sources, a lesson that was reinforced during my 
time in China (see Chapter Three).
  My experience working in Asia helped me to avoid mirror imaging, 
the label often given to the trap of assuming that everyone thinks the 
way that you do (see Chapter Six). It was understandable that the army 
of Westerners and analysts, knowing the conditions in which the North 
Vietnamese regular and irregular forces lived, and the weight of bombs 
thrown against their country, should conclude that morale must be low 
and the Politburo ready to negotiate; and no doubt anti-communist 
sources in the South anxious to encourage the US to continue the fight 
exaggerated the plight of the North Vietnamese. But my hunches were 
proved right when the North Vietnamese fought on until the US 
became tired. It mattered little whether the enemy numbered 300,000 
(the military’s estimate) or 600,000 (the CIA’s estimate, which took into 
account irregular forces). What mattered more than their numbers were 
morale and the determination of the communist leaders.
Historical Background and Overview of the War
The territory now known as Vietnam had, for two thousand years, suf-
fered foreign invasions, shifting frontiers and cultural intrusions. By the 
middle of the nineteenth century the French were moving from a mis-
sionary presence to the development of a colonial government. The 
seeds of the Vietnam War were sown during the Second World War. The 
Japanese, constrained by their membership of the Tripartite Axis 
(Germany, Italy and Japan) dealt softly with the Vichy French and the 
Vietnamese, so the VC (the communists) did not suffer, as the MCP 
had, from the attentions of the Japanese Secret Police.
  In March 1945 the Japanese took off the velvet gloves, deposed the 
French and installed Bao Dai as puppet Emperor. The Free French had 
not yet arrived, and so an unfortunate British general, Douglas Gracey, 

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
29
had, from August 1945, the thankless task of trying to keep order in the 
mess as communists and criminals stepped into the vacuum. When the 
French Army arrived they found themselves facing a belligerent and 
increasingly powerfully armed Communist Party leading a United 
Front, which demanded that the French relinquish their colonial claims. 
Having mounted a guerrilla war Ho Chi Minh, the leader of the VC, 
declared himself President of Vietnam. In December 1945 the first 
French naval shell was fired at Hanoi. The new war had started.
  It was in 1954, after a catastrophic defeat, that the French gave up 
their supposedly impregnable fortress at Dien Bien Phu, built to show 
the VC that the French could dominate the hinterland. They had 
planned to supply, reinforce and support the fortress by air, but General 
Vo Nguyen Giap managed to drag the VC’s guns up the steep hills 
overlooking Dien Bien Phu and so interdicted their logistics. The defeat 
was a demonstration that a ‘raggedy-assed, little fourth-rate country’ 
(the phrase used ten years later by President Johnson) might be able, 
with ingenuity coupled to muscle power and fighting spirit, to defeat a 
more powerful opponent. It was, of course, ironic that the US, tradi-
tionally deep-rooted critics of all forms of colonialism, should pick up 
the baton, and they were woefully unprepared for the mammoth and 
complex nature of the long-term postcolonial task ahead.
The US’ Decades of Intervention
The 1954 Geneva Agreement divided Vietnam along the 17th Parallel 
into a communist North and a non-communist South. As the French 
withdrew the US began to increase their presence, and soon the US was 
contributing 75 per cent of the South Vietnam Government budget. By 
1963 the US Military Advisory Group numbered nearly 17,000, but 
many of the South Vietnam Army (ARVN) made poor use of US weap-
ons and training. The Vietnamese leaders failed throughout the war to 
convince the young people of South Vietnam that the anti-communist 
cause was worth dying for. The hearts and minds campaign, which had 
been central to success in Malaya by persuading the people to support 
the British rather than the CTs, could not be replicated in Vietnam.
  In August 1964 a report alleging that a North Vietnamese torpedo 
boat had attacked the US Destroyer Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin gave 
Johnson a pretext for a dramatic increase in US military involvement. 

why spy?
30
By 1965 there were 81,400 US soldiers on the ground. By 1973, when 
the US withdrew, there were over half a million and Westmoreland was 
claiming that a further 100,000 would do the job.
  Of course US military officers believed that the VC could not con-
tinue the battle in the face of massive aerial bombardment of their 
industries and their infrastructure. It was difficult for regular officers 
serving in the most sophisticated and logistically well endowed army in 
the world to grasp the strength of a peasant army. The needs of the 
North Vietnamese Army (NVA) could be met by gangs of ‘coolies’ push-
ing bicycles which might carry as much as 200 kilograms of supplies. 
Their supply route, the Ho Chi Minh Trail, could not be destroyed by 
aerial bombardment; the Commander in Chief, Pacific Command 
(CINCPAC) once showed me aerial photographs with fresh tracks mak-
ing a detour round every crater, so that within hours of a successful 
bombardment the bicycle convoy could once more trickle southwards.
  A senior US State Department official remarked to me that, since the 
US did not have any equivalent to our Colonial Service to provide offi-
cers ready to immerse themselves for the long-term in Vietnamese cul-
ture and language, the battle was probably hopeless. Officers, temporar-
ily seconded from the State Department, the CIA and the police and so 
on, however energetic, could not be expected to perform as effectively 
as Colonial Service Officers who had chosen to specialise overseas. The 
US soon discovered, as they did in Afghanistan and Iraq after the terror-
ist attacks of 11 
 September 2001 (9/11), that it was easier to win battles 
than to win hearts and minds or to help a foreign country where there 
was no effective administration. Not that winning battles is any easier, 
especially when the public at home turns against a war because of the 
number of soldiers returning in body bags.
  Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defence from 1961 to 1968, and the 
business-trained people, whom he had introduced into the Pentagon, 
were led astray by the pseudo science of the numbers game, a danger 
that all would do well to be wary of. Their extrapolations from numbers, 
such as enemy body counts and the weight of bombs dropped, sup-
ported an assessment that the enemy was bleeding to death. Their assess-
ments of the effects of bombing the Ho Chi Minh Trail ignored the 
difference between the heavy logistical requirements of a Western army 
and the light requirements of VC foot soldiers, and the fact that, since 
the VC armaments came from Soviet and Chinese factories, the bomb-

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
31
ing of North Vietnam had no effect on armament production. As the 
war dragged on, McNamara became increasingly uneasy, yet his official 
assessments for the President still continued to be optimistic.
  A newly retired US general told me that he had left the army because 
he could see no merit in the war and that when he had polled almost 
200 retired generals, to his astonishment the majority had expressed 
doubts about the US objective. The same general described to me the 
numbers game as it was played in Saigon. The staff were required to 
compile reports on military progress which was based on over sixty so-
called statistical indicators, such as the numbers of enemy and kill ratios. 
This methodology produced a stream of optimistic reports leading to the 
conclusion that the North Vietnamese would be unable to continue the 
fight. But my general remarked, ‘unfortunately in this war the will 
power as well as material power was required.’ It was true that the US 
had the power but the Vietcong had the will.
  Not all presidential advisers were optimistic. As early as 1961, John 
Kenneth Galbraith, the US’s Ambassador to India, the country which 
chaired the ICC, wrote a report for President John F. 
 Kennedy in which 
he said ‘[Ngo Dinh] Diem [the President of South Vietnam] will not 
reform either administratively or politically in any effective way’ and 
that Diem had ‘effectively resisted improvement for a long while in [the] 
face of heavy deterioration.’ In December 1962 Senator Mike Mansfield 
told the Senate that despite the US’s two billion dollar investment, ‘after 
seven years of the Republic, South Vietnam appears less, not more sta-
ble’. By 1963 Kennedy had begun to consider disengagement.
  An early State Department assessment predicted that President Diem 
would fall, 500,000 US troops would be sucked into the conflict and 
the war would last for at least ten years. The authors of such gloomy 
reports were endangering their careers: such pessimistic appreciations are 
easily dismissed as defeatist. Unpalatable assessments also came from 
elsewhere. In 1966, for example, a group of forty-seven non-government 
specialists were brought together by the Institute of Defence Analysis to 
look at the results of twelve months of ‘Rolling Thunder’, the heavy air 
bombardment of the North. The group, which had access to all intelli-
gence which was available to the US Government, concluded that the 
bombing had not affected North Vietnam’s will to fight, nor created 
serious difficulties in transportation, economy or morale.
  McNamara eventually lost confidence in his number-based method-
ology. In his 1995 autobiography he confessed:1

why spy?
32
‘We misjudged … the geopolitical intentions of our adversaries…’
  This may be true but not of central importance.
‘We viewed the people and leaders of South Vietnam in terms of our own 
experience. We saw in them a thirst for—and a determination to fight for—
freedom and democracy. We totally misjudged the political forces within the 
country.’
  The naiveté in seeing a thirst for democracy is an example of mirror 
imaging. There was indeed a misjudgement of the political forces.
‘We underestimated the power of nationalism to motivate a people … to fight 
and die for their beliefs and values …’
  This comment suggests insufficient expertise on patriotism. McNamara 
might have added ‘and the strength of resentment against foreign 
occupation’.
‘Our misjudgements of friend and foe alike reflected our profound ignorance 
of the history, culture, and politics of the people in the area, and the personali-
ties and habits of their leaders.’
  This is spot on: the ignorance was profound.
‘We failed … to recognize the limitations of modern, high-technology military 
equipment, forces, and doctrine, in confronting unconventional, highly-moti-
vated people’s movements.’
  This was a further example of the US having fallen into the trap of 
mirror imaging.
‘We failed to recognize that in international affairs … there may be problems 
for which there are no immediate solutions.’
  A depressing but sensible realisation. This failure was an example of 
wishful thinking: mixing hope with reality.
‘[We failed] to organize the top echelons of the executive branch [in the US] to 
deal effectively with the extraordinarily complex range of political and military 
issues [in Vietnam].’
  A not unusual failure to educate the end user of intelligence.
  This is a refreshing litany of self-criticism by a Cabinet Officer who 
had held major policy responsibility for the conduct of the war. It con-
firmed the comments I had made in my final despatches from Hanoi in 

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
33
1968. My last one noted that there was no sign of a break in the will of 
the party or the spirit of the people, which might have justified hope of 
significant concessions to bring the bombing to an end or to achieve an 
early peace. It continued by noting that the withdrawal of foreign troops 
remained at the top of the agenda at peace talks. The intentions of the 
Politburo as seen from Hanoi gave little reason for optimism, and the 
best hope for peace seemed to be that if the US strengthened the ARVN 
and started to withdraw its troops, the communists would allow the war 
to simmer down. This fade out seemed to be the only immediate alter-
native to a continuation of the war.
  It was daunting to remember that my one man band was competing 
with an army of analysts in Saigon, but on the face of it I was right and 
they were wrong. It was difficult for Western assessors to grasp that 
although all the indicators in use in Saigon suggested that the Vietcong 
were losing, this did not mean that morale was cracking. The Hanoi 
population were on short commons, the city was shabby and life austere, 
but morale held firm, despite the bombings. Morale was more impor-
tant than military power in Vietnam, where the Vietcong were fighting 
on home ground and the invaders were thousands of miles from home 
and had difficulty in understanding why they were there.
  The intelligence personnel preparing figures purporting to show the 
strength of the NVA made decisions that had the undesirable effect of 
misleading the recipients of this intelligence. US military estimates 
omitted militia, guerrillas and civilian irregulars from the total strength 
of the NVA. 
 This military definition, in effect only considering uni-
formed soldiers, produced a strength of about 300,000, while the inclu-
sion of the non-uniformed supporters produced a figure of 600,000. A 
compromise was reached whereby no numbers were given for the non-
uniformed irregulars and this manipulation of figures gave false encour-
agement to the US Government. The Tet Offensive revealed that this 
optimism was misplaced.
The Tet Offensive
In January 1968, Westmoreland reported that the previous year ‘ended 
with the enemy increasingly resorting to desperation [sic] tactics… The 
friendly picture gives rise to optimism for increased successes in 1968.’ 
By 25 
 January intelligence led him to report instead that events seem to 

why spy?
34
be ‘shaping up as a D-Day for widespread pre-Tet offensive action on 
the part of VC/NVA forces.’
  The Tet (Spring Festival) Offensive of 31 
 January 1968 marked the 
beginning of the end of the US intervention. The VC launched a coun-
trywide assault, penetrated into the heart of Saigon, captured Hue, the 
ancient capital of Annam, and occupied many towns. Westmoreland 
boasted that the offensive had been defeated, while Hanoi boasted that 
they had punched formidable holes. Both proclaimed a famous victory. 
But Johnson was faced with an increasingly hostile media and popula-
tion who asked how, if previous assertions that the US were winning 
were correct, the VC’s offensive had been so successful. Hanoi had dem-
onstrated that they could still give an excellent account of themselves in 
a fire fight, and Hanoi’s declaration of a great victory would not be 
challenged in the Hanoi media.
  Soon after the Tet Offensive I was invited to Singapore where our 
Ambassador in Saigon and I were to lead a discussion. The participants 
would be senior men from the diplomatic, military and intelligence 
professions. As I flew south for the conference, the more I thought 
about the debate and the more worried I became. I was outgunned: it 
was to be a Consul General against a senior Ambassador, and one 
against many, all of whom had access to intelligence and appreciations 
from the US juggernaut in Saigon and knew better than to challenge 
Westmoreland’s view. I decided, therefore, not to waste my breath but 
to write a document entitled ‘Notional Appreciation of the Tet Offensive 
by the Hanoi Politburo’ and to ask the meeting to read it. As I had 
anticipated there was no support for my gloomy analysis that, while it 
was true that the communists had not achieved their final objective, 
they had done huge damage to South Vietnamese morale and won a 
propaganda victory.
Personal Reflections
Bias, complacency and over-reliance on technology all played their part 
in the failure in Vietnam, but ignorance of history also made a major 
contribution. A nation that had beaten the British Regular Army in the 
eighteenth century should have been better able to understand the 
strength of an irregular force fighting on home ground against a regular 
army from abroad.

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
35
  Throughout my time in Hanoi I reported that morale remained high 
among the Vietnamese. They were determined to fight on until, like the 
Chinese long before and the French more recently, the US decided to go 
home. After Hanoi, I met some of the principal US players in this war: 
Dick Helms, DCI, William (Bill) Colby, a future DCI, and others. I 
found that my views were in most respects shared by the CIA’s intelli-
gence wing.
  On my way back to Britain I called on Helms, the DCI of the day. He 
was pessimistic. He saw the growing anti-war feeling all round, not 
merely among students and parents, and assumed correctly that soon the 
US would have to seek a way out of a war which had already taken the 
lives of 15,000 US soldiers. I found it uncomfortable to be mixing with 
friends in the operations and intelligence side of the CIA whose daily 
work was to support the war effort in Vietnam when they did not believe 
in the war or that it could be won. Many of them were troubled because 
their children were about to be drafted, or were being sucked into the 
peace movement. I also once had the opportunity to debate these topics 
with Zbigniew Brzezinski the Presidential Adviser. He agreed that the US 
had underestimated the will of the North Vietnamese.
  Yet there were still civilians who were confident of victory in the 
long-term. Among them was an old friend, Bill Colby, a devout Roman 
Catholic and a committed anti-communist, who later became Director 
of the CIA. 
 In my Hanoi time Colby was Director of the Pacification 
programme, which had borrowed heavily from Malayan experience. He 
remained certain that had the US persevered the communists would 
give up the armed struggle. He did not take into account the limited 
appetite of US society for a long painful war on the other side of the 
world nor that in Malaya we had been part of the government, not 
merely advisers.
  The US should, however, be given credit for its role in preventing the 
fall of other non-communist dominoes in South East Asia. Some argue 
that the domino theory was disproved by the fact that, although the VC 
won in Vietnam, the rest of the dominoes in South East Asia did not 
fall. But without the US’s intervention the outcome might have been 
very different. The twenty years that intervened between the withdrawal 
of the French and the withdrawal of the US gave a breathing space to 
the potential dominoes of Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesia.

why spy?
36
The Intelligence Performance
The Vietnam War has been scrutinised in a multitude of public and 
private inquires; most in the spirit of a search for scapegoats in the tradi-
tion of the investigations that responded to the Pearl Harbor disaster. 
The evidence suggests that overall the intelligence community did a 
good job, although they were never able to satisfy their customers, nor 
able to provide a clear warning that Giap might be about to break the 
Tet truce and launch an attack on Saigon, Hue and other towns.
  The CIA’s Intelligence Directorate was not guilty of over-optimism. 
A CIA paper dated 2 
 December 1967 said that there was no evidence of 
a weakening of the communist will. Although US intelligence recog-
nised Giap’s tactical skills because of his resounding victory at Dien Bien 
Phu, it underestimated his talent as a strategist and as a consequence 
intelligence did not look for a strategic plan. The ferocity of the attack 
on the US’s Khe San base in January 1968 convinced US intelligence 
that the NVA intended to inflict a crippling defeat on US forces in the 
tradition of Dien Ben Phu. The Khe San operation was a brilliant decep-
tion ploy that seemed to provide good evidence that Giap was engaging 
in a battle for the countryside.
  Insufficient weight was given to intelligence from the ARVN. 
 So 
when, immediately before the Tet Offensive captured VC tapes sug-
gested that the VC were taking an unhealthy interest in the cities, the 
reports were not highlighted. Intelligence professionals believed the 
stories that Giap had disappeared from public view because he had fallen 
out of political favour. This was wishful thinking: instead, he was busy 
planning the Tet Offensive.
  Intelligence reporting was insufficiently wary of the optimistic reports 
about the strength of anti-communist feeling in South Vietnam. There 
seemed to be little awareness of the danger that informants might have 
a motive to provide information designed to please their US contacts 
and to encourage them to continue the battle. Reports that contradicted 
the rosy picture of ardent anti-communists were likely to get short shrift. 
And intelligence did not emphasise the fact that, although people may 
have been anti-communist, they did not enjoy a host of trigger-happy 
foreign troops swarming over their country. If McNamara’s team had 
been augmented by people who had studied the intelligence lessons of 
the past, he might have learned much earlier how flawed his assessment 
system was. On the other hand, perhaps such a person, rocking boats by 

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
37
challenging mirror imaging and commonly held opinions, could not 
have worked in the Pentagon. Ultimately the outcome of the war 
depended on the workings of the human mind: endurance, morale, 
loyalty, national pride, and so on. You can count the number of tanks, 
discover their technical specifications, capabilities, and reliability, but 
you can only guess about human spirit and willpower as the Germans 
found to their cost at the battle of Stalingrad in 1942–3.
The Malayan Red Herring
Whether the conflicts are examined in terms of intelligence lessons 
alone, or lessons to be drawn from other aspects, differences abound 
between the Malayan Emergency and the Vietnam War. The fundamen-
tal reason why there was little chance of replicating the Malayan victory 
in Vietnam, however, was that in Malaya we had been part of the gov-
ernment, whereas in Vietnam the US was not and the governments they 
were trying to support were ineffective.
  I did not expect that the musings of an ex-Malayan civil servant tem-
porarily living in Hanoi would have much impact. Westmoreland, 
unlike Templer in Malaya, could not grasp the fact that the solution 
depended as much on politics as on military might. Furthermore, I 
doubted that the advice of my old ex-Malayan friends in the British 
Advisory Group in Saigon could be of much help. It was true that the 
enemy in both cases were communists, and that both countries were in 
South East Asia, but there the similarities ended.
  Militarily the differences could hardly have been greater. The VC was 
receiving generous aid from the Soviet Union and China; men for their 
anti-aircraft defences, training teams, engineers to repair their roads and 
bridges. By contrast, the only support the MCP got from their com-
munist brothers was rhetoric. Most of the MCP soldiers, never more 
than 12,000 strong, had been skulking in jungle camps, surrendered or 
retired to sanctuary in Thailand. The VC armed forces, numbering hun-
dreds of thousands were fighting major battles, controlled more than 
half the country and had railways, ports and airfields.
  In Malaya we were a colonial government and were working, not as 
dictators, but as co-leaders of a multi-racial team. We spoke Malay, 
Chinese and Indian languages, earned respect by studying the local cus-
toms and spent a lot of time with the local people. Unlike the French in 

why spy?
38
Vietnam who exercised direct rule, we ruled indirectly through local peo-
ple. Each Malay State had a Malay ruler, and the British were ‘Advisers’.
  And then there was the carrot of independence. Our intention to 
leave Malaya in 1957 had been well publicised, so MCP rhetoric about 
the need to fight to gain independence had no resonance. No such 
agreement had been made between the French and the Vietnamese; 
President Charles de Gaulle’s talk of ‘autonomy proportionate to her 
progress and attainments’, was hardly the sort of offer to assuage the 
thirst of an ardent patriot like Ho Chi Minh.
  The composition of the two national Communist Parties was also 
very different. In Vietnam the Party was led by a national hero, Ho Chi 
Minh, whose liberation credentials went back to 1920 when, as Nguyen 
Ai Quoc (Nguyen, lover of his country), he had spoken out vehemently 
in Paris, contrasting the French motto ‘Liberte Egalite Fraternite’ with 
the reality of the French behaviour in Indo China. In Malaya, on the 
other hand, Secretary General Chin Peng, who had replaced Loi Tak, 
was almost unknown. Most members of the MCP were Chinese and so 
they had no nationalist credentials, whereas most members of the 
Vietnamese Communist Party were of Indochinese stock.
  This short analysis suggests that our Malayan experience was of lim-
ited relevance to the US in Vietnam. This is a reminder of the limita-
tions of attempting to transfer lessons directly from one conflict to 
another. I am still looking for a satisfactory explanation for the MCP’s 
touching faith that the people of Malaya would rise up to support them. 
Chin Peng’s 2003 autobiographical work does not provide an answer.2 
Sir Robert Thompson’s (formerly Secretary for Defence in Malaya) advi-
sory team to Vietnam was of limited help in a situation that was so 
totally different. In the absence of viable, dynamic, political leadership 
able to rally the population against the VC, the Malayan precedent was 
almost irrelevant. The essential political foundations for victory, which 
Templer emphasised in Malaya, were lacking in Vietnam.
  Among the lessons learnt by Western policymakers from the Vietnam 
War was to be wary of engaging in asymmetrical warfare against a coun-
try vastly smaller and vastly outgunned but no less determined to fight 
for independence. Intelligence is only one ingredient in success: there 
may be factors in the enemy’s favour that are difficult to eliminate, such 
as morale and assistance from third party sources. What intelligence can 
help with is the identification of a ‘best practice’ approach whilst mea-

VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
	
	
39
suring the chances of success. The Vietnam case clearly shows the danger 
of the numbers game and mirror imaging, and how these two fallacies 
can exacerbate one another.


	
41
3
CHINESE AFFAIRS
‘The enlightened sovereign and the capable commander … achieve successes far 
surpassing those of ordinary people because they possess “foreknowledge”. This 
“foreknowledge” cannot be obtained from ghosts or spirits, nor from gods, nor 
by analogy with past events, nor from astrological calculations. It can only 
come from men who know the enemy situation.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
‘He who lacks wisdom cannot use agents.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
‘He who makes full assessment of the situation at the pre-war council meeting 
… is more likely to win.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
This chapter looks at China through my eyes over a period of almost sixty 
years working in the Colonial Service, Foreign Office and finally as a 
business adviser. During those years I worked with many Chinese col-
leagues in the diaspora as well as in mainland China, watching the coun-
try throw off the shackles of ideology and develop into a world economic 
power. The experiences related by this chapter illustrate how much can 
be done with eyes and ears and friendships without indulging in clandes-
tine intelligence activities. The degree of control that totalitarian states 
have over the amount and type of open source material available does not 

why spy?
42
prevent the collection of overt intelligence, as the example of journalistic 
material demonstrates. Creativity and skill can prove productive when 
seeking intelligence in such states. Indeed, these are useful when engaging 
in the art of intelligence no matter what the target.
  My interest in China began in 1946 when I became a Cadet in the 
Malayan Civil Service and was sent to learn Chinese in Singapore and 
in China. By the time that I returned to Malaya the civil war known 
officially as the ‘Emergency’ was in full swing; the MCP, whose members 
were mainly Malayan Chinese, had gone to war. So the Chinese-
speaking members of the Malayan Civil Service—the Chinese Affairs 
personnel—found themselves at the centre of the action.
  In a country as large as China the general public can be as ignorant as 
the foreigners. In 1948 few Chinese knew what hell Yenan, Mao 
Tsetung’s base in North West China, had been. Yenan was little more 
than a vast gulag, where speech and thought were censored and com-
munication with the outside world was forbidden. Foreign ignorance of 
the truth was understandable: Edgar Snow was the only Western writer 
in Yenan and he chose not to describe the misery. He earned his reputa-
tion by reporting Yenan as some sort of a communist paradise.
  I returned to China in 1960, joining the British Diplomatic Mission 
in Beijing and, the following year, becoming the Consul General 
Shanghai. My years in Beijing and Shanghai coincided with a lull 
between the miseries that came with Mao’s Great Leap Forward and the 
Cultural Revolution. Mao had shown his true nature and China was 
reeling from a series of brutal campaigns designed to revolutionise the 
country regardless of the pain and misery caused. Mao set young against 
old, children against parents, students against teachers, workers against 
management, coining idiotic slogans such as ‘better red than expert’, 
disparaging all traditional learning and art, and mocking antiquities. He 
demonstrated that he was not interested in the welfare of the Chinese. 
But we Westerners did not appreciate the depth of misery and starvation 
which had been brought about by ambitious policies. We were not 
allowed to see the famine and poverty in the countryside. We could 
guess that the leaves of the trees around Beijing had disappeared into the 
locals’ cooking pots, but we did not know that throughout the country-
side millions were starving to death. Fellow travelling foreign journalists 
concealed the truth, and any brave Chinese leaders who challenged Mao 
were dismissed.

CHINESE AFFAIRS
	
	
43
  Sometimes one was able to help the search for truth. I made a contri-
bution when, in the early 1960s, my Head of Mission, the UK’s most 
senior representative in China, asked for confirmation of the rumour 
that there had been a serious breakdown in Sino-Soviet relations and 
that the 12,000 Russian experts and their wives were being sent home. 
My response was to immediately monitor the railway station. While the 
rest of the diplomatic community were still debating the rumour we 
observed thousands of Russian experts and their loot-laden wives board-
ing the trains to Moscow. The Sino-Soviet relationship was indeed in 
trouble. The Sovietologists, the intelligence community and academia’s 
specialists on the Soviet Union, were prone to take inexplicable Soviet 
stories as disinformation, and were no doubt surprised to find that this 
time the rumour was true.
  The Chinese Security authorities must have gnashed their teeth over 
the fact that foreigners were able, from bases outside China, to intercept 
the Chinese internal public broadcasts. Local newspapers also provided 
some information. The bar at the top of Beijing’s Qianmen Hotel was 
of help too. This was the drinking hole of the few journalists who had 
somehow managed to obtain a visa. The visitors in my time included 
Han Su Yin. I did not tell her that I had been responsible for banning 
her book about Malaya. Of course, all these people were ‘fellow travel-
lers’. They earned their visas by reporting that China was in good shape, 
and by repeating the statements of the senior Chinese they interviewed. 
However, Su Yin was half Chinese and the West found it easy to believe 
the rosy picture she painted. She was badly caught out later, however, 
when the Cultural Revolution ended and the horrific truth emerged.
  On several occasions I had to use my Chinese language skills to extri-
cate foreign Ambassadors who had been taking photographs. Usually 
the problem was some peasant soldier or police officer who had been 
brainwashed into believing that all foreigners were spies; sometimes it 
was an overzealous local who thought that a picturesque dilapidated 
temple was not an appropriate subject for a picture. On one occasion 
the head of the British Foreign Office was arrested in the Western Hills 
when looking for the temple where he had lived as a young language 
student. I knew that we were slightly out of bounds but I was able to 
extricate our distinguished visitor by warning the Chinese soldiers, who 
surrounded us with bayonets fixed, that they would be responsible if 
they prevented our party from attending the banquet to which their 

why spy?
44
Foreign Minister had invited us. Fortunately I had a cutting from a 
Beijing newspaper supporting my tale. I often rescued Ambassadors who 
were guilty of nothing more sinister than their incompetence with their 
expensive cameras and thus lingered too long in one place.
  The Chinese authorities tolerated my non-diplomatic habits although 
the Shanghai Public Security Bureau (PSB) warned my best Chinese 
friend that she should not be seeing me because I was too ‘sharp’. 
Fortunately she paid no attention. However the PSB did their best to 
discourage me from travelling by delaying my permits until the last 
moment assuming I would have no time to buy tickets. They had not 
recognised that I spoke Chinese and was quite capable of buying tickets 
at the railway station by myself. I made the most of these chances to see 
more of China.
  But what, you may ask, was the benefit to Her Majesty’s Government 
of all this travel? It was true that I was not collecting any information 
that in a democratic open society could be called secret. But we were in 
a police state and foreigners were only supposed to know the Party line. 
In the two cities where foreigners lived, court notices, legal information, 
sentencing and so on were not displayed. By contrast, the smaller cities 
seldom visited by foreigners were festooned with interesting notices, and 
the PSB forgot that some of us could read Chinese.
  These public notices provided a commentary on the scene which was 
not to be found in the national papers. Small beer indeed, but beer 
denied to those who never left the capital, and could not read Chinese. 
To a limited extent I could do the job of a military attaché, using eyes 
and ears. I had an advantage over the rest of the embassy staff; I had 
spent a great deal more time in Chinese society than they.
  My use of these kinds of intelligence sources allowed me to predict 
that Deng Xiaoping would become the leader of China, but not that he 
would open China to the world. Fortunately my Ambassador seemed to 
approve of my methods. I became his tourist guide, and the papers in 
The National Archives suggest that London and Washington appreciated 
my reporting, which was based on open source material. Yet no-one 
understood Mao. We could only guess that there were dissident voices in 
his councils. I had pleaded with Nien Cheng, my friend in Shanghai, that 
she should stay away when she next made one of her regular business 
trips to Hong Kong before there was another campaign against bourgeois 
Chinese with Western connections. But it did not occur to either of us 

CHINESE AFFAIRS
	
	
45
that the next campaign would be much more violent: that Mao would 
rather wreck China than give power to moderates. Three years later the 
Cultural Revolution followed. I missed it but Nien spent five years in 
solitary confinement accused, among other things, of espionage.1
  Nien was certainly not an agent. Her background knowledge of the 
China scene was, however, invaluable to me. When, for example, the 
Embassies in Beijing were worrying about the appearance of masses of 
Chinese pressing against the border fence around Hong Kong, wonder-
ing whether China was about to swamp the area, Nien correctly assessed 
that this was an accident. The Canton Authorities had relaxed their exit 
rules and the public was simply trying to emigrate. We failed to under-
stand the scale of the disasters created by Mao’s policies and no-one, 
Chinese or foreign, foresaw the Cultural Revolution.
  My diplomatic spell in China had coincided with the winding down 
of the Great Leap Forward that had installed a steel plant in every vil-
lage, communal feeding, and interference in agricultural practices. I was 
lucky to leave before the Cultural Revolution. My successor stood in the 
sun for a day in Shanghai confronted by baying mobs, and our embassy 
in Beijing was invaded and burnt. Foreign observers did not know the 
scale of the disasters nor the depth of the tensions between Mao and his 
senior colleagues. Those who strongly opposed policies which starved 
China in order to allow Mao to play the rich uncle to the Third World 
were hounded to painful deaths.
  In 1982 I returned to China as an adviser to companies anxious to 
exploit the ‘opening’ of the PRC. 
 When Deng Xiaoping became leader 
of China in 1978 he began to lead the country into a new relationship 
with the world, one in which it began to open its doors to cooperation 
and to seek investment. It took many years to undo the collectivist ideas 
which for thirty years had plagued modern China, but by 1980 a start 
had been made by encouraging small businesses. It was remarkable how 
much I was able to achieve without institutional support. I met Jiang 
Zemin at a time that the China-watching community had never heard 
of him, shortly before he became President of China, and proceeded 
with his help and that of his Chief Scientist to find a great deal of useful, 
profitable business.
  As for predictions, I did rather better than most of the pundits who 
in the 1980s, year after year, warned that China was heading for a crash. 
Their judgement, I think, was coloured by irritation that China was not 

why spy?
46
listening to our talk about human rights, democracy and rule of law. 
Thirty years later China still seems to be doing quite well.
  All of these tales from China are illustrations of how much can be 
achieved without secret sources. Long service in Asia, making friends 
and using my eyes and ears was the basis for my activities, not spying. It 
is rare for diplomats, reporters, academics or intelligence officers to be 
allowed to specialise as I did. There were reporters like Dennis 
Bloodworth who stuck with Asia but they were rare birds indeed.
  Here we might come back to a central problem about assessment. 
Analysts are easily and constantly influenced by the priorities of their 
own cultures. They find it hard to remember that other countries have 
different priorities. It was I suppose easier for me, having so many 
Chinese friends over so many years, to remember. For two happy years 
in the 1940s I immersed myself in Chinese life assisted by five teachers 
who were as much friends as tutors. Three were men dressed in scholars’ 
gowns: a seventy-year old roué, Him Po, smoking opium and a mine of 
information on Chinese society; his brother, Ah Baat, married to a mil-
lionaire’s daughter; the third a son of the last Manchu commander in 
Canton. Twenty years later, in Beijing, at 6 a.m. every morning I con-
tinued my language and cultural studies, struggling through the daily 
papers with my teachers’ help, improving my Mandarin and learning the 
communist jargon. My colleagues and I assumed that all our Chinese 
contacts were subject to PSB control and monitoring and acted accord-
ingly. Nevertheless these daily conversations helped me to assess infor-
mation through the lens of locals. It remains a mystery why the authori-
ties sent me such delightful unreconstructed teachers.
Conclusion
The insight that I had gained during my student days and official post-
ings to China proved very useful when I returned as a business adviser. 
It soon became apparent that I was ‘one up’ on the other foreign com-
panies trying to break into the China market, who were all flying blind, 
advised by hosts of bankers, lawyers and consultants. Knowing the 
Chinese language I was on the inside track. Twenty-five years later I left 
a retired Chinese Major General of Signals to take my place. A career in 
intelligence is not necessarily a handicap to a further career.

PART TWO
THE MACHINERY AND METHODOLOGY 
OF INTELLIGENCE


	
49
4
THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY 
OF INTELLIGENCE
‘There is no room for either politics or partisanship in the way the intelligence 
community performs its functions.’
George Tenet, DCI, 2001
‘I want one dog to kick, but when it comes to intelligence, I have to go down 
to the pound!’
Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defence
‘[P]ut good people in those jobs, give them clear direction and hold them 
accountable for their performance, and I think that’s probably more important 
than whatever reporting arrangements we have.’
Richard Cheney, Vice President to George W.  Bush, 2002
This chapter, discussing the machinery of an intelligence community, 
reminds us that failure may occur at any stage of the intelligence pro-
cess; so there is little point in talking of intelligence failure without 
pinpointing which part or parts of the machine failed. The complexity 
of the machinery of intelligence and security in modern times, whether 
in a democratic or a police state, is immense, and we can only scratch 
the surface of the topic here. The electronic revolution has brought new 
techniques of intelligence collection and therefore innumerable new 

why spy?
50
opportunities and problems for security and intelligence agencies, which 
need an ever-growing army of people for mundane tasks such as record 
keeping and tracing. The computer enables such matters as cross refer-
ences to be dealt with at a speed well beyond the capacity of what the 
CIA used to affectionately call ‘the ladies in tennis shoes’: but unlike 
those ladies the computer has no folk memory. In the 1970s, the CIA’s 
operational officers were already bemoaning the retirement of their 
ladies with their card indexes and elephantine memories; they cannot be 
entirely replicated by computers. The human element at all levels and in 
all forms of activity, remains an essential factor.
  Computers and computer systems can be magical, powerful tools, but 
they also bring problems with them. Edward Snowden’s leaks of classi-
fied material have reminded the US Government of these potential 
problems. Kim Philby and his contemporary spies had to handle reams 
of paper. The size and weight of paper involved in an operational plan 
in earlier days would probably have reminded even the dizziest of staff 
officers of the importance of the package they were carrying. Computers 
can be crammed full with highly sensitive material, and occasionally 
some officer who should know better leaves their laptop lying around.
  There is a further danger in the reliance on computers, which may not 
be recognised: in pre-laptop days a case officer could rely on a secretary 
to follow through on the paperwork while the case officer continued 
their operational duties. Since a case officer’s reputation is more likely to 
be built on success as an agent recruiter and a producer of intelligence 
than on the perfection of their records, it is doubtful whether all are as 
meticulous today as secretaries used to be about record keeping.
  The simplest way to consider the intelligence process is as a chain 
linking the customers—those who receive intelligence from the intelli-
gence services—through assessment, to the material that is reported 
by 
 the collectors of intelligence. A simplified ‘intelligence chain’ is set 
out below:
1.  The customers (political and military decision makers).
2.  The final judgement of the intelligence community (in Britain this is 
produced by the JIC).
3.  The assessors (in Britain, since 1968, this work has been done in the 
Cabinet Office).
4.  The analysts (Defence Intelligence, scientists, and specialists).

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
51
5.  Collectors and sources. In Britain these are:
a)  MI5 (security intelligence).
b)  SIS (foreign intelligence, based in the UK but operating around 
the world).
c)  An independent signals intelligence agency (GCHQ).
d)  Other official sources (military and diplomatic).
e)  Open sources of every kind (media, academic, social).
  Each stage should contribute to a solidly based opinion ready to pres-
ent to the customer. Of course, the theory is easier than the practice. 
The collector may have difficulty in validating a sub source. The analysts 
and assessors may subconsciously give the benefit of the doubt to mate-
rial that supports the received wisdom. Intelligence might be passed on 
to the consumer in its raw form, because of time pressures, leaving it 
liable to criticism or even refutation at a later date. In addition, there is 
nothing to stop a strong willed Prime Minister from insisting on seeing 
the raw material as Churchill did. But national leaders, who insist on 
being their own Intelligence Chiefs, can do great harm to their nations 
and the world. The machinery discussed in this chapter is the ideal, but 
even in a democratic government inconvenient intelligence can be 
rejected or ignored. This chapter concerns the parts of the intelligence 
community, including comment on the US example that I have 
observed, the British example, which I have participated in, and the 
roles that customers, assessors, analysts and collectors of intelligence 
should play in trying to produce national intelligence answers.
Coordination of an Intelligence Community
‘I am going to force them [the intelligence bureaucracies] to cooperate.’
John M.  (Mike) McConnell, Director of National Intelligence (DNI), 2007
‘The objective should be that processing of deployment orders and obtaining 
other bureaucratic clearances can be accomplished in minutes and hours, not 
days and weeks.’
Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defence, 2002
  Coordination is a fine concept, but effective coordination is hard to 
achieve. Coordinating so complex a machine, employing an army of 
people, is a monumentally difficult problem. Obviously there should be 

why spy?
52
an attempt to coordinate, but we should be realistic about expectations. 
In 1968 Sir Dick White, formerly Head first of MI5 and then of SIS, 
was appointed to the newly created Cabinet post of Intelligence 
Coordinator; but he knew full well the limitations of his role. The intel-
ligence and security agencies were independent organisations with their 
own budgets, and they were not subordinate to the Coordinator, or even 
to the JIC. 
 Their masters were elsewhere in Whitehall: the Foreign 
Office, Home Office, and Ministry of Defence. White was an adviser: 
the only thing he commanded was respect. If the intelligence agencies 
or the JIC did not like his advice, they were at liberty to ignore it.
The US experience
The US intelligence community faces the largest problem of national 
coordination in the Western world. It has a growing annual budget well 
over $50 billion and employs over 100,000 people. Even if all were part 
of a uniformed, disciplined service, their efforts would be hard to coor-
dinate. But most are civilians from a variety of disciplines and back-
grounds. It took the US fifty years from the creation of their first civilian 
intelligence agency, the CIA, to recognise the folly of expecting one 
person to be simultaneously both director of the CIA and director of the 
national intelligence community. The popular title of intelligence Tsar 
is bandied about, but it is easier to stop people doing things, than to 
coordinate and to inspire people to drop petty jealousies.
  Soldiers at war are motivated to help their comrades in defence or 
attack, but there is no civilian equivalent to that camaraderie. The term 
intelligence community, with its connotations of shared values and col-
legiate spirit, is misleading. This is a community where, in the US for 
example, as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
J. 
 Edgar Hoover once ordered his staff not to speak to CIA officers. The 
term intelligence circus is, perhaps, more appropriate. The tent is large, 
the individual performers often brilliant, but the lion tamer has a very 
different persona to the acrobat or the clown. Similarly the spymaster is 
likely to have a totally different persona to a research officer, cryptogra-
pher or scientist. The only certain common factor in the intelligence 
circus is that everyone in the community is on the government payroll; 
but that does not guarantee collegiality.
  The US’s Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 
created the post of Director of National Intelligence. The post-holder 

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
53
has the coordinating role previously assigned to the DCI, and has 
authority over the community’s budgets. Within two years, though, the 
first DNI, John Negroponte, moved on to the less complex subject of 
diplomacy. His successor, Mike McConnell, a retired four-star Admiral 
of the US Navy, with excellent credentials as a former Director of the 
National Security Agency (NSA), soon discovered that the problems he 
faced were greater than any he had faced in the US Navy. The CIA used 
to say that it was difficult to identify the main enemy; at times the 
enemy within, such as the Pentagon, the State Department or the FBI, 
seemed more of a menace than the enemies without.
  Secretary of Defence Robert Gates, a career CIA officer, had the expe-
rience, wisdom and knowledge to realise the horrendous complexities of 
the task of a DNI and sensibly refused the poisoned chalice. An effective 
DNI, an intelligence Tsar, would have to impose their will and leader-
ship on this vast circus, taming egos, encouraging collegiate spirit and 
initiative, breaking down barriers between agencies and discouraging 
bureaucracy. The requirement was clear, but the problems were daunt-
ing. In February 2007 when McConnell accepted the job, he did so 
reluctantly, from a sense of duty. His dedication to duty was admirable: 
but the job is, in my view, impossible. Even in a police state where world 
and domestic opinion is of little significance and the dictator and their 
henchmen are above the law, the life of an intelligence supremo is not 
for the faint-hearted. Lavrenty Beria, chief of the NKVD, the Soviet 
intelligence agency, achieved some degree of coordination through ter-
ror, but in the process he became so hated and feared by his comrades 
in the Politburo that, as soon as Joseph Stalin, supremo of the Soviet 
Union, was dead they arranged for his arrest and execution.
  No commercial organisations have ever had to manage, motivate and 
inspire such vast numbers scattered over so wide an area, though private 
military and security companies, some of which employ thousands of 
people, are likely to become increasingly involved in intelligence activi-
ties. Civilian government agencies may try to imitate the commercial 
world by attempting to measure performance by reference to targets, but 
such tools are difficult to apply in the intelligence world. It is bogus sci-
ence to put numbers on intelligence results: the budgets are easily estab-
lished, the results difficult to quantify. When it comes to cross border 
cooperation the image of the tower of Babel springs to mind; egos, 
national pride, competing agencies, many languages, differing cultures 
and religions can all play a role, some positive, some a hindrance.

why spy?
54
  The benefits of international cooperation in intelligence, such as the 
sharing of resources, are undoubtedly substantial, and continue to 
encourage cooperation. However, international liaison must be treated 
with care, and creates challenges of coordination. The two services 
involved represent two different nations and each may exploit liaison 
channels to make points in their national interest. A particular danger 
arises when a liaison service receives aid from a ‘big brother’ service. The 
recipient of aid will be tempted to exaggerate threats in order to loosen 
big brother’s purse strings.
  The Iraqi WMD case provided a good example of the difficulty faced 
by the US, in this instance of validating the product of a liaison source. 
In 1998 the German foreign intelligence service (the BND) had 
recruited an Iraqi chemical engineer who had wandered in to a refugee 
camp. The agent, codename CURVEBALL, provided material on the 
subject of chemical warfare, and on the Iraqi regime’s chemical warfare 
capabilities. The BND shared the material with US intelligence, but 
would not allow US officers to meet the source. The material was 
detailed, and CIA analysts found it scientifically and technically sound. 
In October 2002, by which time CURVEBALL’s material had assumed 
considerable importance, a CIA officer was despatched to press the 
BND for access to the source. The BND refused and went on to say it 
was suspected that he may have had a breakdown and even that he was 
perhaps fabricating intelligence. CURVEBALL himself has since pub-
licly admitted that nearly everything he told the BND was false. The 
CURVEBALL example demonstrates that international coordination 
does not only involve the sharing of intelligence, but complex inter-
agency relationships.
The British solution: The Joint Intelligence Committee
There were already coordination problems in Britain in the nineteenth 
century when communications started to move beyond the limits of 
horse or sailing ship, to steam and cable. The speed and variety of mod-
ern communications has changed the world. Good communication, 
however, does not guarantee interdepartmental collaboration. Nor does 
good communication solve the problem of winnowing out, recognising 
and highlighting nuggets of significant intelligence: it increases the 
problem by vastly increasing the amount of ‘chaff’ among which the 

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
55
gems are hidden. Despite these challenges, coordination is important 
and worthwhile. The members of the intelligence circus each have their 
strengths, and without pooling these the maximum benefit from this 
investment of resources cannot be gained. The British solution to coor-
dination is the Joint Intelligence Committee, of which I was Secretary 
from 1968–72. The excellent first volume of its official history was pub-
lished in 2014.1
  The JIC’s role embraces customer and assessor, and it is also the intel-
ligence ‘top table’, looking across the board at intelligence issues, and 
advising government as appropriate. It has no department behind it, only 
a committee room in the Cabinet Office and a small supporting staff of 
seconded officers. As a customer it receives reports from all sources. It is 
the apex of the British assessment machinery, contributing to the final 
drafting process and approving, before circulation, the work of the assess-
ments staff. As the intelligence top table it provides a unique forum for 
clearing ideas and avoiding friction between agencies. The JIC is a 
uniquely British institution, operating by consensus and guided by good 
sense and good manners. It is the envy of foreign counterparts who find 
that interdepartmental collaboration is not easy to achieve by command.
  The JIC developed during the twentieth century, evolving from mili-
tary origins to an all-purpose intelligence committee. Its members 
include the heads of the intelligence agencies, senior members of the 
armed services and senior policymakers from the Ministry of Defence, 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Cabinet Office, Home Office and 
Treasury. The Chairman has usually been a very senior individual hold-
ing a job in the Foreign Office, and the Deputy Chairman was, in my 
time, the Director-General of Defence Intelligence. All the JIC’s mem-
bers had full-time jobs outside the committee. The intelligence agencies 
did not take orders from the Committee or its Chairman.
  The JIC was rarely in the limelight until the saga of the dossier on 
Iraq’s alleged WMD (see Chapter Ten). Agencies have been faced with 
disgruntled officers blowing whistles; civil servants have taken a high 
moral position; Russian spies have been uncovered. All such titbits are 
meat and drink to the headline writers, but the doings of the interde-
partmental committee are not. The British press had fare to offer that 
was far more interesting to most of its readers. The JIC’s business was 
not about James Bond-like operations, but about assessments, most 
probably concerning some country of little interest to the public. If 

why spy?
56
someone on the JIC staff seduced a secretary, or took a drink in the 
office during working hours, the press never knew.
  The JIC’s minutes had to be produced and circulated within twenty-
four hours of each meeting, and so were written without consulting the 
members of the JIC. 
 The Committee’s product was notoriously dry. In 
the JIC Secretariat we prided ourselves on capturing the spirit of the 
debate and recording what the members had intended to say rather than 
what they had actually said. Personalities and verbatim quotes were 
anathema, and sensitive detail went into secret annexes. In the course of 
three-and-a-half years I only had two challenges to the minutes. The first 
was a light hearted tease by my Irish Deputy Chairman who said, ‘those 
minutes of yours last week Brian, were not a record of the meeting that 
I attended.’ The second challenge was serious; a member who had spo-
ken long and learnedly at the previous meeting was not pleased to find 
that his masterpiece had been condensed to, ‘[i]n the course of the dis-
cussion the following point was made.’ His protest was noted but the 
minutes were not changed.
  A general criticism by outsiders was that our minutes were boring and 
our reports over fond of the ‘on the one hand, but on the other’ for-
mula. But it was not the job of the assessment staff to make wild guesses 
or predictions. The JIC output was creditable in relation to the small 
staff involved, and remarkable considering the large staffs with which it 
was competing across the Atlantic.
  The post of Intelligence Coordinator was created in 1968. Sir Dick 
White, the first Coordinator, whom I served for over three years as a 
staff officer, did not imagine that we were in command. I doubt if Sir 
Burke Trend, the Cabinet Secretary of the time, had any illusions about 
the reality either. I have known several of the British Intelligence 
Coordinators, and listened to Sir David Omand, former Security and 
Intelligence Coordinator (a post created in 2002), speak eloquently, and 
know that he has won golden opinions from his colleagues. I wonder, 
however, whether he found it much easier to coordinate independent 
agencies in the 2000s than we did in the 1970s.
  The intelligence community that came closest to effective coordina-
tion may have been that which came to its full flowering under General 
Sir Gerald Templer during the Malayan Emergency of 1948–60 (see 
Chapter One). Templer had the temperament, the background, experi-
ence and staff, and he also had the authority, wearing the hats of High 

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
57
Commissioner and Director of Operations, to impose his will on civil-
ians and soldiers alike.
  When Sir Maurice Oldfield became coordinator of security intelli-
gence in Northern Ireland his first report conceded the unintended 
existence of two principal jobs: the first to oil the wheels of the intelli-
gence machine; the second to blot up the blood spilt in the arguments 
between those participating in the intelligence effort. I had in fact, as 
Secretary of the JIC, tried to do the same thing in minor key. Like 
Oldfield later, I did my best to oil wheels. Although my Whitehall col-
leagues probably thought of me as an ex-colonial officer, specialising in 
Oriental affairs, my earlier experiences as a soldier stationed in Northern 
Ireland, and as a colleague of the government forces fighting the com-
munists in Malaya, had equipped me with some knowledge of subjects 
relevant to ‘the Troubles’. I clashed with Whitehall conventions when I 
introduced the Director of Special Branch, Royal Ulster Constabulary 
(RUC), to our Whitehall committee. My initiative, which seemed to 
have the merit of common-sense behind it, was not welcome. It was 
disappointing to meet the petty-mindedness of some Whitehall depart-
ments; but it was of course a similar attitude to the one which accom-
panied the recommendations by the JIC Far East that the Director of 
the Malayan Security Service should not be invited to join the 
Committee lest his views be too parochial. The Director of SB, RUC, 
was grudgingly allowed to attend. I hope that introducing him was at 
least useful in educating the Whitehall members, who knew little of 
Northern Ireland and had never been there.
  I pointed out to my Whitehall colleagues that I had seen all this 
before in Malaya: the police were outnumbered and demoralised there. 
The situation in Northern Ireland was similar: we had abolished the 
RUC’s auxiliary force (the B Specials) and were reducing the number of 
British troops. My colleagues were appalled and told me that I was a bad 
old colonialist. Alas I was right; when the lid came off the kettle there 
were not enough forces of law and order to put it back on again. I took 
no pleasure from the fact that I was right. It was a classic example of 
wishful thinking and complacency.
  A problem facing any coordinator of intelligence is watertight com-
partments, which can too easily prevent an essential interchange of intel-
ligence. In my JIC days I had been led to believe that the need to sepa-
rate collection from intelligence requirements and analysis of intelligence 

why spy?
58
was fully established. But the distinction was watered down in the pur-
suit of economy. The dossier on WMD in Iraq might have looked sig-
nificantly different if this separation of functions had been properly 
monitored. A case officer without technical background will not be able 
to make an expert judgement on the plausibility of the reporting, and 
independent judgement must be brought to bear, to guard against agent 
handlers becoming overconfident about the reporting of their sources. 
The judgement must not be left to the case officer alone; there must be 
an independent arbiter.
  Although the following sections of this chapter are separated into the 
categories of customers, and collectors, assessors and analysts, many of 
the points made in the latter are those that customers should also bear 
in mind.
The Customers
The ultimate customers and consumers of intelligence are the political 
masters who make policy decisions and their chief military advisers, and 
it is the function of intelligence to support these leaders. Leaders are 
seldom familiar with intelligence matters. President George Bush Snr 
was an exception: he had served as DCI for a short period. Consumers 
may have unrealistic expectations or underestimate intelligence. 
Kennedy lamented after the Bay of Pigs disaster that his experts had 
neither magic wand nor crystal ball. Tenet, DCI before 9/11, had been 
frustrated by the capacity of the US Government to ignore the urgency 
of the situation. Tenet said that ‘the system was blinking red’, but the 
politicians were not on high alert and nor did intelligence matters have 
top priority.
  Failures of intelligence are often the fault not of the professional col-
lectors and assessors, but of the customer who has chosen to ignore or 
reject inconvenient information. As the old saying goes, ‘you can take a 
horse to the water but you cannot make it drink’. Sometimes they may 
decide that despite new inconvenient intelligence, an operation must be 
carried out as planned. A military case in point is the decision of the 
commanders in Operation Market Garden in 1944 to proceed with the 
airborne operation in the Netherlands despite the unwelcome last min-
ute intelligence acquired by air photography about the arrival of a 
Panzer Division in the dropping zone. The airborne forces had been 

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
59
brought to an advanced state of readiness and delay was felt to be 
unacceptable.
  The customers cannot be forced to give weight to inconvenient infor-
mation. But there are none so deaf as those who choose not to hear. 
History has provided many examples of customers rejecting inconve-
nient intelligence. The job of the intelligence community is not finished 
until the customer has been persuaded to take notice.
Collectors and Assessors
The principal job of the collectors, in whatever agency they work, is to 
respond to the intelligence requirements of the policymakers. The col-
lectors’ performance is relatively easily judged; have they, or have they 
not, succeeded in obtaining the raw material needed to meet the intel-
ligence requirements? Their performance should be judged against rea-
sonable criteria: intelligence officers do not, as Helms said, possess 
divine wisdom, and there is no tool available to unlock all the secrets of 
the human mind. Moreover, since no agency has access to unlimited 
resources, it is impossible for them to monitor the globe at all times, 
though international intelligence liaison can help to some extent.
  The assessors’ function is to judge the reliability, accuracy and signifi-
cance of the material provided to them by the collectors and analysts, 
and then to draft papers based on all sources for the customers. There is 
no doubt that the assessors’ job comes with great responsibility. The 
assessors are generalists: they depend on specialists, including those in 
the defence intelligence community, for technical and scientific analysis. 
There was, it seemed to me during my years in the JIC, a tendency to 
keep science and technology out of the debate. I was not very popular 
with the traditionalists when I introduced specialists into our meetings. 
The recriminations after the Iraqi WMD affair suggest that we are still 
guilty of keeping the scientific analysts out of the debate.
Intelligence Requirements
If the intelligence community is to be the servant of the government it 
should concentrate on the targets and priorities set by the government, 
known in the Anglophone community as the ‘requirements’. They must 
also, however, maintain a state of grace so they can respond to the unex-

why spy?
60
pected. The list of requirements set out by the JIC, after consultation with 
all their customers, only reflected the past and the present; the items were 
broad brush and they certainly were not based on some fortune teller’s 
globe. The vast majority of the requirements were obvious to any intelli-
gent, experienced officer with expertise in the area to which he or she was 
being posted. This reduced the JIC list to little more than a checklist of 
immediate interests. Further, they were too extensive for a single agency 
to cover by themselves. They were an important but not exhaustive list of 
all the points upon which the customers at any particular moment in time 
might seek enlightenment from intelligence collection. So to treat the JIC 
requirements as though they were the only subjects to consider was to 
make a serious error. Intelligence officers were employed to do more than 
tick boxes: a good SIS officer in the field should use imagination and local 
knowledge to peer into the future and to pinpoint new requirements 
which had not yet been identified by Whitehall.
  In the case of the Falklands War, the intelligence community was not 
formally tasked to focus on the intentions of Argentina’s President 
Leopoldo Galtieri, and the British Ambassador and his Defence 
Attaché’s warnings of the danger were waved airily aside by the apparat-
chiks in Whitehall. The magnificent victory over the Argentinian invad-
ers distracted attention from the failure of all concerned to focus on the 
threat. The criticisms in the Falkland Islands Review, completed by the 
Franks Committee in 1983, were so gently worded that they were rap-
idly forgotten, even if they were understood. No-one had doubted that 
the Falklands were a problem, but no-one had a solution that would 
square the circle, meeting the demands of Argentinian amour-propre, 
while satisfying the democratic demands of a small sheep farming com-
munity thirty days sailing from their motherland. So the government 
did not seek reminders about the Falklands from intelligence channels.
  The Afghan problem was of a different order of magnitude in terms 
of its impact on world affairs. Afghanistan has long been a cockpit and 
seldom been at peace. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
British India and Russia strove to extend their influence in Afghanistan. 
British India never achieved satisfactory, friendly relations with 
Afghanistan. The Russians too failed.
  It certainly was a great mistake to remove Afghanistan entirely from 
the list of intelligence priorities the moment the Russians departed the 
country in 1989. The US Embassy and the CIA station there were 

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
61
closed. Afghanistan, in so far as it was studied at all, became the respon-
sibility of CIA’s Near Eastern Division, based at CIA Headquarters in 
Langley, Virginia. The Islamabad CIA station’s directive contained no 
mention of Afghanistan, and the only active CIA work in that country 
was concerned with the hunt for Mir Aimal Kansi, the angry young man 
who had killed or wounded several CIA staff on the morning of 
25  January 1993 as they were driving to work.
  There is no way of proving that the situation would have been signifi-
cantly better had the intelligence tap not been turned off as soon as the 
Russians withdrew. But surely the CIA might have been able to afford 
and support a mini station in Kabul? A tiny team to monitor, analyse 
and try to understand the post-Soviet developments. Over a decade 
later, the cost of such an intelligence operation looks negligible when 
compared with the cost in cash and lives of our attempts to help the 
Afghanis. The US had declared a victory and turned its attention else-
where, and the consequences remain with us a generation later.
  Getting requirements roughly right, in terms of current situations, is 
relatively easy. Ensuring that the requirements reflect future dangers is 
much less easy, and Afghanistan provides a painful example of the prob-
lems that can arise if the international players are over-addicted to short-
termism. Intelligence collectors must not only look at the formal 
requirements, they should also look at matters which are not yet 
included in the formal list.
Training and Education
Human resources are key to intelligence organisations, but I defy anyone 
to be precise about what makes a good intelligence officer. I have known 
many admirable people in the profession, and they have come in all 
shapes and sizes and with differing characteristics. As a general proposi-
tion, I suggest that there are few jobs which are in greater need of people 
with drive, conscience, sense of national duty and initiative who are also 
quick learners, brave, responsible and able to work alone. Such qualities 
are desirable for intelligence officers, but most are also desirable in other 
careers.
  Once good people are selected and recruited, it is of vital importance 
that they receive appropriate training and education. In the Cold War 
period the Soviets considered that spymasters required a long training 

why spy?
62
that combined a broad education of a university style and specialist 
training. The journal compiled and smuggled out of the Soviet Union 
by Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, the GRU (Soviet military intelligence ser-
vice) officer who spied for the West, is particularly informative on the 
matter of training. According to Penkovsky the GRU training organisa-
tions included a diplomatic academy, institutes for foreign languages, 
communications and intelligence, and schools for illegals (those who 
operate without official cover and without diplomatic immunity) and 
for diversion and sabotage.2 The Soviet intelligence academies turned 
out many officers and I was told by an ex-KGB officer’s wife that the 
Soviet services went in for matchmaking: wives were definitely part of 
the intelligence team.
  The British services confine themselves to short, entry courses, where 
new recruits are taught the tricks of the trade before starting their 
apprenticeship in the field. In my time, training in the intelligence and 
security services was related to the methodology and techniques required 
to carry out the job. The courses did not range outside the nuts and 
bolts into the uses of intelligence and its value.
  For those seeking confirmation that the cult of the amateur is not 
without merit, we can note with satisfaction the many British achieve-
ments in the intelligence and security fields during the Cold War. True, 
the Soviets had many successes, including deeply imbedded illegals, and 
ideologically and financially motivated sources. But the West had Oleg 
Gordievsky, the KGB officer spying for SIS and MI5, Penkovsky, and 
many others whose names are not publicly known.
  Creating a British intelligence Staff College ought to be given serious 
consideration. Alternatively, intelligence high flyers who might be 
expected to reach senior ranks could be given a sabbatical year so they 
can read around the subject and engage in discussions with other mem-
bers of the intelligence community. Such sabbaticals used to be given to 
diplomats in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. This need not be 
expensive: universities already offer courses in intelligence studies, many 
of which are aimed at, and are taken up by, intelligence professionals.
  University courses provide opportunities for serving or future intel-
ligence officers to gain a formal, certified education in intelligence stud-
ies. Such courses draw students’ attention to the value of intelligence 
and to the place of the intelligence officer’s specific activities relative to 
wider intelligence practices. As argued elsewhere in the book, under-

THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY
	
	
63
standing the value and the context of intelligence is certainly a most 
desirable attribute for intelligence officers.
  Without the opportunity to study the lessons of history in some 
depth, whether at university or in an intelligence Staff College, the intel-
ligence officer cannot reasonably be expected to avoid errors already 
made by others. Since officers tend to be very busy on their day-to-day 
jobs, the likelihood is that they do not find time for research into the 
broader issues, so they learn by osmosis and personal reflection. Studying 
for an accredited degree provides the opportunity to engage directly 
with fellow students, many of whom will also be intelligence officers, 
and provides guidance on how to find one’s way through the published 
literature on intelligence.
  A handful of British universities already offer Masters degrees in intel-
ligence studies.3 Some of these are designed exclusively for the intelli-
gence officer. These are studied remotely over the internet using online 
discussion boards accessible only to students and university staff. 
Increasing the links between the intelligence community and universi-
ties will help a greater proportion of intelligence officers become aware 
of this opportunity to learn about intelligence in the round and to learn 
the lessons of the past.
Conclusion
Intelligence requirements are a formal way in which the government 
tells the intelligence community what it needs. The US spent a great 
deal more time and effort than the UK did on trying to ensure that the 
list of requirements was complete. Yet this remains an unattainable goal: 
the world keeps changing. Requirements allow the government, who sit 
at the top of the intelligence chain, to feed their priorities back to the 
collectors, who are positioned at the bottom of this chain. Coordination 
is required in order to make the best possible use of the resources present 
at each stage of the chain. Formal coordination mechanisms such as the 
JIC, and the holders of posts such as the DNI and the UK’s Intelligence 
and Security Coordinator, have numerous, difficult tasks. Coordination 
is important, but expectations must be realistic.


	
65
5
TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION 
METHODS
What follows does not aspire to be an exhaustive list of every method of 
intelligence collection or every ingredient in the assessment process. Nor 
do the types always fit neatly into tidy categories such as human intel-
ligence (Humint) and technical intelligence (Techint). Signals intelli-
gence (Sigint), for example, is collected by technical means but the 
material it collects requires human intervention to turn the raw product 
into useful intelligence. Yet it is convenient to have a short form name 
by which to refer to intelligence subjects. And it reminds us of the mul-
tiplicity of intelligence activities of varying degrees of importance, each 
of which has, on some occasion, made a significant contribution to the 
complex process of assembling the intelligence mosaic.
  Language has changed in recent decades. What used to be known as 
overt intelligence is now often called open source intelligence (Osint). 
The classifications overt and covert are also open to debate. Some infor-
mation, which is ‘unclassified’ in a democratic society and which the 
public may demand to see under Freedom of Information legislation, 
may well be treated as a state secret in an undemocratic state where 
officials and politicians can make their lives easier by minimising the 
flow of information to the general public. The intelligence community 
should always remember that overt information, much less glamorous 
than secret reports, has a vital part to play.

why spy?
66
  Not all the terms discussed in this chapter are universal currency. The 
transatlantic short forms like Trashint (trash intelligence), Rumint 
(rumour intelligence) and Hunchint (hunch intelligence) refer to sub-
groups of collection methods that clearly do not compete with such 
categories as Sigint, Imint (imagery intelligence) and Audint (audio 
intelligence) in terms of the volume of intelligence they produce, but on 
occasion they have made seminal contributions. Even graffiti can be of 
interest. I once found myself in a Chinese urinal where extremely rude 
words had been painted on the walls calling into question Mao’s parent-
hood and impugning his virility. Clearly there were still sparks of oppo-
sition to be found hidden under the drab clothes of the workers and 
peasants. In short, all sources may have some relevance and top secret 
code word material is not the only source of value.
  Humint and Techint are not, of course, mutually exclusive; Techint, for 
example, requires vast human resources and may assist Humint. Both 
forms of intelligence are required. They are complementary, neither is 
necessarily better than the other, and the past enthusiasm of customers for 
Techint on the grounds that it was less likely to cause embarrassment than 
Humint was ill-founded. This has been demonstrated all too well by the 
embarrassment of western governments caused by whistleblower Edward 
Snowden’s disclosures about their secret Techint collection activities. 
Embarrassment can also be caused when friends are found to be spying on 
friends, regardless of the methods used to do so. Every nation which has 
the ability almost certainly attempts to spy on its friends in order to have 
a better understanding of their true intentions.
  Those who believed that Techint was less potentially embarrassing 
than Humint might also have remembered the case of Gary Powers and 
his U-2 photo reconnaissance aircraft, which was shot down by the 
Soviet Union in 1960, giving them a chance to put the pilot on trial and 
to rage against the US’s spying activities. Additionally, the comforting 
idea that Techint is less likely than Humint to include an element of 
fabrication and deception may be true, but Techint can also mislead.
  Admiral Stansfield Turner, who took over from Bush Snr as the 
Director of the CIA in the mid-1970s, was a Techint aficionado. He had 
been head of the NSA, the US Sigint agency, and knew the value of 
Sigint. Yet he clearly had not read much intelligence history or he would 
have known that communications are often used for deception pur-
poses, or that, although the camera does not lie, the objects it photo-

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
67
graphs may be fabrications. And as to the reliability of intercepted docu-
ments, there are many cases where skilfully created documents have 
fooled leading experts. Britain had major successes in this field in both 
World Wars.
  The attack on Pearl Harbor provided some excellent lessons on the 
limits of Techint, which Turner does not seem to have learnt. The long 
radio silence of the Japanese Navy resulted in there being no clue as to 
the Japanese positioning in the days before its attack on Pearl Harbor in 
December 1941. The Japanese were also extremely lucky to have heavy 
cloud cover to conceal their vast armada. In this case there was no 
Humint to help since the Japanese had prevented foreign attachés from 
visiting the areas where the fleet was perfecting its bombing techniques 
and assembling. There was a third Techint problem in the last hour 
before the attack. When the young radar operator at Pearl Harbor found 
his radar screen filled with images of a swarm of aircraft and reported 
the fact to his superior, he was told not to worry as they must be US 
planes. Turner and his fellow technical enthusiasts might have pondered 
the fact that in this case Sigint was deaf, cameras blind, and radar signals 
were misread.
  So both categories of intelligence collection methods are essential and 
complementary, neither is necessarily available when required, and both 
can cause embarrassment. In any case, however many brilliant new tech-
nical methods are developed, good human agents will still be necessary, 
if only to interpret information about the minds of the enemy leader-
ship and the state of morale, training, and so on. Satellite photography 
can produce results that no human agent could, but the human agent 
can produce the background knowledge to enable the analysts to per-
form effectively when assessing images taken by satellite. Agents’ back-
ground knowledge can help analysts to address questions of quality, 
training and experience, and to predict intention. Techint may tell us 
what the enemy is saying and doing; it cannot tell us their intentions.
Human Intelligence (Humint)
Q ‘I am always preceded by a hundred spies.’
Frederick the Great of Prussia, c.1757
‘One spy in the right place is worth 20,000 men in the field.’
Attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte

why spy?
68
‘[t]he laws of the universe can be verified by mathematical calculation: but the 
dispositions of an enemy are ascertainable through spies and spies alone.’
Mei Yao-chen commenting on Sun Tzu’s ‘The Art of War’, eleventh century1
‘I will never again command an army in America if we must carry along paid 
spies.’
General William T.  Sherman, US Army, 1863
‘You can send your “source” from the German air force to his whore of a 
mother! This is not a “source” but a disinformer.’
Joseph Stalin, 1941
  There have been attempts to compare the value of human intelligence 
with technical intelligence. There is no point in such an exercise as both 
are essential elements in intelligence work. For example, aerial photog-
raphy can cover vast areas of ground in seconds, which a human agent 
could not cover in a lifetime. However, human agents are required to 
steal the plans and interpret intentions. In this section the prominent 
types of Humint sources are discussed, namely the use of agents, walk-
ins and defectors, as well as less discussed types including exile intelli-
gence and rumour intelligence.
Agents
‘One who does not employ local guides will not secure advantages of terrain.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
‘People suitable as special agents … are 20 to 45 years old. Persons from aristo-
cratic and bourgeois-conservative circles are of no interest. … People who 
adhere strictly to church dogma and rules are not suitable, nor are people with 
a tendency toward alcoholism, drug addiction, and or sexual deviations.’
KGB Handbook on recruitment of agents
‘Your … spy must be a man of keen intellect, though in outward appearance a 
fool; of shabby exterior, but with a will of iron. He must be active, robust, 
endowed with physical strength and courage: thoroughly accustomed to all 
sorts of dirty work, able to endure hunger and cold, and to put up with shame 
and ignominy.’
Tu Mu, a commentator on Sun Tzu, eighth or ninth century

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
69
‘He who lacks wisdom cannot use agents; he who is not humane and generous 
cannot direct agents; he who is not sensitive and alert cannot get the truth out 
of them.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
  What sorts of people make good spies? Although most of the best-
known spies have been men, there have also been highly successful 
women (the unfortunate Mata Hari was not among them). Probably the 
only characteristic shared by all successful spies is their ability to dis-
semble and deceive. Their motives are varied and include greed, disap-
pointment, bruised egos, failure in the promotion stakes, talents that 
went unrecognised, disillusionment and a desire for revenge. In some 
cases they may respond to a case officer’s flattery and sympathy. They 
may be ripe for development by a case officer who appears to recognise 
their virtues. Some may simply be grateful to find a friend. Others may 
be seriously disenchanted with the system in their country and anxious 
to promote change.
  Even from a well-motivated agent with excellent access, we must not 
expect miracles. Although Rumsfeld’s phrase ‘unknown unknowns’, 
which refers to things ‘we don’t know we don’t know’, has been mocked, 
he made an important point. It is impossible to direct an agent on to 
targets you do not know exist. Here we are in the business of logical fal-
lacies and philosophical quandaries. That you have failed to find some-
thing does not prove that the object you are looking for does not exist.
  There is another basic problem: even if your agent obtains the minutes 
of the latest Cabinet meeting, the decisions recorded can be changed at 
any moment. If there had been an Abwehr (German military intelli-
gence) agent at General Eisenhower’s meetings in early June 1944, the 
agent would only have been able to report that the invasion of Normandy 
might have to be postponed because of bad weather. Eisenhower decided 
to go ahead at the last minute, deeply worried. He might as easily have 
decided to postpone. So we are brought back to the ineluctable truth: 
that no-one can foretell the future with absolute certainty.
  Clearly a reliable spy with good access is a pearl beyond price and the 
best are likely to be motivated by something more noble than greed. 
Penkovsky and Gordievsky did not work for the West for money, but 
because they had become disillusioned with Communism. Even reliable 
agents may forget, mishear, misjudge or misinterpret, or be over-eager 
to please. These are weaknesses to which a technical device is not prone. 

why spy?
70
Moreover, even if the original motivation of the recruit was shared val-
ues, ideology, and friendship, the agent may have second thoughts about 
betraying the motherland, or be turned, by blackmail for example, into 
a double agent.
  Close friendly relationships with agents have special problems. 
Handovers are not supposed to be dependent on personal chemistry. 
This ideal tidy view of agent handling does not, unfortunately, fit reality; 
an agent working for money alone may have little interest in the person-
ality of their new case officer, but others may not wish to be reminded 
that he or she is technically a spy to be handed on to a new case officer. 
The topics that follow remind us that there is nothing simple about the 
intelligence business.
Walk-ins and defectors
Defectors are of many different sorts. They may be agents who have lost 
their access or be in danger, or people who have never before been in 
contact with a foreign intelligence service and decide to ‘walk in’ to offer 
their services. But ‘walk-ins’ may be the agents of the local security ser-
vice. Is it a trap? Is it a provocation intended to stir up diplomatic trou-
ble? And is it sufficiently promising to justify the expenditure of huge 
resources and risk a diplomatic protest? While the potential host govern-
ment is mulling over the case, the clock is ticking, the enemy may have 
rumbled the volunteer and already put them under full surveillance.
  Gordievsky’s case was a resounding success for him and for British 
intelligence who helped him to escape the net. After beginning work for 
SIS in 1974, the KGB only began to suspect him in 1985. SIS helped 
Gordievsky escape the Soviet Union and defect to Britain. Sadly, in the 
Penkovsky case, the Soviets arrested him and wreaked a bloody revenge.
  Twice during my time in Beijing I was summoned in the middle of 
the night by the Head of Mission to deal with Chinese citizens who had 
climbed over the compound wall and presented themselves to the star-
tled British security guard. Each time I concluded that they had nothing 
to offer that was likely to persuade the British Government that they 
were worth the untold problems which would have arisen had we 
allowed them to stay on British soil. So, wishing them luck, they were 
hoisted back across the compound wall. The Chinese authorities never 
mentioned either of the incidents so we had no idea whether these were 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
71
genuine would-be escapees with excellent night movement skills or 
failed agents provocateurs.
Exile intelligence (Exint)
Exiles are tricky. They may be more vulnerable to the blackmail of their 
mother country’s secret services than to the blandishments of Western 
intelligence services. One of the most successful operations mounted by 
any secret service in the twentieth century was the brilliant infiltration 
of the Russian émigré clubs by the Russian revolutionary secret service, 
the Cheka, in an operation in the 1920s named Trest. An analogous 
situation arose when the KMT evacuated China in 1948 and moved to 
Taiwan. The KMT’s intelligence service and nationalist exiles were an 
attractive target for the West, but they were frequently under the control 
of the Communist security apparatus.
  The temptation to liaise with the KMT was strong but many intelli-
gence officers were badly misled by their KMT contacts about the state of 
affairs in China. The KMT took with it to Taiwan a vast apparatus of 
intelligence security officers and on the face of it they were much better 
placed than Western agencies to collect intelligence about mainland China. 
The problem of sifting the true from the false was formidable, since 
Western intelligence officers could not operate in the People’s Republic.
  This China case illustrates another danger. The foreigners gratefully 
receiving the confidences of exiles seldom pause to wonder whether their 
opinions might be suspect since the exile had not been in their native 
country for decades and, perhaps, had seldom, if ever, ventured far from 
the capital cities. Nor were their foreign contacts inclined to question 
whether a good knowledge of English guaranteed reliable views. If the 
subject under discussion was plans for regime change, the agent might 
find it all too easy to agree rather than to point out difficulties. At the 
centre of the Exint problem is the fact that an exile has little or nothing 
to lose if an invasion fails, and much to gain if the attack succeeds.
  Heavy reliance on Exint arises when a target country has become a 
closed police state, making it difficult for people to travel freely across 
its borders. In a police state with strict border controls it is difficult, if 
not impossible, for intelligence officers to visit the country to talent 
spot, recruit and run agents or to verify agent reporting through per-
sonal observation on the ground. At a time when the country concerned 

why spy?
72
may have become a top priority intelligence target and more sources are 
required, the intelligence officer’s opportunity to check on the bona fides 
of potential sources will have become severely limited. The exile com-
munity may look attractive but their reliability is difficult to judge.
  The failed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs provides a seminal 
example of the problem of discovering the truth about the strength of 
opposition to a dictatorship when the agent base consists almost entirely 
of exiles. Cubans exiled in Florida offered a convenient quarry for the 
CIA’s agent recruitment efforts, but even if they had genuine sub-sources 
in Cuba there was a problem of bias. The Cuban sources were anti-
Castro and had a vested interest in encouraging the US to support a 
regime change. It is surprising that given its importance, intelligence 
from exiles is rarely discussed in the literature. It is a source that should 
be treated with great care.
Hunch intelligence (Hunchint)
Hunchint challenges accepted views. It should not be dismissed out of 
hand when it is produced by experienced professionals. In these cases 
the analysts and assessors should look at the evidence afresh. Such inter-
pretations of the evidence are not always recognised as the potentially 
significant warnings that they may be. Perhaps the best-known case of 
Hunchint is DCI John A.  McCone’s hunch about the Soviets’ weapons 
deployments in Cuba in 1962. There was no hard intelligence, secret or 
otherwise to support his hunch that the Soviets would exploit their 
relationship with the Cubans to the full and deploy Medium-Range 
Ballistic Missiles (MRBMs). But the photographs taken by a U-2 plane 
proved that he was right. Clearly assessments cannot be changed on the 
basis of hunches, but when the people who question the conclusion on 
the basis of their ‘gut feelings’ have a long, distinguished and relevant 
career behind them, their hunches should not be ignored.
Trash intelligence (Trashint)
The late Sir Reginald Hibbert, a diplomat whom I had known since my 
Oxford days, used to complain to me that the restrictions on taking 
intelligence material home after work made it difficult to give that mate-
rial as much attention as it deserved. Not all officials obeyed those 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
73
tedious rules. The intelligence gained from rubbish bins, wastepaper 
baskets and other forms of detritus would be a very minor part of col-
lecting intelligence if everyone were fully security conscious. Fortunately 
for intelligence collectors, people are careless. The trash of offices and 
residences have always provided rich pickings and in the twenty-first 
century people who may remember to deal securely with paper may 
easily forget the vulnerability of their personal computer.
  A well-documented case demonstrating the value of Trashint is that 
of Aldrich Ames, the CIA officer who spied for the KGB from the mid-
1980s to the 1990s. It was Trashint which first confirmed that he was a 
spy. A fifty-strong FBI team had failed to find hard evidence. Two tiny 
pieces of crumpled paper and the records in his computer provided 
conclusive evidence of his treachery. Although Ames was a CIA officer 
trained in the arts of intelligence and security, he failed dismally to per-
form according to the CIA’s elementary security rules.
Cab intelligence (Cabint)
The use of taxi drivers as a source is a standing joke among intelligence 
professionals and journalists, but there is something serious to be said 
about it. The taxi driver plying their trade in a war zone has considerable 
opportunity to observe the local scene, and, since his life depends upon 
avoiding trouble, a strong motive for making an accurate assessment of 
the situation. Unlike most embassy staff the taxi driver speaks the local 
language and is unhampered by the sort of strict security arrangements 
imposed by governments on their employees. They have the motivation 
to gather intelligence, and access denied to most foreign observers trapped 
within security compounds. Conversing with taxi drivers is therefore one 
way to collect intelligence that can help improve understanding of the 
mood and general attitude within a country, region or city.
Rumour intelligence (Rumint)
‘Rumint’ describes anything being discussed by the general public. It 
should not be totally ignored. Although, like Hunchint, it is no substi-
tute for properly sourced intelligence, the average person in the street or 
in the bazaar has a good motive for thinking about the local political 
and economic situation, and has their ear closer to the ground than any 

why spy?
74
foreigner. Rumint may be a pointer to future events and a useful trigger 
for investigation.
  Neither the Indian Mutiny in the nineteenth century nor the 
Burmese Army’s coup d’état in the twentieth, were foreseen. But Rumint 
gave some lead-time. In the Indian case rumours in the bazaar of 
impending mutiny were well founded. Unfortunately many officers with 
long service in India had blind faith in the loyalty of their courageous 
troops, so the Rumint was often ignored and British officers paid the 
penalty. In Burma, now known as Myanmar, in 1958 we had an analo-
gous, but from the British perspective a less significant situation, when 
the bazaar was flooded with rumours of an Army coup d’état. We had 
no hard evidence to support the rumours but at least we listened and 
had time to prepare for trouble.
  I was not in Beijing in 1966 when the Red Guards attacked the 
embassy and the consulate general in Shanghai but I assume that in both 
cases the Red Guards got out of hand, so there was no scope for pre-
warning. In any case, Rumint was hard to come by in the China of those 
days. Coffee shopping with locals was not an option and local staff did 
not swap gossip with us.
  The purist may reject out of hand the idea that such grey areas should 
be seriously considered. To them I would suggest that intelligence assess-
ments must include contemplation of all possibilities. Conclusions 
should obviously be based on hard fact if possible, but ‘all sources’ 
should include rumours carefully qualified. A rumour may turn out to 
be correct, while a report from an agent’s sub source may turn out to be 
a deception, an embroidery, a gullible mistake, caused perhaps by a 
desire to please the case officer. As with interrogation, and whether 
information extracted by what can be called torture can be trusted, so 
with Rumint. The answer is ‘of course not’; it must be set against the 
whole picture.
Technical Intelligence (Techint)
‘I believe the country needs this information, and I’m going to approve it [the 
U-2 programme]. But I’ll tell you one thing. Some day one of these machines 
is going to be caught, and then we’ll have a storm.’
President Eisenhower, 1954

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
75
‘Intercepted communications could be a more promising source of intelligence 
if it weren’t for our national tendency to logorrhea about the subject.’
R.  James Woolsey, former DCI, 2002
  This section of the chapter would be long indeed if it attempted even 
the most summary description of the technical developments of the last 
century. Scientific and technical aids to intelligence gathering have 
exploded in the developed world, including the huge efforts put into 
Research and Development in two world wars, during the Cold War, 
and since. The slow, wood and cloth built biplanes and triplanes, drop-
ping bombs by hand, soon evolved into the Spitfire and long-range 
bombers of the Second World War, and thence to supersonic planes and 
to aerial platforms for electronic warfare systems, and more recently to 
the Predator, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) or ‘drone’ carrying 
weapons and cameras, while satellites float in space. The mobile phone 
has replaced the clumsy Bakelite telephone, tethered to its copper wire. 
The heavy wooden camera and its plates moved rapidly on to miniature 
spy cameras and digital cameras. The Bletchley Park computer of the 
Second World War has morphed into a household gadget that packs 
more punch than the Bletchley model; tablets are multi-functional and 
easily transported, and huge amounts of data can be stored cheaply. The 
radio has advanced from whiskers and crystals, through valves, and solid 
state to digital, and the first clumsy wire recorders have become tiny 
pocket tape recorders.
  Until the industrial revolution little changed in the intelligence world. 
The spy and his messages could travel faster on a train than on a horse, 
and more reliably on a steam driven boat than a sailing ship, but there 
was no change in basic methodology. The scientific and technical revolu-
tion of the twentieth century on the other hand, has opened up entirely 
new areas. The explosion of new technologies has been as far reaching in 
its effect on intelligence as it has been in the wider military and civilian 
world.
  Every technical advance that is likely to benefit a collector of intelli-
gence will provide security officers, tasked with preventing information 
from reaching enemy hands, with a new headache. For example, the dry, 
portable, efficient copying machines which in the 1980s superseded a 
generation of slow and messy copiers were a godsend not only to office 
staff but also to spies and so a nightmare for security officers. Or take 

why spy?
76
the case of image intensifiers and infrared devices; a godsend certainly 
to poachers and to spies, able to capture images, which bad weather, the 
darkness, or good camouflage nets would have previously denied to 
them. Removing the cloak of darkness cuts both ways. The night is no 
longer a cloak for clandestine activity of any sort, and often security has 
been slow to recognise the full horror of the situation created by new 
gadgetry. It is highly convenient to be able to stick a beacon device onto 
a target’s vehicle thus making it easy to follow the target wherever he 
moves; but the enemy too can acquire such gadgets and use them to 
monitor their opponents.
  Technical intelligence, like human intelligence, has limitations and 
weaknesses. When the signals are not there to collect, Sigint has little to 
offer. Whatever advances are made in interception and cipher breaking, 
Siginters need some cooperation from their targets. Analogous limita-
tions apply when collecting audio intelligence. However excellent the 
audio quality of the telephone tap or the microphone, it will avail the 
intelligence officer nothing if the targets follow the oppressive disciplines 
of good audio security: no ‘shop’ talk in hotel bedrooms or in offices 
unless they are specially constructed secure rooms; no ‘shop’ talk in 
restaurants or other public places which may have been fitted out with 
audio gadgetry; and no casual assumption that it is safe to talk in the 
garden where directional microphones, or even lip reading, may pose a 
danger. Well disciplined targets can frustrate the best technology. Not 
every ambassador is so careless as to speak on insecure phone lines in an 
insecure room; not every military commander so careless as to use inse-
cure communications. At the moment when secret intelligence is most 
desirable, the sources may become silent.
The Complementary Nature of Techint and Humint
Until the development of electricity, there was no prospect of avoiding the 
messy uncertainties of Humint by using technology. Before then, the 
nearest we had got to Techint matters was the world of the ‘black cham-
bers’ of the Western powers, where cryptography and secret writing were 
studied. Rulers had learnt to protect themselves from snoopers and eaves-
droppers by such devices as creaking floorboards; the Chinese had devel-
oped a system for giving advance warning of enemy movement, by bury-
ing skin-covered drums in the ground which would respond to the sound 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
77
of marching men before the sounds were audible to the sentries. But while 
the weapons of war and transport systems had made formidable advances, 
the weapons of intelligence were much the same as they always had been. 
Eyes, ears and brains were the weapons. The advent of electronics and the 
development of the optical sciences changed the scene dramatically; and 
now there are Techint weapons of enormous power.
  It is understandable that governments might hope that a new techni-
cal dawn was breaking in the intelligence field. The magic which had 
been wrought by the Siginters in the Second World War, and the ability 
of an overhead camera to capture the image of a golf ball from 30,000 
feet, soon led to unrealistic hopes that Techint could replace the use of 
agents and eliminate the potential for embarrassment which they repre-
sented. In military matters politicians would like to replace boots on the 
ground by technical devices, using military aircraft and naval vessels to 
deliver weapons from afar. So the idea of Predator-type aircraft to collect 
intelligence is attractive. But just as it has been found impossible in the 
military world to dispense with troops, so in the intelligence world it has 
been found that however wondrous science and technology, there is still 
a need for humans on the ground.
  Even James R. 
 Schlesinger, Helms’ successor as DCI, who had no love 
for the CIA and its agents, understood that technology could not alone 
provide all the answers. His comment, ‘[y]ou cannot photograph an 
intention’, encapsulates the ineluctable truth that, although it is indeed 
useful to have a full picture of the size and composition of a dictator’s 
armed forces, it is also important to know what the dictator intends to 
do. And there are other reasons why the camera has limitations. In the 
case of aerial photography although the camera does not lie, the subjects 
it is photographing may have been created as part of a deception plan. 
In the case of ground photography it is not unknown for agents to 
fabricate; a combination of skilled photographer and expert model 
maker can produce extremely realistic images.
  There is no guarantee that pouring money into the recruitment of spy 
masters and spies will solve all intelligence problems; but nor is there any 
guarantee that ever increasing expenditure on expensive technology will 
solve all the problems either. The appointment of Turner, formerly 
Director of NSA, to direct the CIA, was a reflection of Presidential frustra-
tions with the uncertainties and potential embarrassments of traditional 
operations using agents. Turner naturally resented the criticism that he 

why spy?
78
harmed the Agency by overemphasising technical means, and damaged 
morale among Humint officers, but the criticism has not been stilled.
Signals intelligence (Sigint)
Sigint is the descendant of the black chambers of Cardinal Richelieu of 
France and the Russian and British spymasters of the past who pored 
over intercepted messages. The explosion of communications based on 
the invention of electricity and then of computers and mobile phones 
has given Siginters more targets and more problems as the volume of 
messages grows ever larger. British mobile phone users, for example, 
send billions of text messages each year. The attack and the defence alike 
rely on ever more sophisticated computers; communicators seek an 
unbreakable system, and the Siginters strive to prove that the phrase 
‘unbreakable cipher’ is an oxymoron. The battle between Siginters and 
communicators will continue. There will probably never be a totally 
secure system, but as the cost and delays involved in unbuttoning the 
latest systems escalate, a Sigint success may often be too late to affect the 
tactical situation.
  Each type of intelligence collection method, from time to time, pro-
duces a gem, both all are susceptible to deception, and each has advan-
tages and disadvantages. However, if one were to attempt to rank meth-
ods according to the impact their intelligence has had on world events, 
Sigint would come high on the list of technical means. Higher perhaps 
than satellite and aerial photography, which cannot tell us the reason for 
deployment. Sigint is a golden goose which can at times produce real 
time coverage of the very highest levels of communications.
  Sigint’s virtues are accompanied by a singular weakness. The imme-
diacy and accuracy of an intelligence report based on Sigint make it rela-
tively easy for security agencies to decide that a leak has emanated not 
from Humint, but from Sigint, and the immediate consequence is likely 
to be a change in the communications system, thus plugging the leak. 
By contrast, there may be hundreds of human suspects who might have 
had access to the information passed to the enemy, and there is unlikely 
to be a quick identification of the culprit however urgent and efficient 
the mole hunts. If an agent is blown, or a microphone found, there may 
be embarrassment, as well as a loss of intelligence; but in the case of 
Sigint if a country discovers that its supposedly unbreakable cipher has 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
79
been mastered by its opponents, it can arrange to change the system 
worldwide, and thus suddenly deny the enemy, possibly at a crucial 
moment, all access to top level communications.
  A similar situation arose in the interwar period when the British 
Government’s fears of the subversive activities of the Soviet communist 
agitators led Stanley Baldwin’s Government to reveal to the Soviets that 
they were reading their cables and knew all about their nefarious activi-
ties, fomenting and funding unrest. The result, inevitably, was that the 
Soviets ceased providing the British code breakers with material, and 
turned to written communication by diplomatic bag.
  British successes in attacking German communications during the 
Second World War are now well known. But it is less well known that 
there were many successes against other adversaries, including the 
Japanese, which presented special difficulties because of its three scripts: 
Romaji (romanised; used for their telegrams); Kanji (Chinese charac-
ters); and Kana (seventy phonetic symbols). Further, a Japanese diction-
ary might present more than thirty different choices under one Romaji 
entry. The Siginters did well.
  There is another side to this discussion of the value of developing, 
maintaining and using a Sigint capability. An intelligence report based 
on Sigint is likely to be given exceptional credence and importance. 
There is no doubt that Sigint carries both the reputation of reliability, as 
well as the highest vulnerability. Although the customers are usually 
sensitive to such security matters, it is all too easy for them to forget the 
sources of their knowledge and thereby inadvertently betray them by 
giving hints to the opposition. Conversely, if the real provenance of a 
Sigint based report is concealed, it may lose its impact on the consumers 
of intelligence.
Imagery intelligence (Imint)
The technology of Imint has advanced by leaps and bounds over the last 
century, and the process has accelerated with the development of over-
head photography from highflying aircraft and satellites. In the 1960s 
the U-2 and SR-71 programme developed reconnaissance aeroplanes 
that could fly sufficiently high that they were, it was hoped, beyond the 
range of the Soviet missiles of the time. Although U-2s were shot down 
over the Soviet Union, China and Cuba, the programme was hugely 
successful. This is best demonstrated by the pivotal role of the U-2 in 

why spy?
80
dispelling the ‘bomber gap’ myth in 1956, reassuring the US that until 
then they had overestimated the capability of the Soviet air force. The 
successor programmes used satellites and were also successful. A CIA 
analyst calculated that the Corona satellite programme could provide 
more coverage in one capsule of exposed film returned to Earth than the 
U-2 programme could have provided in four years.
  Meanwhile, photographic techniques have been developed that can 
overcome fog, cloud, darkness and smoke, and even, with heat sensors, 
defeat overhead covers and camouflage nets. Electronics enable cameras 
to take pictures around corners. However, there are limits to the capabil-
ity of the camera. It cannot look into a cave or a subterranean shelter 
and the objects that it photographs may be deliberate deceptions. In 
addition, Imint does not speak for itself. It has to be interpreted and this 
introduces the possibility of human error. Nonetheless, images have 
provided valuable intelligence and will continue to do so.
Audio intelligence (Audint)
‘Electronic intercepts are great, but you don’t know if you’ve got two idiots on 
the phone.’
Martin Peterson, senior CIA analyst, 2000
‘It’s nothing but an eight-storey microphone plugged into the Politburo.’
Richard Amery, US Representative, describing the new 
US Embassy building in Moscow
  Audint can be extremely useful, producing instant intelligence that 
reflects the current thinking and views of the target. But it is difficult to 
get a microphone into the right place, especially as the danger of eaves-
dropping becomes ever more well known. Audint’s potential is much 
greater than it should be because people tend to forget warnings only to 
use safe rooms when speaking, to turn on water taps, and so on to 
thwart the eavesdropper. Eavesdropping can be by a microphone in a 
wall or everyday object, or by a directional microphone which can 
enable an eavesdropper to hear a conversation at a considerable distance 
in the open air. Boring holes in walls and listening from next door is as 
old as history.
  The reports of foreign visitors—business people and diplomats—say-
ing that they know that they were ‘bugged’ have to be taken with a 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
81
pinch of salt. Even a country with a population as large as China would 
be hard-pressed to cover every foreign visitor’s hotel bedroom or confer-
ence room, record conversations, translate, process and promptly deliver 
a report. The use of Audint in court is quite a separate issue. The intel-
ligence community, unlike the police, collects intelligence in order to 
find out the truth, not in order to produce evidence acceptable in court.
  The new US Embassy in Moscow, for which building work began in 
1979, was generously wired for sound by the KGB during the course of 
construction, and it was said that the walls were as full of holes as a 
Gorgonzola cheese. The US was, however, well used to the KGB’s habits 
having long before discovered a microphone neatly concealed in the coat 
of arms fixed on the wall behind the Ambassador’s desk. Nonetheless the 
skills of the audio specialist can be nullified if the targets are security 
conscious, stay away from places which may have been bugged, and 
conduct their conversations in open spaces beyond the range of direc-
tional microphones and lip readers.
Documentary intelligence (Docint)
‘Reading a man’s correspondence is not the same thing as reading his mind.’
Peter Calvocoressi, historian, 1979, cited in Philip Knightley, ‘The Second Oldest 
Profession: The Spy as Bureaucrat, Patriot, Fantasist and Whore’, 1986
  For obvious reasons documents are highly valued sources of intelli-
gence. But, as already remarked, there are such things as forgeries and 
some of these have fooled eminent historians. Once, when staying in a 
room in a South East Asian country normally occupied by an enemy 
officer, I found the draft treaty of a singularly unhelpful secret agree-
ment between the government of the hosts and the enemy in a dressing 
table drawer. The draft was written in a language I could read quite 
readily. It has never become clear whether this was an accident or a 
deliberate gift from the local hosts whose sympathies lay with Britain. 
Either way it is an unusual and interesting example of luck. One poten-
tial problem with documents, however, is that they are the most obvious 
way of attempting to deceive the enemy. Examples where forged docu-
ments were used by the British with great success are described in the 
chapter on Deception Operations.

why spy?
82
Open Source Intelligence
Osint does not fit neatly into either Humint or Techint. It could be 
electronic, it could be a printed page, it could be a radio broadcast. It is 
clearly not true that all the information required to make a good intel-
ligence assessment is to be found in open source material. However, an 
energetic trawl of newspapers, radio and TV material can produce very 
useful background to a case or issue. For example, in the run up to the 
Argentine invasion of the Falklands, it would not have been difficult, by 
scrutinising the local press, to gauge the attitude and dangerous paranoia 
of Argentinian dictator President Galtieri. Not every nation publicises 
its intentions in so convenient a fashion, but in any society, even the 
most strictly censored police state, a great deal can be learnt from study-
ing the media, by noting who is in and who is out in the leadership, by 
studying the changes in propaganda themes, and by reading between the 
lines, working out what has been left out and why. Tribute should be 
paid to the brilliant work done by the BBC Monitoring Service record-
ing foreign broadcasts.
  The intelligence services share with diplomats, journalists and aca-
demics the duty to seek the truth. All need to be constantly aware of the 
need to consult open official and unofficial material. The arrival of the 
great Times correspondent in the Crimean War prompted the Tsar of 
Russia to remark that, ‘[w]e have no need of spies. We have the Times.’ 
In November 1941 The Daily Telegraph warned its readers of the likeli-
hood of Japanese military retaliation against Western restrictions. The 
Telegraph reporting was closer to the mark than the official reports which 
allowed the US and Western governments to bury their heads in the 
sand before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. Once when attending 
a lunch hosted by DCI Helms and emboldened, no doubt, by the stiff 
dry Martini which had preceded our teetotal meal, I asked our host 
which newspaper he recommended for a general conspectus of foreign 
affairs. He gave me his recommendation, adding that he always read that 
before looking at official papers. I would have liked to pursue the topic 
further but looking round the table I realised that this topic was not 
popular with officers who struggled daily to ensure that the DCI 
received the CIA’s view of the world before breakfast.
  There is no simple answer to the question of how to ensure that open 
sources are given their proper weight in the assessment process. In 
twenty-five years working without the luxury of secret sources, I and 

TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
	
	
83
many of my ex-colleagues found that open sources, coupled with experi-
ence could often produce useful assessments. The most remarkable of 
the open bulletins available on China after I was no longer privy to 
classified intelligence was a regular publication by the Jesuit Father 
Laszlo LaDany. He led a tiny posse of Chinese linguists who covered the 
provincial Chinese broadcasting scene and reported usefully on internal 
affairs in that vast country at a time when no foreigner could roam 
around observing the scene. His product was extraordinary.
  When working in the Cabinet Office, I always started the morning 
by skimming the Dublin and Belfast newspapers and the New China 
News Agency (NCNA) bulletin; everyone else seemed to be waiting for 
the input from embassies or British official sources. Putting aside the 
time delay involved in waiting for the official verdict from our various 
government contacts, there was also the problem that our Whitehall 
machine was looking at the situation indirectly through the prism of 
other official agencies who might, or might not, have considered ‘all 
sources’ when making their reports.
  On the morning that the Chinese and the Soviets started a battle over 
the demarcation of the Sino-Soviet boundary at the Ussuri River, I 
received a copy of the New China News Agency (NCNA) daily bulletin, 
which obligingly included photographs of the two armies in action, 
tanks and guns firing, and a thirty page analysis of the battle as the 
Chinese wanted the world to see it. My contribution to the meeting was 
not entirely appreciated as it somewhat contradicted the impression 
given by our embassies. Later I found that having the NCNA delivered 
to my house had caused a flutter in security circles when they noted that 
a member of the Cabinet Office staff was the regular recipient of a 
Communist Chinese news bulletin.
  No-one challenges the statement that intelligence assessments should 
be based on all sources, but inevitably a newspaper report is less glamor-
ous than a top secret report. When I served in embassies it was accepted 
that every morning the Ambassador should preside over a meeting of 
Chancery and other relevant officers where the questions of the day 
would be discussed. Media reporting would be included in the discus-
sion. In some countries there was little or no secret intelligence and 
media sources were uniquely important. Although in overseas posts the 
importance of open sources was likely to be well recognised, there 
seemed to be no machinery in Whitehall to ensure that the intelligence 
community was making full use of open as well as restricted material.

why spy?
84
  It is important to pay more than lip service to the concept of all 
source reporting. At the very least Osint may give warning of a crisis 
before official channels have woken up; they can be important, giving 
advance warning of something which has yet to be reported on official 
channels, and give colour to official reporting. Despite the value of open 
sources, human nature may well ensure that overt intelligence seldom 
gets its due: secrets are more interesting.
Conclusion
This chapter has outlined the commonly-discussed methods of collect-
ing intelligence, as well as some that receive much less attention in the 
intelligence world and in books about intelligence. All means of collect-
ing intelligence are important: human and technical, secret and open. 
Human and technical sources complement each other, as do secret and 
open sources. While it is tempting to overlook the importance of open 
source material, intelligence professionals may continue to be inclined 
to do just this. Preconceptions of Humint as less reliable than intelli-
gence collected through technical means, and of Techint as less likely to 
cause embarrassment should their activities be exposed, are also flawed 
and difficult to eradicate.
  Perhaps the most important point to be made about this chain of 
intelligence which leads from collection to customer is that like every 
chain its strength is determined by the strength of the weakest link. The 
recruitment of an ace spy, the development of a new technology, and the 
decryption of an interesting complex code are admirable achievements. 
However, unless the end product can be presented in timely and persua-
sive fashion so that the customer not only reads the report but acts upon 
it, the intelligence effort has been a waste of time and money. The glam-
our goes to the producers, but the final impact on the policymakers will 
be achieved, in the British case, by the JIC. 
 The JIC’s prose may be grey, 
but its judgements are the best available and are likely to have the most 
influence on policymakers.

	
85
6
ASSESSMENT
PROBLEMS AND COMMON FALLACIES
‘Know your enemy and know yourself and in a hundred battles you will not be 
in peril.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
‘[W]e must develop a far deeper knowledge of other people’s culture, religion, 
[and] politics, than we possess today.’
Richard Helms, former DCI, 1983
Previous chapters have described the complexity of a sophisticated intel-
ligence chain and the tools, methods, problems and limitations of the 
collectors. This chapter is focused on the segment of the chain that has 
the responsibility for analysing, interpreting and finally creating an intel-
ligence mosaic from the raw intelligence, in order to present a conclu-
sion to the customers and consumers of intelligence. In Britain this 
process is called the assessment process; in the US ‘estimates’. The pro-
cess is an essential part of the intelligence chain.
  Unlike the collectors with their spies and gadgets, the assessors work 
behind the scenes, and their essential, and usually admirable, perfor-
mance has had no public chronicler in fiction or otherwise. There have 
been no famous novels about intelligence assessors; no Joseph Conrad, 

why spy?
86
Compton Mackenzie, Graham Greene, Ian Fleming or John le Carré, to 
mock, romanticise or discuss the machinery of assessment. Nor in the 
event of intelligence ‘failure’ does the dry subject of the assessment 
machinery receive much coverage. We only hear of the assessment pro-
cess obliquely on some rare occasion, such as the unprecedented use of 
the JIC to produce a public assessment in late 2002 in the context of the 
vexed question as to whether Iraq had WMD.
  But even in the retrospective scrutiny of the Iraqi WMD case the 
subject of the machinery of assessment was hardly touched upon. The 
issues of interest to the media were not the organisation and bureau-
cratic habits of the British intelligence machinery, but the personalities 
of individual performers whose heads were above the parapet. And, as 
in the Falkland Islands Review into ‘the way in which the responsibilities 
of Government in relation to the … Islands and their Dependencies 
were discharged in the period leading up to the Argentine invasion of 
the … Islands on 2 
 April 1982’, the inquiries into the WMD affair 
stuck very strictly to their terms of reference and gave us little enlighten-
ment on the bureaucratic tangle that contributed to the unfortunate 
results. Boring as the subject may seem in comparison with the more 
glamorous profession of collecting intelligence, good assessment is key 
to good intelligence and should, perhaps, be given more attention.
  The British Government seems to find it as difficult as the British 
public to take much interest in this recondite subject. The major shake 
up of the national machinery, undertaken by the leadership of Sir Burke 
Trend, Cabinet Secretary, in 1968 provided Britain for the first time in 
history with an intelligence staff to support the work of the JIC. Previously 
the JIC had no Assessment Staff; all the assessment work was done in 
departments or agencies, and the JIC Secretariat, which was only big 
enough to cobble it together and keep the paper flowing, had no capac-
ity for research.
  The new Assessment Staff establishment, which was about twenty 
strong, was composed of officials on secondment and sat alongside the 
Secretariat and the newly appointed Intelligence Coordinator. My 
appointment as Secretary of the JIC coincided with the beginning of the 
new dispensation. The Current Intelligence Groups, each of which dealt 
with a particular area of the world, produced an impressive volume of 
useful assessment using all sources available to them. Their reports were 
scrutinised and perhaps modified before being issued as JIC documents.

ASSESSMENT
	
	
87
  This model was an improvement on the previous system but no long-
term solution had been found to provide permanent staff. The executive 
staff were permanent civil servants who did a magnificent job in keeping 
the machine running smoothly. But the Secretariat and Assessment Staff 
and, indeed, the Committee members themselves, were all birds of pas-
sage with a career to attend to outside the Cabinet Office, and few were 
likely to serve for even three years. And, not to put too fine a point on 
it, there was not one who had any credentials as an experienced assess-
ment officer. From the Coordinator downwards, we had all earned our 
spurs elsewhere.
  In the US however, by 1968, the profession of intelligence assessor 
was a well-recognised alternative to a career in academia or business. As 
an analyst, Robert Gates rose from a junior rank on the research side of 
the CIA to become Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, then to 
Director of Central Intelligence and, finally, Secretary of Defence. It is 
difficult to believe that an assessor could aspire to analogous heights in 
the UK.
  The price Britain has paid is unquantifiable, but it certainly includes 
the damage done by the constant reinvention of the intelligence wheel 
by people who have not done their homework on intelligence history. 
For example, Trend’s 1968 reform of the JIC included recommendations 
about creating an assessments cadre. In 2004 the Butler Review into 
intelligence on Iraq’s alleged WMD capability noted the same point. 
The recommendation had not been implemented and assessors were left 
to learn on the job using their wits.
  The beginning of the First World War is a good example of the dire 
consequences that can arise from wrong assessment. It was a worldwide 
conflagration on a scale never before experienced, or imagined, except 
in science fiction. In 1914 there was plenty of good intelligence available 
to all the major players, Sigint was already a powerful intelligence 
weapon and the crowned heads of the European states were all closely 
related. They talked of cousin Willie, the Kaiser, and Nicky, the Tsar, 
wrote soothing letters to each other and assumed that common sense 
would prevail. It was unthinkable that the Great Powers could be pro-
pelled inexorably to a gigantic, unwanted, world war. The leaders in 
Europe did not conceive of such a catastrophe until the troop trains 
began to move hundreds of thousands of combatants.
  Professor Geoffrey Blainey, the Australian historian, in his masterly 
book The Causes of War suggests many reasons why intelligence com-

why spy?
88
munities fail to foresee the dangers ahead.1 For example, he points to the 
Japanese attacks on the Russian naval base at Port Arthur in 1904 and 
on the US naval base at Pearl Harbor in 1941. The parallels are remark-
able. In both cases the Japanese capacity for war, skill and daring, were 
underestimated; in both cases the garrisons’ fleet was successfully 
attacked by Japanese torpedoes, and both Russia and the US were 
caught napping.
  On both occasions it was well known that serious tension was growing 
and that the Japanese were in a belligerent mood, so there was no excuse 
for not being on the alert. The Russian and US garrison commanders were 
content with their appreciation that their bases were impregnable, and 
anyway Japan was too far away. Neither Russian nor US intelligence had 
predicted the time, place or method of attack, but the main failure was the 
obstinate complacency of the customers; the policymakers and the opera-
tional commanders ignored the warning signals and, as a result, failed to 
feel a sense of urgency. Complacency, arrogance, racial bias and mirror 
imaging all had their part to play, and allowed the Japanese twice in forty 
years to make a first, devastating attack on fortresses, which their Western 
enemies smugly believed to be impregnable.
  Discovering the number of tanks, aircraft, and so on in the enemy 
forces has become ever easier with the development of satellite photog-
raphy, drones and infrared detection. Intentions, however, are difficult 
to discover. Terrorists’ overall intentions are declared from the house 
tops, whether it is independence or jihad. Their operational plans, how-
ever, are much harder to ascertain, as the 9/11 attacks highlighted. It was 
not the first hijacking of a commercial airliner, but there had never been 
a case of terrorists using an aircraft as a flying fire bomb. Thousands of 
officers, people, and every form of technical aid, produced a mass of 
information but only human imagination, not computers, could predict 
such an unprecedented attack, which had, however, been portrayed in a 
popular Tom Clancy novel.2
  As I write the world faces the Russian leader, Vladimir Putin, trained 
in the KGB, his overriding object to grasp power and recover the 
Russian Empire. His annexation of Crimea should have been inter-
preted as a warning shot, but in a world which prefers optimism to 
pessimism, it has been largely ignored. Putin has been displaying his 
true colours for a long time. It is not clear why the Western world has 
been so surprised to find that their erstwhile strategic ally was not a 
friend, but probably an enemy.

ASSESSMENT
	
	
89
  Intelligence services, even if they have managed to purloin a valid 
copy of the latest Politburo minutes, can do no more than enlighten 
their customers on what the target has allowed to be put in his or her 
mouth. There is no guarantee that, even if the record is correct, they will 
not change their minds. Intentions are not merely secrets, they are mys-
teries, and intelligence on them will continue to be a matter of guess-
work, never certainty.
  The remainder of this chapter addresses the common fallacies which 
mar intelligence assessment: mirror imaging, groupthink, over-reliance 
on numbers, wishful thinking and assuming the grass is greener on the 
other side. The chapter’s headings are not based on any scholarly or 
official tome on intelligence methods. Like the terms used in the previ-
ous chapter, some will be familiar to the general reader and some will 
not. Fundamentally, we are looking at common fallacies that have been 
responsible throughout the ages for dangerously wrong appreciations 
and woefully wrong predictions about enemy intentions. The central 
theme of the chapter is the importance of quality assessment.
Mirror Imaging
This is a subject of huge importance and a cause of many errors. Mirror 
imaging is the mistake of forgetting that not everyone thinks as we do. 
It is a trap for all. Understanding the mind of another person, even a 
person brought up in the same society, is no easy matter. It is very much 
more difficult to understand and anticipate the thought processes of 
people from a different culture, and our assessment is likely to be wrong 
if we assume that the target shares our views and prejudices. Among 
mirror imaging’s latest manifestations is the belief held by some in the 
West that the people of Iraq and Afghanistan share our priorities and 
values. If, as all too frequently happens, an intelligence community falls 
into the trap of mirror imaging, a nation may suffer great harm.
  The mirror imaging fallacy can lead to entirely false assumptions; thus:
We vastly out number the enemy; 
We would not dream of attacking against such odds; 
Therefore the enemy will not attack.
  It is dangerous whether in peace or war to take it for granted that all 
have the same priorities and perceptions, and use the same moral com-

why spy?
90
pass. In the military field, for example, people have made many wrong 
assessments that the enemy will react as they themselves would in any 
given circumstances; that the enemy will be making military apprecia-
tions on the same basis as the home team. But the enemy may not share 
your views on the value of human life, or may not have an accurate 
picture of the strength of the defence and, therefore, will not be aware 
of the high casualty rate they must face. They may also have different 
views on the ratio of troops required for success, or on the degree of 
support from artillery, tanks and aircraft that your own planners judge 
are necessary to guarantee success.
  In Vietnam, the failure to understand the differences between the cul-
tures of the opposing forces led to fatal underestimations of the fighting 
potential of the far less well equipped North Vietnamese forces. At Dien 
Bien Phu the French planners totally failed to anticipate the ability of an 
underdeveloped nation to succeed militarily in a situation that would have 
looked impossible to a Western commander. The mistake would, perhaps, 
not have been made had the French remembered that two thousand years 
before, Romans, Greeks, Egyptians, and many others, had been able to 
produce vast structures using nothing except manpower.
  There is another aspect of mirror imaging which affects both civil and 
military attempts to estimate intentions, that most difficult of intelli-
gence targets. You do not know the exact content of the target’s data-
base, and it is unlikely that it is exactly the same as yours. Nor can you 
be certain that the enemy’s interpretation is the same as yours. There are 
many examples of major differences of interpretation of facts and intel-
ligence made by the West and the Soviet Union during the Second 
World War, each because of very different cultures and histories.
  Consider the case of the KGB, who were exploiting their wartime 
opportunities to the full to spy on their Western allies. They refused to 
believe that we were not behaving in a similar fashion. So when Philby 
and the other members of the Soviet espionage ring, ‘the Cambridge Five’, 
reported that there were no British clandestine operations inside the Soviet 
Union, the KGB interpreted this as evidence that Philby and company 
were double agents, and that they were reporting lies and deceptions. The 
KGB continued throughout the war to mistrust Philby’s reporting.
  However, it is not easy to find staff with a good understanding of 
another culture. A thorough understanding of the differences between 
our society and that of the target country is unlikely to be acquired by 

ASSESSMENT
	
	
91
academic study alone. But since it is clearly a counsel of impossible per-
fection to suggest that every neophyte assessor can have the opportunity 
to live and work in the society in which they are to specialise, we can only 
hope to burn into the minds of the trainees the need to remember that 
people do not all react or think in the same way. They should also be 
encouraged to have the humility to accept that they can only partially 
understand the mindsets of people from a different background.
  People used to remark in Malaya and China, ‘it’s so easy for you, you 
speak the language.’ Although that facilitated an understanding of what 
pleased and annoyed them, language skills alone were not the central 
basis for success; it was working with them daily that had brought about 
some degree of understanding. Airport bookshops of the world are well 
stocked with books claiming to inform the business traveller ‘how to do 
business in country X’. They remind the reader that they are about to 
enter an arena where significant differences because of culture and cus-
tom may cause serious difficulties, embarrassment and animosity. The 
two sides may have very different concepts of time scales, business eth-
ics, bribery, the sanctity of contracts and so on.
  Intelligence officers ought to be given training on this aspect of life. 
It should not be assumed that, having recruited bright and able gradu-
ates with excellent degrees, they can be relied upon to educate them-
selves so that they do not fall into the mirror imaging trap. The British 
Imperial Services, who were paid for by local governments across the 
empire, took the view that, however high the quality of their recruits 
they should be required to serve an apprenticeship of four years as 
cadets, during which time they had to study the language, law, history 
and culture of their territory. Those who failed their examination were 
not confirmed in their appointments.
  There have been many occasions when Britons with first-class degrees 
were badly wrong in their conclusions because of mirror imaging. One 
example was provided by the assessment of Soviet intentions after the 
Prague Spring of 1968. The intelligence picture was clear: the Soviet 
forces deployed in preparation for their annual manoeuvres, along the 
Czech border, were considerably larger than usual, and there were more 
than enough to invade and subdue their Czech satellite. The question 
which neither photography nor Sigint could answer, and which no agent 
had answered either, was whether the Soviets would invade. The 
Chairman of the committee concerned, a generalist who had the highest 

why spy?
92
intellectual qualifications, overruled the views of the specialists round 
the table and insisted that the Soviets would not invade because of the 
adverse effect such an act would have on world opinion. The Soviets, 
however, were much less concerned with world opinion than they were 
with the fact that the Prague Spring had set a dangerous precedent that 
gave encouragement to dissidents and reformers among the Soviet satel-
lites, and thus endangered the Soviet sphere of influence. The Soviet 
leaders did not give a kopek for world opinion.
  Another example of flawed assessment due to mirror imaging was 
provided by China in 1989. For a month, ever growing crowds of 
Chinese thronged Changan Da Jie, the central boulevard of Beijing, 
supporting the students who were camped in Tian Anmen, a vast central 
square. The Chinese Government became increasingly infuriated by the 
sight of protesters bearing banners demanding freedom, the end of cor-
ruption and nepotism and so on, even mocking the patriarch Deng 
Xiaoping as ‘Little Bottle’. The capital of China came to a standstill and 
there was a great loss of face. The Western media was giving maximum 
coverage to the situation, praising the outbreak of democratic fervour.
  It was indeed impressive, but it was also unrealistic to suppose that 
the Politburo would allow the protests to continue. Their priority was to 
restore order and not to please world opinion. So the demonstrators 
were crushed violently by the Army, as the Imperial Cossack Cavalry 
had crushed demonstrations in Moscow at the beginning of the century, 
when the Russians attempted to appeal to the Tsar, their ‘Little Father’.
  The tragic carnage in Beijing appeared to take the West by surprise. 
But I was in Beijing at the time and I found it difficult to see any ending 
other than brutal suppression. There were many reasons for this assess-
ment. Authoritarian regimes, be they Russian, Chinese or North 
Korean, Communist or Fascist, do not develop traditions of peaceful 
handling of riots and civil commotions; they have no doctrine of mini-
mum force, or trained riot squads. It seemed naïve to expect the Chinese 
Government, enraged by the disrespectful attitude of the student lead-
ers, and incensed by the worldwide coverage of the chaos in Beijing, to 
show moderation. It ended with a bloody show of force. The West 
would not have been surprised had they not been prone to mirror imag-
ing. They assumed wrongly that the Chinese Government would give 
the same weight as the western democracies did to world opinion, and 
to concepts such as the rule of law and human rights. For the Chinese 

ASSESSMENT
	
	
93
Government such things were subsidiary to the restoration of order and 
of ‘face’.
  Mirror imaging is as significant a cause of mis-assessment as any form 
of fallacious thinking. If the assessors are highly educated Western liber-
als, they will need to be particularly conscious of the dangers inherent 
in assuming that the foreigner has the same views on ethics, law and so 
on. Like the rest of the pitfalls discussed here, mirror imaging is not the 
prerogative of intelligence assessors alone; it is part of general life. As the 
old saying has it, ‘there’s nowt so queer as folk’, and getting fully into the 
mind of another person is no easy task. The task is infinitely more dif-
ficult if one is trying to get into the mind of someone from a totally 
different culture and with different priorities and prejudices. Further, an 
adequate understanding is more likely to be acquired after some time 
working and living in the country concerned through a sort of osmosis 
than by reading alone. Although it is obviously impossible to offer to 
every fledgling assessor a long apprenticeship in the field, it is clearly of 
great importance that somehow the dangers of mirror imaging are burnt 
into their minds.
Groupthink
This is a common cause of mistaken opinion and mistaken assessment. 
It is convenient to join the mob and agree with their view; it takes 
energy and courage to take an independent line. Groupthink means the 
received wisdom: the authorised view of an institution, bureaucracy or 
military organisation. It is a damaging form of thought. The 1973 Yom 
Kippur war illustrates the principle. In this example the blanket of com-
placency led to the acceptance of the most comfortable thesis. The 
Egyptians were holding another annual military exercise, scurrying 
around the Middle East in a way that suggested panic rather than con-
fidence. In late September a courageous, independent minded Israeli 
intelligence officer decided that the enemy activity was not merely 
another defensive exercise, but suggested something much more aggres-
sive. He submitted his report to higher command, who suppressed it. 
On 6 
 October the attack commenced and the Israelis were caught by 
surprise. Groupthink does not welcome challenges, particularly if they 
come from junior officers.

why spy?
94
The Numbers Fallacy
The numbers fallacy, like the others described in this chapter, is not the 
monopoly of the intelligence community. It also exists in the business 
world, for example, where accountants are sometimes guilty of thinking 
that money is everything and business people ignore the experiments 
that have shown that job satisfaction, loyalty and other non-financial 
factors are important too.
  There are many examples from the Second World War of numbers 
being a poor guide. The overwhelming numbers of Soviet troops, tanks 
and aircraft did not give them an easy victory over German forces. In 
1941 the Soviets had six times more tanks and five times more aircraft 
than the invading Germans. Yet the Germans walked all over the Soviets 
because they were better trained, better led and their equipment was of 
higher quality.
  While overestimating the strength of the enemy should be avoided, 
so too should the habit of counting armoured fighting vehicles in order 
to determine a threat. Quality, ease of maintenance, fuel requirements, 
crew conditions, training, speed, endurance, effectiveness of armour and 
firing systems, and other exotica must also be considered. And even if 
military hardware, personnel and weapons are equal, other impondera-
bles such as leadership, morale, imagination, tactics, and command and 
control will affect the outcome of an engagement. Although quality 
must be considered when assessing an enemy’s strengths, it is very dif-
ficult to measure. And however good the weapon, the performance of 
the user may prove decisive.
  The Cold War provided many examples of the uncritical use of num-
bers to assess enemy threats and strength. Both West and East were 
guilty of confusing quantity with quality; both issued alarmist accounts 
of the opponents’ capabilities and possible intentions. The military 
establishments naturally found it convenient when seeking increased 
budgets to talk of numbers without discussion of quality. The Soviet 
military was large and the prospect of a swarm of tanks and aircraft, and 
hordes of soldiers invading Western Europe, backed by missiles, was 
indeed alarming. But did the quality match the quantity? Somehow the 
assessors were so mesmerised by the numbers that they barely considered 
other factors. It was a curious general failure. It was, as the scientists 
used to say, comparing apples with oranges. The quality of the Soviet 
conscripts, almost two million per year, drafted for a two-year stint of 

ASSESSMENT
	
	
95
National Service, should have been given more attention. Comparisons 
of air strength based on numbers alone were also misleading: for exam-
ple the West had an overwhelming advantage in the amount of training 
time given to pilots. Further, attempts to arrive at solid conclusions by 
comparing budgets was a singularly useless, disingenuous or even men-
dacious, exercise. All defence budgets are opaque and the doubling of a 
budget does not guarantee a doubling of production. There never was a 
reliable measure of productivity.
  A useful overview of the nature and extent of military exaggerations 
during the Cold War is provided in a book by someone, who like me, 
went to Glenalmond College and Worcester College Oxford, and 
appears to have been infected, like me, with an instinct to challenge the 
received wisdom. Andrew Cockburn’s The Threat gives an excellent pic-
ture of how the military machines of the US and the Soviet Union went 
about the task of persuading their governments of the need for vast 
expenditure on defence by emphasising numbers.3
  The missile gap of the late 1950s and early 1960s, a period when US 
intelligence produced inaccurate assessments of Soviet missile produc-
tion and which chilled the blood of the West, was another area where 
comparing numbers was particularly unhelpful. The world had no expe-
rience of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in battle, so the 
experts had only theoretical data upon which to base their assessments. 
They had been tested over comparatively short ranges. We do know that 
there were many failures in the test firings. These ICBMs were unreli-
able. The smaller rocket systems tested also illustrated the gap between 
theory and practice. In the Yom Kippur War of 1973, the Israelis 
claimed that only one of their aircraft was hit for every 100 SAM-6 
(Surface to Air Missiles) that were fired. The hand-held SAM-7 was 
much less effective: 5,000 hand-held SAM-7s were launched but with 
only two confirmed, and four possible, kills. Remember too that the US 
made a gallant effort to assess the state of the Vietnam War on the basis 
of numbers. Their charts produced proved useless.
  The numbers fallacy remains just as much a danger today. Govern­
ments continue to make efforts to assign numbers to terrorists and their 
supporters, insurgent groups who threaten stability in the Middle East, 
and Russian forces in and near Ukraine. In 2014 the CIA was forced to 
triple its estimate of the number of Islamic State fighters in Iraq and 
Syria in the light of a review of recent intelligence reports, demonstrat-

why spy?
96
ing just how difficult it is to produce accurate estimates of this kind. 
Numbers still inform policy and military decisions about how to tackle 
these threats. But assessors must remain wary of the dangers of placing 
too much confidence in numbers, and of underemphasising the impor-
tance of qualitative factors.
Wishful Thinking
Everyone has, at some time, fallen into the trap of mixing hope with 
reality. In a perfect world wishes must be followed by hard-headed 
assessment. Case officers and assessors need to be on guard against the 
over-optimism of agents, particularly those who are not themselves 
going to be personally involved in action.
  The ancient case of the Trojan horse provides a fine example of the 
dangerous influence of wishful thinking. The Trojans awoke one morn-
ing to find that the Greek forces, which had been besieging them, had 
sailed away leaving a large wooden horse outside the main gate. 
Cassandra, the local soothsayer, was a lone pessimistic voice crying 
‘wolf’. The Trojan leaders however, weary with war, preferred an opti-
mistic assessment that the Greeks had given up their plan to capture 
Troy and sailed away for good leaving behind the horse as a gesture of 
goodwill. Acting on this wishful thinking, the Trojan leaders gave orders 
to enlarge the main gateway so that the wooden horse could be dragged 
inside the city walls. In the middle of the night the belly of the horse 
opened and special Greek forces crept out to take over the city. The 
Greek coup de main is one of many examples when someone crying 
‘wolf’ has been right.
  Before Pearl Harbor, the chief intelligence officer at the US base, 
Captain Laycock, repeatedly warned that the Japanese were in a belliger-
ent mood and likely to go to war. His colleagues, who were engaged in 
wishful thinking, laughed at him, but he was later proved right.
  The prelude to President Galtieri’s 1982 invasion of the Falklands 
provides a further example of the prevalence of wishful thinking. In the 
1970s the Argentinians had come near to war. Prime Minister James 
Callaghan used SIS to pass a gentle warning to them that we had nuclear 
submarines in the area and would use them if they went to war.4 The 
warning, passed discreetly via intelligence channels, had the desired 
effect, and the Argentinians backed off. The belligerent new President 

ASSESSMENT
	
	
97
Galtieri came to power in 1981 promising that he would not put up 
with further British prevarications and procrastinations, and would 
recover the Falklands. The British Government had no need of secret 
intelligence to alert them to the danger to the Falklands, but since no 
viable defence plan for the territory would be affordable in peacetime, 
their policy was ‘to hope for the best’. In fact, Galtieri’s decision to 
invade was logical and there was no excuse for surprise. Wishful think-
ing, complacency, and no doubt Foreign Office assertions that their 
negotiations with the Argentinians would, as they had in the past, prove 
successful all played their part in Britain’s flawed expectation that there 
would be no attack.
The Grass is Greener
The problems created by complacency, false confidence and groupthink 
have already been noted. None of the faults encountered are specifically 
endemic to the intelligence industry, they are commonplace in every 
walk of life, although it is easier to identify such failings after disaster has 
struck in the context of some major investigation than in everyday life. 
Another bad habit to which the military in particular are prone is the 
idea that the grass is always greener on the other pasture, and that, 
therefore, the enemy has the better weapons and equipment.
  I first met this syndrome during the Second World War when I com-
manded an Infantry Anti-Tank Platoon in Normandy. We had been 
provided with six 6-pounder guns, handed on from the Royal Artillery 
who had been issued with 17-pounders. The British gunners did not 
conceal their belief that we had been handed useless peashooters, which 
were no match for modern German tanks, sporting five-inch thick plates 
of frontal steel. I listened politely to the comments of the experts newly 
returned from their battles in the desert and hoped that training and 
tactics would help us since we did not intend to take the Panzers head 
on, but shoot diagonally at the flank and rear of the attacking tanks, 
where the armour was thinner.
  On 1  July 1944 we had the opportunity to put our training and tac-
tics to the test in a daylong battle against strong German Panzer attacks. 
By the end of the day my guns were credited with twelve kills: not bad 
for peashooters. I had three months in hospital to brood on the discrep-
ancy between the pessimistic judgements of the experts and the reality, 

why spy?
98
but it was another forty years before, while involved in writing a book 
about the battle, I discovered the range tables, which presumably caused 
the experts to declare that our rounds would bounce off German 
armour. The tables showed that at its maximum range the 6-pounder 
would not penetrate the frontal armour of a Tiger tank. We, however, 
had been fighting at close quarters and were not shooting at the frontal 
armour, so the range tables had little relevance.
Conclusion
The assessor is faced with many potential pitfalls, as explained in this 
chapter. They must strive for objectivity when interpreting the intelli-
gence available to them. Achieving objectivity is not easy, as our analyses 
of what we see, hear and read are influenced by our own views. Being 
aware of how errors can creep in to assessment is an important step 
towards avoiding these errors.
  Intelligence deals not only with facts but with attempts to fathom the 
mental state of human beings. This is difficult enough to do in public 
polling exercises; it is infinitely more difficult when guesswork, not a 
poll, is the basis for an assessment. The human mind is a mystery and 
minds may change overnight. The biggest challenge of all may be to 
persuade the customer of the wickedness of the outside world, and that 
foreigners are not necessarily thirsting for democracy and all the trap-
pings of a modern state. Perhaps, however, we can forgive busy politi-
cians for failing to find time in their gruelling schedules to read enough 
history to understand that not everyone has the same view of right and 
wrong. But there is less excuse for intelligence officers, and the intelli-
gence community must try hard not to fall into such common traps as 
those listed above.
  It is important that we recognise the debt we owe to the unsung 
heroes and heroines who devote their lives to working in the intelligence 
engine room. Without them the most brilliant Humint or Techint 
would be of little use. We must strive to provide a career structure for 
people prepared to devote their lives to the art of assessment. We should 
also remember the need for country specialisation at a time when the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office has downplayed the importance of 
area specialisations for which, in imperial days, the British were 
renowned. The intelligence community must fill the gap once filled by 
the Imperial Services, colonial and consular.

	
99
7
MORAL DILEMMAS
‘Gentlemen do not read each other’s mail.’
Henry Stimson, US Secretary of State, 1929
‘When the fate of a nation and the lives of its soldiers are at stake, gentlemen 
do read each other’s mail—if they can get their hands on it.’
Allen Dulles, former DCI, 1963
‘As motives [for spying] ideological and patriotic convictions stand at the top 
of the list.’
Allen Dulles, former DCI, 1963
‘The only justification a soldier or a spy can have is the moral worth of the cause 
he represents.’
William Hood, formerly CIA, 1993
‘When they feel threatened they want a lot of it [intelligence], and when they 
don’t, they tend to regard the whole thing as somewhat immoral.’
Vernon Walters, former DDCI, 1978
‘You have to be a bit of a villain for that sort of work.’
William Skardon, renowned MI5 interrogator, in an interview with author 
Philip Knightley, 1967
‘Two presidents, when I was Director, told me in almost identical words, 
“Okay, but don’t get caught.”’
Richard Helms, former DCI, 1996

why spy?
100
‘The gathering of knowledge by clandestine means was repulsive to the feelings 
of English Gentlemen.’
Official British History of the Crimean War
Let us first dispose of the cynics’ easy jibe about oxymorons and intel-
ligence ethics. Soldiers are trained to kill, intelligence people trained to 
spy and as long as the military and intelligence people carry out their 
tasks on behalf of their nation, under the rules laid down by their gov-
ernment, they are not criminals but servants of the state. An instructor 
in an intelligence school might wake his class up by saying, ‘you have 
been hired by the Crown to spy and it is my job to see that you are 
efficient spies’ and assume that all the recruits were comfortable with the 
idea that activities which would normally be considered immoral dis-
reputable or criminal were condoned if carried out on duty.
  This chapter’s discussion of moral dilemmas is positioned alongside 
the other chapters on the machinery and methodology of intelligence 
because the quandaries it presents can be found in a diverse range of 
intelligence activities. There are, for example, tensions between secrecy 
and the oversight of intelligence, questions over whether blackmail 
should be used to obtain intelligence, and moral dilemmas raised by the 
use of torture in connection with efforts to collect intelligence by inter-
rogation. The intelligence community and the consumers of intelligence 
face a range of ethical challenges and moral dilemmas as well as the 
practical challenges discussed earlier in this book.
Torture and Interrogation
When those interested in intelligence gather together at conferences to 
talk about ethics, the subject most likely to be discussed is the collection 
of intelligence by interrogation, although interrogation is not a direct 
concern for most intelligence officers. A case officer is not in the busi-
ness of bullying or torturing their sources. Their task is to recruit and 
befriend agents, building a close relationship based on trust, mutual 
understanding, shared values and interests. A successful Humint case is 
likely to be one where there is a mutually beneficial partnership. Such a 
relationship bears no resemblance to the sometimes adversarial relation-
ship between an interrogator and a suspect, where one party is trying to 
extract information and the other may be trying to conceal the truth.

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
101
  The best interrogators, it is said, are born, not made. They need intel-
ligence, patience, a good memory, and the skills of a psychologist. Some 
interrogators have been successful because of dogged determination, 
wearing suspects down through days and nights of gentle but insistent 
questioning until the victims are so bored that they collaborate in order 
to bring the agony to an end. Good interrogators are endowed with 
capacious memories, quick intelligence, and the qualities of a successful 
barrister. Interrogators can also be brilliant communicators who some-
how persuade the victim that they are both on the same side.
  At a recent seminar on intelligence ethics, I found that there was no 
discussion of the occasional need for hostile interrogation. Those present 
seemed to be content to accept without question the European 
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms’ prohibition 
of torture and other forms of ill-treatment. No-one remarked that 
Western fastidiousness provided terrorist instructors with a useful train-
ing tool: since Western interrogators were forbidden to exert ‘pressure’, 
the prisoners only had to maintain denials or silence in order to win.
  There is a need for discussion about definitions of terms. The ancient 
Chinese and Greek philosophers understood full well that unless we 
defined our terms, debate was meaningless. In 1540 an English diction-
ary defined torture as ‘the infliction of excruciating pain or suffering in 
order to force an unwilling witness to give information’. This definition 
is echoed in the UN Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, 
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, signed by the UK on 
15 
 March 1985. In the Convention’s definition, torture ‘means any act 
by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is inten-
tionally inflicted on a person for such purposes as obtaining from him 
or a third person information or a confession’.
  Those responsible for drawing up the UN rules and definitions were 
guilty of mirror imaging. Their reactions to controversial techniques 
would probably be different to those from other cultures and, perhaps, 
harsher environments. A sophisticated Western jurist or judge brought 
up in comfortable civilised circumstances is unlikely to have the same 
reactions to the ‘controversial’ techniques as someone brought up in a 
society with a harsher culture. What for one person is torture or degrad-
ing treatment may for another be mere discomfort. Reaction to pres-
sure—a term distinct from torture—is very individual. And whether the 
victim succumbs depends on many different factors, such as self-esteem, 

why spy?
102
will, conscience, and loyalty to colleagues or cause. These are matters 
likely to differ dramatically according to character, personality, hardi-
ness, background and training.
  Our general revulsion against torture is of comparatively recent date. 
In 1640 England led the way by abolishing torture and by 1789 the 
French followed suit, but Europe was accustomed to barbaric actions, 
including public executions, beheadings, burning at the stake, and hang-
ing, drawing and quartering. Most people today are opposed to the use 
of instruments of physical torture such as the mediaeval rack and 
thumbscrew, the twentieth century cattle prod or water torture: but 
some continue to practise beheadings, execution by stoning and public 
floggings.
  The debate on interrogation has tended to be a dialogue des sourds: 
minds made up already. The spectrum of views on interrogation in the 
West falls into three parts. At one extreme are the ethical absolutists who 
renounce any form of pressure to extract statements from prisoners, argu-
ing that this is an abuse of human rights. Somewhere in the middle are 
those who emphasise that intelligence extracted as a result of pressure is 
unreliable, since the prisoners may tell lies in order to earn their freedom. 
Therefore on practical grounds, pressure should be banned. Sir Dick 
White took the view that an interrogator only needed intellectual skills. 
But I noted that when MI5 faced Philby their intellectual skills did not 
persuade him to confess. The third group consists of those who say they 
have learnt by experience that well trained ‘hard’ individuals seldom 
succumb to kind words, cups of tea or intellectual dominance.
Historical examples
Not everyone agrees that no pressure should be used to tip the balance 
in the interrogator’s favour. Many civilian and military lives were saved 
as a result of the tactics employed in Malaya in the 1950s. Uncooperative 
prisoners did not enjoy home comforts: temperatures could be unpleas-
ant, food was basic and sleep was disturbed. We were advocates of the 
‘ticking bomb’ justification: the prisoner’s rights were not superior to 
those of potential victims who might be tortured in front of their 
despairing families before being brutally murdered. This is delicate 
ground indeed: one person’s discomfort may seem torture to a gently 
reared judge.

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
103
  I was never formally part of the interrogation process in Malaya 
although I was involved in the discussions about rewards and incentives 
in the general context of our psywar programme, and I was present 
during some interrogations, acting as a Chinese-speaking interpreter for 
SB.1 There was no hint of torture in interrogations that I attended. CTs 
who had surrendered or been captured were faced with a simple choice: 
collaborate and be rewarded with generous cash rewards and even with 
freedom, or refuse and face the prospect of lengthy imprisonment and 
possibly execution.
  Fortunately few of our captured CTs had strong ideological convic-
tions. The surrendered enemy personnel had already decided that they 
had backed the wrong horse and many captured enemy personnel were 
already disillusioned and ripe for defection. Some of the senior cadres 
were little more than gangsters who had decided that the Malayan 
Communist Party was a promising form of secret society in which they 
could expect to enjoy greater privileges than they had previously enjoyed 
as a Triad officer. There were few died-in-the-wool fanatical Communists.
  We found that for the most part friendliness and generous treatment, 
coupled with promises of early freedom and rehabilitation, worked well. 
Usually there was a rapid turning of the coat and collaboration; some 
went to work immediately acting as guides to jungle squads seeking 
terrorist camps. We were also aided by excellent Chinese supporting staff 
who could tie the prisoners in knots on ideology. They knew a great deal 
more about Marxist Leninism and Mao’s doctrines than most of the 
Malayan Communists.
  A rare record of practical experience is provided by Camp 020. MI5 
opened this facility in July 1940. They had turned Latchmere, a former 
military hospital, into an efficient interrogation centre equipped with 
plenty of hidden microphones. Between 1940 and 1945, 480 interroga-
tion cases were handled there. The Commandant was Lieutenant-
Colonel Robin Stephens, who was a stern character in the mould of 
some gruff, bulldog hero of Boy’s Own Paper. Stephens did not like 
‘Huns’ and made no secret of the low opinion he held of the foreign 
spies who passed through the camp. In one of his reports he remarks 
that, ‘[t]he majority of the spies were as treacherous a gang as could be 
found in the universe.’ These were all comparatively low-grade agents, 
recruited casually by the Germans and given relatively easy tasks. Most 
were spying for money.

why spy?
104
  To staff and prisoners alike Stephens gave the impression of a fierce, 
single minded officer to be obeyed. He insisted that a good interrogator 
must hate the enemy. His teams usually succeeded in ‘breaking’ the 
prisoners, although in one case it took seventy-seven days. The process 
always began with the prisoner dressed in ill-fitting civilian clothes 
marked by a large triangular white patch, standing to attention. The 
interrogators made it clear that they knew enough about the prisoner 
already to convict them and all that was required was a full confession, 
and if he or she collaborated it might be possible to arrange that they 
would not be executed.
  In peacetime these proceedings might have been derailed by a defence 
barrister. But this was wartime. Britain was the only European country 
which had not succumbed to the Nazi hordes. If you had been found in 
possession of equipment which could have no other purpose than clan-
destine activity, conviction was almost certain. The penalty for espionage 
could be death.
  As the Allies advanced through Europe, Stephens, now a Colonel, 
took command in Forward Interrogation Centres, and was accused of 
torture and abuse. Stephens’ charges included insufficient clothing, cold 
water thrown into cells in winter, scrubbing out by prisoners, insuffi-
cient medical attention, bullying and harassment by guards, and solitary 
confinement as a punishment for not answering questions. Stephens was 
acquitted at a court martial. He had always forbidden physical violence, 
but demanded strict discipline and determined, unremitting, interroga-
tion. His doctrine included that:
Figuratively, a spy in war should be held at the point of a bayonet. 
Violence is taboo … [because] it lowers the standard of information. 
Pressure is attained by personality, tone, and rapidity of question; insistence 
upon an immediate answer, recapitulation. 
Never promise, never bargain. The man’s neck is in your grasp. 
Blow hot, blow cold. No respite, no time to recover, no time to plan.2
  Sometimes interrogations went on all night, exhausting interrogators 
and prisoners alike. In the particular circumstances that Stephens was 
confronted with, these methods appear to have been successful. It is 
important to remember, though, that what is effective, and what is 
appropriate, depends upon many factors, including whether it is war-
time or peacetime, and the background and nature of the people being 
interrogated.

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
105
  Two further historical examples are useful here. They confirm that 
results can vary enormously according to the character of the prisoner. 
The first is the case of a CIA officer whose job was to glean intelligence 
that might help to reduce the damage from rocket attacks on Saigon. 
His colleagues in Vietnamese military intelligence believed in torture, 
but their barbarities produced nothing of value. The CIA officer per-
suaded his Vietnamese colleagues to hand over the battered Vietcong 
prisoner who had refused to talk. The CIA officer tended his wounds, 
fed him well, let him meet his family and showed him the sights of a 
prosperous, vibrant Saigon. The prisoner decided to collaborate and 
produced actionable intelligence, which helped the defence against 
Vietcong rocket attacks. The moral is obvious: kindness can pay.
  The second story is of Nien Cheng, the widow of a pre-revolution 
Chinese diplomat who was part of the tiny coterie of Chinese in 
Shanghai who were prepared to stay in touch with foreigners. Nien was 
a sophisticated well-travelled graduate of London University who when 
she visited Britain usually stayed with the Duchess of Gloucester. She 
was arrested when the Cultural Revolution began, condemned to soli-
tary confinement and tormented for five years, stoutly refusing to sign a 
confession. Nien kept up her fighting spirit, partly furious against the 
evil regime that had taken over her beloved country and partly deter-
mined to see her daughter again. The European Court of Human Rights 
in Strasbourg would certainly have found that her treatment was cruel, 
degrading and inhuman. She was slapped, beaten, kicked, bounced 
against the wall, and for a long period her hands were so tightly hand-
cuffed behind her back so that her hands and arms swelled horribly. Her 
cell was freezing in winter and unpleasantly hot in summer; her rations 
consisted of watery soup and boiled rice. Medical treatment was refused 
for her increasing number of ailments, which included haemorrhaging, 
bleeding gums, swollen joints and open wounds. Her interrogators 
assumed that like most detainees Nien would eventually decide to make 
a confession in order to escape the miseries of her cell. They were wrong: 
she left the prison bloody but unbowed. Nien is a reminder that resis-
tance is not necessarily dependent on fitness, training, age, health or 
fanaticism. She stood up to her torturers for moral reasons, and will-
power prevailed over pain.3

why spy?
106
America’s views
The US, having moved during the twentieth century from Secretary 
Stimson’s high-minded position of ‘gentlemen do not read each other’s 
mail’ to the creation of the largest intelligence community in the demo-
cratic world, is not in step with Europe. CIA documents available on the 
internet appearing under the name KUBARK (the cryptonym for 
CIA 
 Headquarters) attempt to bring together, in language understand-
able by 
 the layperson, the findings of psychologists on human reaction 
to pressure.4
  The 1963 document warns that ‘[i]nterrogations conducted under 
compulsion or duress are especially likely to involve illegality … [and] 
prior Headquarters approval … must be obtained for the interrogation 
of any source … if bodily harm is to be inflicted [or] [i]f medical, 
chemical, or electrical methods are to be used’. A less heavily redacted 
version, declassified in 2014, reveals that if the detention of the suspect 
was ‘locally illegal and traceable to KUBARK … retroactive 
Headquarters approval may be promptly requested by priority cable.’5 
The general tenor of both these handbooks is that pressure of some sort 
will be necessary to make recalcitrant prisoners talk. Intellectual domi-
nance and patience will not always be enough.
  Interrogation is described as a team effort in these handbooks; a con-
tinuum, planned in advance, where an expert analytical team supports 
the interrogators, possibly role-playing as ‘good cop’ and ‘bad cop’. The 
support team follows the interrogation from an adjacent room, armed 
with access to all the relevant data ready to keep the interrogators sup-
plied with supplementary material. Concealed microphones and cam-
eras linked to recorders are used so the interrogators do not need to take 
notes. Recommendations include purpose built interrogation rooms to 
eliminate distractions and induce a sense of isolation. Disorientation 
techniques such as varying the times and durations of interrogation are 
also recommended. They suggest that the threat of physical pain may 
produce cooperation.
  The public debate about interrogation methods has been much wider 
in the US than in the UK. 
 A review commissioned by the Intelligence 
Science Board in 2005 produced a 325-page report concluding that the 
methods used by the US intelligence community were unreliable and 
suggesting that a wider and more scientific approach was needed. It 
agreed, however, that the use of ‘highly coercive’ techniques might 

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
107
sometimes be required. It is important to balance this claim against the 
damage that revelations about the US’ use of so-called enhanced inter-
rogation techniques post-9/11 have done to the country’s reputation.
  Part of the confusion in the debate about interrogation and torture 
stems from a failure to differentiate between the mindset of a normal 
prisoner of war and that of a jihadi. German, Italian and Japanese prison-
ers held during the Second World War were not usually fanatics. Many 
wanted to live and cooperated accordingly. Jihadi terrorists, however, are 
often completely dedicated to the cause. We certainly need additional 
efforts to undo the brainwashing carried out by vocal extremists.
  On 9 
 March 2008 President George W. 
 Bush vetoed a Congressional 
attempt to put new limits on the techniques that could be used for 
interrogation. Those in favour of Congress’s attempt repeated the famil-
iar argument that there was no evidence that harsh interrogation proce-
dures produced more useful intelligence than gentler methods. The 
President argued that, ‘[b]ecause the danger remains, we need to ensure 
our intelligence officials have all the tools they need to stop the terror-
ists.’ He continued, ‘[w]e have no higher responsibility than stopping 
terrorist attacks. And this is no time for Congress to abandon practices 
that have a proven track record of keeping America safe.’
  General Michael Hayden, former Director of the CIA (2006–9), is 
reported to have announced that the US Army Field Manual on inter-
rogation is an adequate guidebook, and that harsh methods are unneces-
sary or even counterproductive. But Bush maintained that the CIA 
should not be bound by rules written for the guidance of soldiers in 
combat. In 2014 the debate was once again given new life, this time by 
the declassification of parts of the Senate Select Committee’s 2012 study 
of the CIA’s detention and interrogation programme.6 The dilemma will 
not disappear; interrogation methods need a great deal more study.
Northern Ireland and Strasbourg
In December 1971 the Irish Government filed an application with the 
European Commission of Human Rights in Strasbourg. It included an 
allegation that Britain had, during the interrogation of suspected terror-
ists interned without trial in Northern Ireland, violated Article 3 of the 
European Convention on Human Rights, which prohibits torture and 
inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners. Seven years later the 

why spy?
108
European Court of Human Rights announced that Britain had not been 
guilty of torture, but had been guilty of the inhuman and degrading 
treatment of prisoners.
  As Secretary of the JIC and staff officer to Sir Dick White, the 
Intelligence Coordinator, when the furore about Northern Ireland broke 
out, I was closely involved in the debate. With years of experience of 
interrogation techniques in Malaya, it was difficult to empathise with 
those who felt so strongly that to put a sack over the head of a detainee 
was to inflict degrading and inhuman treatment. Our targets in Malaya, 
the CTs, were in the habit of cold-blooded murder, often after torturing 
their prisoners. The IRA too showed little mercy to their captives.
  My involvement in what came to be known as ‘the Strasbourg case’ 
began when White appeared in my office one morning brandishing a 
newspaper which had a banner headline about torture in Northern 
Ireland. The controversy was dealt with in a very typical British fashion. 
The great and the good, judges, Privy Counsellors, intelligence and secu-
rity knights, and generals were consulted.7 White and I were at one on 
the subject of the immense importance of the intelligence gained by 
interrogation, and in the country of the blind we had something to offer.
  I have refreshed my memory by re-reading documents I drafted in 
1971 and 1972, and other official papers that are now available in The 
National Archives. From the beginning I had taken the view that there 
would continue to be a public outcry and we should clarify that the 
objective of wall standing, hooding and white noise was not to soften up 
the prisoners, but to ensure maximum security in the early stages of an 
operation. These techniques reduced, for prisoners and staff, the chances 
of identifying individuals involved, the place of interrogation, and the 
overhearing of conversations and recognition of voices. The Intelligence 
Coordinator’s recommendations incorporated my view. The softening 
up effect the techniques had on these prisoners as they awaited interro-
gation was acknowledged, but this was not the purpose of their use.
  The Intelligence Coordinator’s note for Privy Councillor Lord Parker’s 
1971–2 inquiry into interrogation practices emphasised the need to bear 
in mind that the intelligence produced by interrogation had become the 
most important source of intelligence available to the security forces in 
Northern Ireland. The Government was, however, scared. Prime 
Minister Edward Heath, who had not long before complained to the 
Secretary of the Cabinet that the military, security and intelligence ser-

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
109
vices were all wet and asked for a list of things we might secretly do to 
inhibit the IRA, banned all the controversial techniques, hoping that 
this would persuade the Irish Government to withdraw their application 
to Strasbourg. Perhaps if, as I had advised at the beginning, we had 
apologised for mistakes made in the heat of the moment, the Irish 
Government might have been mollified.
  White’s notes make robust points about the psychological environ-
ment of interrogation, which were at odds with his earlier emphasis to 
me on the efficacy of intellectual domination. He wrote that successful 
interrogation requires that prisoners be brought to realise that they have 
reached the end of their particular road, that their freedom is entirely 
within our control, and they are now entirely alone. Their former com-
rades could neither help them nor condemn them further, nor exact 
reprisals upon them (my notations on the draft challenged this last 
point). White continued:
  It is for him [the prisoner] and him alone to decide whether it is best 
for him to cooperate with his interrogators … The conviction of having 
reached the end of the road is all the more complete when the suspect 
reaches it through his own introspection during periods of isolation in 
his cell and by reading the signs of his defeat in the impersonal and dis-
ciplined demeanour and conduct of those who control and question him.
  There were certain grim essentials in the business.
  The Coordinator’s Recommendations included that:
a)  Interrogation should be supervised by a senior police officer; the role 
of military officers should be advisory only.
b)  There should be substantial information on a detainee’s involvement 
in terrorist activity before he is selected for protracted interrogation.
c)  The use of permitted techniques should be subject to medical scru-
tiny and advice.
d)  The three techniques of wall-standing, hooding and white noise 
should be used for control, discipline and security purposes.
e)  Records should be kept on the use of the three techniques.
f)  There should be immediate investigation into the possibility of pro-
viding better purpose-built interrogation centres, to reduce the need 
to use the three techniques.
  An outcome of the various official inquiries prompted by the use of 
hooding and other techniques in Northern Ireland was the appearance in 

why spy?
110
The National Archives of a short report by the Ministry of Defence 
describing the results achieved by interrogation of detainees in Northern 
Ireland. Since the Report was the only one of many submitted to the 
Parker Committee which was cleared for the public records, it seems rea-
sonable to assume that it slipped through the security net by mistake.8
  The Report claimed that new, or confirmatory intelligence, was 
obtained about both wings of the IRA. 
 This included forty sheets of 
ORBAT, the identification of hundreds of IRA personnel, future opera-
tional plans, logistical and operational arrangements, locations of arms 
caches, locations of safe houses, descriptions of means of communica-
tions, and description of supply routes for arms and explosives. The intel-
ligence obtained was actionable and of immediate, as well as of long-
term, value. It helped the security forces in various ways, including the 
mounting of successful search and arrest operations, which in turn led to 
further identifications and successes, such as the discovery of a large arms 
cache. This report seems to justify the infliction of pressure on the sus-
pects, although, of course, the opposition can point out that we cannot 
be sure that the same results could have been achieved without pressure. 
The Ministry of Defence also had reason to exaggerate in this account of 
intelligence gained from this controversial interrogation operation.
  During the Irish imbroglio, White continued to argue that pressure 
was not needed to produce results from interrogation, but I managed to 
persuade him that wall standing, bags on heads, and white sound could 
be justified on security grounds, that sleep deprivation for both suspect 
and interrogators was an inevitable part of the operational process, and 
that a diet of bread and water was a long way from torture. Frank Steele, 
an SIS officer serving in Northern Ireland, described the controversial 
techniques as damned stupid and immoral. But Steele had even less 
direct experience of interrogation than White.
  In the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, seventeen 
judges agreed that the techniques amounted not to torture but instead 
constituted degrading and inhuman treatment. Judge M.  Zekia offered 
the common-sense rider that the criteria are subjective; there will be a 
difference between the reaction of a healthy young person and that of a 
sick or old person. Sir Gerald FitzMaurice, a British judge, took the view 
that the controversial techniques were not inhuman. Perhaps His 
Honour had, like me, been educated at a British boarding school.
  The techniques complained of in the Strasbourg case may seem mild, 
or at least of a different sort, compared with the revolting and obscene 

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
111
cruelties inflicted routinely by interrogators in police states. Penkovsky’s 
notes described in detail the cruelties carried out in the basement of the 
KGB premises in Moscow, where innocent Russians were pitilessly inter-
rogated. He describes one cell where, if the prisoner refused to ‘sing’ 
appropriately, hungry rats were loosed through a series of pipes to attack 
the victim, while the interrogator screamed through a microphone, ‘now 
will you confess, you scoundrel?’ People confessed, the guards drove the 
rats out with powerful jets of water and the prisoner was hustled out 
ready for execution. It was, said Penkovsky, ‘terrible’.9
  It seems to me, forty years on, that there has been little progress or 
advance in the study of interrogation techniques and the results of inter-
rogation, and of the most effective permissible means of persuading 
prisoners to disgorge their intelligence. The absolutists’ argument, based 
on the sanctity of human rights, seem to drown out all debate on the 
need to distinguish between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ individuals.
Polygraphs and Lie Detectors
The polygraph method of interrogation deserves mention. It is popularly 
known as a lie detector, but also by more scientific names such as the 
measuring of electro-dermal responses or the systolic blood pressure 
deception test. It is a ‘black box’ which records changes in blood pres-
sure, breathing rate and sweating, all of which may indicate that the 
suspect is stressed by some particular questions. This approach is based 
on the notion that a guilty party is more likely to manifest signs of stress 
than an innocent person. The possible use of the polygraph by intelli-
gence agencies creates a moral dilemma, though, as it does not necessar-
ily produce consistently reliable results. British agencies tend to be dis-
missive of the value of polygraphs. Sir Maurice Oldfield, Chief of SIS, 
swore to me that he had outwitted one. However, while they certainly 
cannot be considered to be lie detectors, they may provide useful indica-
tors of subjects deserving further examination.
  The ‘black box’ style of polygraph appeared in the first half of the 
twentieth century, publicly championed by Professor Leonard Keeler of 
Northwestern University in the US. 
 Keeler’s view in 1930 was that the 
only torture involved in such tests were self-induced through fear of 
being caught, a fear which, in any case, was likely to be present in the 
mind of any guilty party whatever the form of interrogation. Another 

why spy?
112
US academic, William Marston, agreed with Keeler’s views but went 
further in claims for the polygraph. He argued that the polygraph test 
should be administered to every candidate for public office.10
  While the British have been averse to the polygraph, the Americans 
have used and studied it widely. The Israeli and Japanese police routinely 
use the polygraph for investigations and have reported considerable 
success both in identifying criminals and exonerating the innocent. In 
an article in the Journal of Applied Psychology by Vance MacLaren of the 
University of New Brunswick, it is argued that if what the author calls 
the Guilty Knowledge Test is used skilfully it can produce useful results, 
reporting that in one experiment 76 per cent of those with ‘secret 
knowledge’ were correctly identified. Nonetheless, the results overall, 
whether from laboratory tests or practice, do not support the view that 
the polygraph will necessarily detect a lie.
Oversight, Freedom of Information and Security
‘I think there’s a tradition that the CIA is a silent service, and it’s a good one. I 
think the silence ought to begin with me.’
Richard Helms, when appointed DCI in 1966
‘I recall only two instances in intelligence history in which the files of intelli-
gence services were as thoroughly ransacked as those of the Agency during [the 
mid-1970s congressional] investigations.’
Richard Helms, former DCI, 2003
‘95 percent of what leaks comes out of the executive branch, because some 
people believe they have some free right to disseminate this information.’
George Tenet, DCI, 1999
  The requirements of security do not sit easily with demands for trans-
parency and political oversight of intelligence agencies and their work in 
a democracy. To give parliamentarians access to classified material so that 
they may monitor the intelligence agencies’ actions necessarily entails a 
risk to the security of that material. Yet the UK maintains a parliamentary 
oversight committee, and the US has a comparable system.
  No doubt a lot of time is spent on oversight and freedom of informa-
tion issues, which might, perhaps, be better spent, but the British par-
liamentarians charged with scrutiny have shown more restraint and 

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
113
concern for national security than their colleagues in the US. 
 We have 
never had the equivalent of the Church Committee rampaging like a 
rogue elephant in the delicate world of espionage. It is ironic that the 
CIA, which in the 1960s, as a result of the Philby case, was chary of 
sharing secrets with their leaky cousins in the UK, became a major secu-
rity risk because of the antics of egocentric US politicians just a few 
years later.
  George Bush Snr, former President as well as former DCI, said on 
26 
 April 1999 at the dedication ceremony for the George Bush Centre 
for Intelligence at the CIA, ‘I have nothing but contempt and anger for 
those who betray our trust by exposing the names of our sources. They 
are, in my view, the most insidious of traitors.’ The list of criticisms by 
former DCIs could, of course, be much longer. Bill Colby, who was at 
the helm when the oversight frenzy was gathering momentum, had to 
spend far more of his time attending meetings with members of 
Congress and Senators than on directing the CIA. 
 The unfortunate 
Colby was a superb and experienced intelligence operator, as well as an 
admirable human being. He was excoriated by many of his colleagues 
for giving too much information to the politicians. His response, which 
seemed to make sense, was that had he not cooperated there would have 
been a flood of subpoenas and contempt citations, and the damage to 
the Agency would have been far greater. Alas, the damage can never be 
entirely undone; allies and agents have learnt that the well established 
‘need to know’ principle is no longer sacrosanct in a democratic society 
where freedom can easily turn into licence and transparency takes pre-
cedence over security.
  Traditionally, Britain has been secretive about intelligence. Until late 
in the twentieth century the very existence of MI5, SIS and GCHQ was 
unacknowledged. Questions put to the government were answered with 
the bland, ‘we do not comment on intelligence matters.’ By the end of 
the century their existence had been acknowledged and their charters 
formalised and published. The Freedom of Information Act passed in 
2000 includes references to intelligence, Special Forces, and provides for 
exemptions. The British, when making provision for exemptions, take 
into consideration a wide range of factors including possible damage to 
relations with other countries and their intelligence services. Long may 
common-sense prevail.
  The Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament (ISC), the 
UK’s formal intelligence oversight body, was reformed by the Justice and 

why spy?
114
Security Act 2013 so that it has greater powers to collect evidence from 
the intelligence agencies. Even before this reform the ISC received visi-
tors from other states wanting to learn from our model for the oversight 
of intelligence in a democratic state. While increased openness facilitates 
oversight by the ISC, the public and the media, there are others who 
argue that this damages the nation’s security. There is no obvious way to 
resolve this tension between secrecy and accountability in intelligence.
  A notable instance of this conflict arose when I was secretary at a 
meeting of the heads of the intelligence services at which the main sub-
ject on the agenda was the growing pressure to release information on 
the successes of British intelligence in the Second World War. Silence 
had been maintained for twenty-five years, and no official was anxious 
to change the rules. Silence seemed preferable to the unknown conse-
quences of change. Outside Whitehall, however, change was already 
taking place. David Kahn’s book The Codebreakers and Donald 
MacLachlan’s book Room 39 had already been published.11 Others were 
waiting in the wings anxious to publish on the basis of their wartime 
experiences, most notably Sir John Masterman, formerly Provost of 
Worcester College, Oxford. Masterman, wartime intelligence officer, 
Christ Church historian, cricketer and novelist, wanted to tell the world 
about the remarkable triumphs of British intelligence in the Second 
World War. He proposed to do so in a book entitled The Double-Cross 
System, which he based (rather cheekily) on the official report he had 
written at the end of the war about the operations that had comprehen-
sively bamboozled German intelligence over our military plans and 
strength (see Chapter Twelve).12
  The committee complained that Masterman was letting the side 
down and should not be allowed to publish. In 1972, after much huff-
ing and puffing and even threats of prosecution, he was given permis-
sion. The unkind suggested that he was helped by the fact that both Sir 
Alec Douglas-Home, a future Prime Minister, and Sir Dick White had 
been his pupils at Oxford. Alternatively, it can be argued that common-
sense prevailed.
  However, the Masterman item was only the hors d’oeuvre at this 
meeting. The main issue on the agenda was the argument about whether 
intelligence should be given its place among all the other official vol-
umes being published about the history of the Second World War. The 
committee were adamant that no official history should be written on 
so delicate a subject, and in any case would be impossible to write.

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
115
  Taking a deep breath, I ventured to say that I thought that posterity 
would not be very kind to us if the minutes showed that the proposal 
had been vetoed before any research had been done. Should we not call 
upon an eminent historian to look at the records, and if they recom-
mended that something could be done, they could be commissioned to 
write a secret history, which would not have to be published? To my 
delight the committee agreed that Professor Harry Hinsley should be 
invited to look into the matter. The result was the publication of three 
volumes on intelligence and one on strategic deception. They are heavy 
going; cattily described as history written in committee for committees. 
Nevertheless, they have ensured that the role of intelligence in World 
War II has been recorded.13 A small collection of other official or autho-
rised histories of intelligence have followed, including Christopher 
Andrew’s The Defence of the Realm.14 Common sense has prevailed over 
a bureaucratic lethargy that was hiding under the cloak of security.
Blackmail, Drugs and Sex
‘[T]he Female of Her Species is more deadly than the Male.’
Rudyard Kipling, ‘The Female of the Species’, 1911
  British intelligence has never officially accepted such infelicitous 
improprieties as intelligence brothels, blackmail, and the use of drugs as 
appropriate weapons for their armoury. These weapons, along with 
assassination, continue however to be frequently used by others.15 Such 
subjects have been taught in the Andropov School for Intelligence 
Officers in Moscow, where the tradition that predates the Russian 
Revolution of using any weapon, from torture through to sex and black-
mail, has been continued. They do not appear in the syllabus at British 
intelligence schools, and they certainly are not ‘cricket’.
  The drugging of a courier or a potential agent with a view to subse-
quent blackmail is unlikely to lead to the blossoming of a warm and 
trusting relationship between case officer and agent. The frightened 
agent, recruited through fear of exposure, is unlikely to be whole-heart-
edly devoted to serving the interests of his or her blackmailers. The 
perception of a change in the terrorist threat brought about by 9/11 has 
renewed debates about whether these methods are acceptable.
  Sex is a questionable basis for an intelligence relationship. Seduction 
has never been a formally recognised weapon in the British intelligence 

why spy?
116
armoury. After the Second World War, however, attractive, vivacious, 
young ballerinas were to be found at official receptions in Moscow and 
Leningrad, enchanting the unattached male guests. They often ensnared 
besotted diplomats. Not every ‘swallow’, to use the Russian jargon, suc-
ceeded, but many did. For example, in 1953 the CIA’s first Station 
Chief—their most senior representative—in Moscow was sent home in 
disgrace, having succumbed to the charms of a swallow; eleven members 
of the US Embassy staff were also sent home during the same period for 
the same reason. During this period the French Ambassador and his Air 
Attaché also succumbed to the charms of swallows.
  This was a time when, in Western society, homosexuality was still 
regarded in much the same terms as it had been when Oscar Wilde was 
condemned. So the ‘sex’ weapon was doubly powerful in the case of a 
homosexual entrapment. Before the First World War, Colonel Redl of 
the Austrian General Staff, an extravagant dandy and a homosexual had 
been trapped by the Russian Imperial Intelligence Services with money 
and with the threat of exposing his sexual orientation. Redl gave the 
Russians total access to the secrets of the Austrian General Staff and his 
material was rated as being worth at least twelve divisions.
  Crude Soviet provocation tactics often worked: a frequent ploy was 
to lure a foolish foreigner into bed with a swallow and then send in an 
angry ‘husband’, complete with camera, ready to photograph the 
seducer in flagrante delicto. He would be threatened with exposure to his 
Ambassador if he refused to collaborate. The approach would not, of 
course, have worked had the victims felt confident that if they made an 
honest confession to their Ambassador the only result would be a repri-
mand. However, Western intelligence services were so anxious about 
blackmail that a confession would almost certainly lead to immediate 
repatriation and a serious black mark.
  During the Cold War period the acknowledged masters of sex ploys 
were the East German Service. Markus Wolf, the East German Chief’s, 
first essay into the use of sex to produce intelligence was, however, a 
farce. His Soviet advisers had helped him to set up a malina (slang for a 
‘honey trap’), a brothel equipped with concealed microphones and cam-
eras in order to entrap foreign staff. Finding swallows proved to be dif-
ficult. Wolf’s first team were so unattractive that they had to be dis-
missed; a second team was infested with lice. Then the malina and its 
staff waited in vain for a visitor. Eventually one of Wolf’s staff managed 

MORAL DILEMMAS
	
	
117
to persuade a West German journalist to enter the trap, but the journal-
ist spent the evening sitting in the kitchen chatting to a maid. Yet Wolf 
was lucky; the journalist guessed the true nature of the malina, offered 
his services and became quite useful.
  The East German Service went on to penetrate the Bonn Government 
at many levels. The basic ploy was simple; their officers were sent to cafés 
near ministries and government offices, which were regularly used by 
their employees, to pick up junior female staff. If a suitable lonely heart 
was found, the next stage was to deepen the relationship and to seek 
help from the new found friend under some innocent sounding pretext, 
gradually leading to a compromising situation and, finally, to recruit-
ment. The East German officers were not specially selected Adonis types, 
trained in ars amatoria. But they were good listeners and, perhaps, ama-
teur psychologists, using friendship, sometimes even marriage, as a 
weapon. The German service was even prepared to organise a bogus 
religious marriage if need be. As KGB’s Major General Oleg Kalugin 
remarked, sex could indeed be a powerful weapon.
Conclusion
There is a balance to be struck between ethics and the requirements of 
intelligence. Of intelligence’s moral dilemmas it is perhaps interrogation 
and torture that are given the most attention today. There are, unsurpris-
ingly, polarised opinions on what is effective, what is permissible, and 
what is required in terms of interrogation practices. More research needs 
to be done on what methods are effective and acceptable.
  This chapter has discussed just some of the moral dilemmas of intel-
ligence. The issue of the enormous thefts of classified material, as carried 
out by Edward Snowden and Chelsea (formerly Bradley) Manning must 
also be debated more seriously. The public must be left in no doubt as to 
the damage to our national security done by all such whistleblowers.


PART THREE
FAMOUS CASES OF INTELLIGENCE 
IN PRACTICE


	
121
8
PEARL HARBOR
‘The Japanese are not going to risk a fight with a first-class nation.’
Charles S.  Faddis, US Congressman, February 1941
‘No matter what happens the U.S.  Navy is not going to be caught napping.’
Frank Knox, Secretary of the US Navy, 4  December 1941
The attack on the US naval base at Pearl Harbor on the Hawaiian island 
of Oahu was undoubtedly a victory for the Japanese. Broad intelligence 
warnings that the Japanese were preparing for war reached US custom-
ers yet they paid scant attention. It was an intelligence failure for the US 
in the broad sense that the intelligence community failed to persuade 
the politicians and military commanders to expect a Japanese attack. 
Their general warnings should not have been brushed aside so easily.
  There are parallels between Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and the 
Al Qaeda attacks of 9/11. Each came as a horrific surprise. Japanese 
naval aircraft destroyed over 200 planes and ships, and killed around 
2,500 service personnel at Pearl Harbor; the Al Qaeda attack, using four 
civilian airliners as flying bombs, killed over 3,000 civilians.
  In both cases alarm bells had been sounding, but had not rung insis-
tently enough to engender a sense of urgency or a drastic review of the 
defensive measures in place. There was no top priority requirement 
demanding special efforts by all agencies to identify the nature of the 

why spy?
122
threat. It was not until after the disasters that a sense of urgency was 
shared by all agencies concerned, and that analysts identified potentially 
useful minute pieces of intelligence as wheat among the mass of chaff. 
The Pearl Harbor attack demonstrates the sins of assessment discussed 
in an earlier chapter. Above all, it shows how almost impossible it is to 
persuade senior officers to overcome their prejudices and preconcep-
tions. This, and the cases in the remaining chapters in this part of the 
book, are well-known and much analysed.
  The background to the attack was Japan’s insistence that the West 
tolerate its expansionist policies, which were designed to give it access to 
oil, rubber and other strategic materials. The determination of the 
Japanese to break out of their economic straitjacket does not seem to 
have been adequately understood, although they had joined Germany’s 
Axis grouping in September 1940. The West had no hard secret intelli-
gence on their plans or intentions: a Sigint indication that Pearl Harbor 
might be the object of a surprise attack was not passed on to the 
American military commanders in Hawaii.
  The failure to foresee and warn of the possibility of a full-scale air 
assault on Pearl Harbor ranks high in the annals of intelligence failures, 
but, as usual, the responsibility for the disaster lay at many doors. From 
President Franklin Roosevelt downwards the idea of such an air attack 
was unthinkable. Security in Japan had prevented foreigners from 
observing their preparations, and the weather helped conceal their 
armada during its journey to the target. Yet there was plenty of overt 
evidence of the belligerent state of mind of the Japanese. In January 
1941, for example, the Japanese Foreign Minister bluntly announced 
that Japan ‘must control the Western Pacific.’
  Another factor contributing to the disaster was a lack of coordination 
and communication between departments in Washington and Pearl 
Harbor. The general chairing the Army Board of Inquiry that looked 
into this surprise attack remarked of the Pearl Harbor warning systems 
and information centre, ‘it all seems cock-eyed to me.’ Complacency 
and racial arrogance were also part of the problem.
  Further, historical precedents seem to have been ignored. With British 
help, the Japanese had built up a formidable modern navy which fifty 
years before had blown the fleets of Imperial China and Imperial Russia 
out of the water, and the Japanese had a strong martial culture. Yet sheer 
astonishment seems to have been the order of the day when reports were 
first received of the devastating air attack on Oahu.

PEARL HARBOR
	
	
123
The Events of 1941: Prelude to War
In mid-1941 Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto, Commander of the Japanese 
Combined Fleet, proposed that Pearl Harbor should be attacked and the 
core of the US Pacific Fleet destroyed. His colleagues considered that an 
attack on Hawaii would be foolhardy and Yamamoto only got his way 
by threatening to resign. The Japanese operation was a gamble since the 
voyage from Japan to the launching position, 200 miles north of 
Hawaii, would take ten days. The task force, covering an area of 5 square 
miles, might be spotted by air reconnaissance and the weather might 
have been so rough that the ships could not refuel en route.
  The Japanese Naval Task Force sent to Pearl Harbor consisted of two 
battleships, six aircraft carriers, three cruisers, eleven destroyers, eight 
supply vessels, and a fleet of submarines, five of which had midget sub-
marines strapped like papooses on their backs. The air armada con-
sisted  of 355 warplanes; bombers, dive-bombers, torpedo bombers and 
forty-five Zero-type fighters whose pilots had honed their skills in battle 
over China.
  General Walter Short, commander of the US Army’s Hawaiian 
Department, assumed that the only threat facing the naval base at Pearl 
Harbor was sabotage or surreptitious entry by submarine. An assault by 
air was considered impossible because of distance. Admiral Husband 
Kimmel, CINCPAC, was thinking about sea battles, not the defence of 
Pearl Harbor. The FBI’s representative in Hawaii had proposed curbing 
the flagrant intelligence collection activities being brazenly carried out 
by the Japanese Consulate’s intelligence officers. But Short insisted that 
the consulate must not be restricted in its activities for fear of losing the 
support of the local Japanese community. It should have been obvious 
that the Japanese were being forced into a corner, and one did not have 
to be a Japanese expert to work out that Japan would not surrender 
without a fight.
The Attack
At 5.30 a.m. on Sunday 7 
 December 1941 two Japanese aircraft were 
launched to discover whether the Pacific Fleet was still in Harbor. They 
returned undetected, and reported that the battleships were in Harbor 
and the carriers at sea. The first air fleet then took off, followed by the 
second air fleet half an hour later.

why spy?
124
  There had been a few alarms and excursions during the night before 
the attack, which should have alerted the US garrison. Destroyers had 
sighted and sunk midget submarines, and the radar operator had 
reported a mass of aircraft approaching. But these incidents were not 
correctly interpreted.
  The base was totally surprised by the attack. Kimmel had given little 
thought to defence of the base. He had a formidable fleet. It included 
three carriers, twenty-nine destroyers, eight battleships and numerous 
cruisers and submarines. Yet despite receiving a ‘war’ warning from 
Washington no action was taken to step up air patrols.
  So the battleships remained in Harbor, aircraft were huddled together 
to facilitate defence against saboteurs, ammunition was not positioned 
ready for action, and servicemen were on weekend leave. The Japanese 
were presented with sitting ducks in the Harbor and on the airfields. By 
the end of the attack 188 warplanes and eighteen warships, including 
eight battleships were out of action, and almost 2,500 US personnel had 
been killed. The following chronology of the lead up to the attack and 
of the attack itself presents some of the key pieces of information that 
might have been interpreted as indications that Japan was preparing to 
attack the US and, more specifically, to attack Pearl Harbor. The US was 
not party to all of these pieces of information, but where it is known 
that they were in possession of these, it is noted below.
1941
January 27
US Ambassador in Tokyo, Joseph Grew, reports that 
his Peruvian colleague has heard of a Japanese inten-
tion to attack Pearl Harbor. This Rumint was dis-
missed by Naval Intelligence, whose view was that 
‘no move against Pearl Harbor [sic] appears immi-
nent or planned for in the foreseeable future.’
July
The US freezes Japanese assets and, as revealed by 
Sigint, Ambassador Nomura, posted to London, is 
pessimistic about his mission.
September 4
The Japanese Cabinet approves a policy paper outlin-
ing the Japanese attitude towards the US and its 
European allies. It stated, ‘[i]n the event that there is 
no prospect of our demands being met by the first 
ten days of October … we will immediately decide

PEARL HARBOR
	
	
125
to commence hostilities’. The policy paper described 
‘Minimum Demands’ and ‘Maximum Concessions’, 
and did not address Western demands for Japan to 
cease its belligerent policies in China and South East 
Asia.
September 12
War games in Tokyo cover all aspects of an attack on 
South East Asia including Pearl Harbor.
October 6
The Japanese Army High Command decides that 
war is inevitable.
October 16
A new Cabinet is in place in Tokyo. The US Govern­
ment notes that it will be more anti-US than its 
predecessor.
October 17
US Army Intelligence lists the five most likely 
Japanese moves. An attack on the US is ranked last.
November 4
US intelligence notes that Japan is withdrawing all 
merchant shipping from the Western hemisphere.
November 5
A telephone tap intercepts a message from Tokyo to 
Nomura that said the deadline for settling the dis-
pute with the US had been postponed from 25 to 
29 
 November, but ‘[a]fter that things are going to 
happen automatically.’
November 14
US intelligence, confused by a torrent of repetitive 
Japanese signals, reports that the aircraft carriers 
‘remain relatively inactive’, unaware that every 
operational carrier in the Japanese Navy had joined 
the Hawaiian Task Force in Hitokappu Bay.
November 15
A message from Tokyo to Nomura reconfirms that 
there would be no further negotiations after 25 
 Nov­
ember.
November 16
Captain Ellis Zacharias, US Navy, a Japanese special-
ist and former intelligence officer but now a Captain 
of a warship, tells colleagues that he expects the 
Japanese to start the war with a sneak attack, which 
would include an attack on Pearl Harbor. Zacharias 
had come to the correct conclusion by using open 
source information. Since he was outside the intel-
ligence circle his conclusions carried no weight.
November 26/29
Sigint reports two directives (usually known as the 
‘Winds’ messages) from Tokyo, which laid down

why spy?
126
that in an emergency Japanese news broadcasts 
would contain messages disguised as weather reports, 
to indicate the country with whom a diplomatic 
breach had occurred.
US Secretary of State Cordell Hull informs the 
Japanese that the US insists they withdraw from 
China, Indo China, and from their alliance with 
Germany and Italy.
The Japanese Task Force Commander, about to set 
sail for Oahu, seeks reassurance from Japanese intel-
ligence that the US Fleet will be in Pearl Harbor on 
Sunday, 7 
 December. Agent Suzuki assures him that 
the fleet returns to base every weekend.
November 27
General George Marshall, the US Army’s Chief of 
Staff, issues a ‘war warning’ message about Japanese 
future action being ‘unpredictable but [noting that] 
hostile action [was] possible at any moment’, and 
orders that reconnaissance be carried out.
November 28
US Sigint identifies further instructions from Tokyo 
to Honolulu to report in detail on movements of 
capital ships in and out of Pearl Harbor.
November 29
The US Army’s periodic Estimate of Threats contains 
no mention of the possibility of an attack on Pearl 
Harbor. During the subsequent investigations G-2 
explained this by reference to the conviction of their 
naval colleagues that because of the US Navy’s dispo-
sition a Japanese attack would be either impractical 
or suicidal.
December 1
US intelligence notes a tightening of Japanese signal 
security, that the Japanese Navy are changing call 
signs with increasing frequency, and that it seems as 
if many ships are now maintaining total radio 
silence. Intelligence correctly interprets this as an 
ominous sign of imminent aggression, but Kimmel 
rejects proposals for special reconnaissance flights to 
search for the invisible fleet. He characterises his 
intelligence officer’s interpretation as a case of crying 
wolf.

PEARL HARBOR
	
	
127
Sigint reports that Tokyo has ordered Japanese offices 
in London, Singapore, Hong Kong and Manila to 
destroy their cipher machines.
December 2
Lieutenant Commander Edwin Layton, Fleet Intelli­
gence Officer, confirms to Kimmel that intelligence 
does not know the locations of the Japanese aircraft 
carriers.
December 3
The telephone tap on the Japanese Consulate in 
Hawaii records the voice of the cook informing a 
friend that the whole consulate staff was feverishly 
destroying documents and codebooks.
Washington informs Kimmel that the Japanese have 
been ordered to destroy all their confidential mate-
rial, including codes and ciphers, at once. Kimmel 
did not pass the message on to General Short.
December 5
Sigint distributes a version of a message dated 
29 
 November asking Honolulu to report details of 
ships in Pearl Harbor. This adds to the picture of an 
unhealthy Japanese intelligence interest in the ships 
deployed in the Harbor.
December 6
The chief of the US Sigint section was persuaded to 
approve an order to all stations in the Pacific and 
South East Asia to destroy surplus communications 
material.
December 7
2 a.m. Japanese intelligence reports that neither bar-
rage balloons nor anti-torpedo nets were being used 
in Pearl Harbor.
3.57 a.m. US Minesweeper Condor reports a sight-
ing of a periscope near the mouth of the Harbor.
6.30 a.m. A US supply ship reports to US Destroyer 
Ward a sighting of what seemed to be the con-
ning 
 tower of an unidentified submarine near the 
harbour.
6.40 a.m. A US Destroyer on patrol reports sinking 
a midget submarine just outside the harbour. This 
report was logged at 6.53 a.m., and was swiftly fol-
lowed by a report from the air force that they had 
sunk a submarine one mile out from the harbour. In

why spy?
128
hindsight, these reports were a clear indication that 
there was mischief afoot, and could have given the 
garrison and the fleet lead-time to order action sta-
tions. But senior officers wanted verification, and the 
discovery of the midget submarine’s attack did not 
trigger a general alert.
7.20 a.m. The radar operator reports that his screen 
shows an armada of aeroplanes 74 miles away. It was 
thought that they were US planes coming home.
7.30 a.m. (1 p.m. Washington time). The last of a 
fourteen-part message from the Japanese Govern­
ment is conveyed to the US Government. It is a 
declaration that negotiations had been broken off, 
and recognised by the US leaders as tantamount to a 
declaration of war.
7.40 a.m. The Japanese Air Commander leading the 
armada fires his Verey pistol to start the attack.
7.50 a.m. The first bombs drop.
The Nature of the Intelligence Failure
With hindsight it is easy to identify moments when an imaginative and 
confident intelligence officer might have been prepared, despite the lack 
of hard intelligence on the Japanese war plans, to risk crying wolf and to 
insist that, not only was there a probability of Japan starting a war, but 
also that the plan might include an air assault on Pearl Harbor. While not 
all of the pieces of information given in the chronology above were known 
to the US at the time, many of them were.
  A Senior National Intelligence Chief sitting alongside the President 
might have been able to persuade the US establishment to revise their 
view of the Japanese threat. Many of the causes of the intelligence failure 
at Pearl Harbor were the same as those which led to Malaya and 
Singapore being overrun in 1941, when the Japanese drove the much 
larger British Army down the Peninsula to ignominious surrender in 
Singapore. The culprits include arrogance, cultural stereotyping, group-
think and wishful thinking.
  The West seemed to have been unbelievably arrogant and complacent 
in its assessment of the Japanese. The Japanese were despised by many 

PEARL HARBOR
	
	
129
as figures of fun; bandy legged, short sighted little men, in crumpled 
uniforms, who were not likely to give trouble to the armed forces of the 
West. So the news of the devastating attack on Pearl Harbor was received 
with incredulity. Frank Knox, Secretary of the Navy said, ‘[i]t can’t be 
true.’ General Douglas MacArthur chose to believe they must have been 
using white mercenary pilots. Presidential adviser Harry Hopkins 
remarked, ‘there must be some mistake.’ Just before the attack, President 
Roosevelt had expressed the opinion that Japan’s military masters would 
not risk war with the US. 
 The Japanese had been written off as mere 
imitators. In fact they had produced the best torpedo of that time, learn-
ing from the British success against the Italian Fleet in the shallow 
waters of Taranto. Their Zero fighter out-performed Western planes.
  It is much more comfortable to accept the received wisdom of the 
society in which one operates, than to question it. Layton, Fleet Intelli­
gence Officer, and an expert on the Japanese language, history and cul-
ture, was unable to make any impact on the groupthink of his colleagues 
in Pearl Harbor. To the group, it was so unlikely that the Japanese Navy 
would launch a surprise attack, that any indications they were wrong 
were unpalatable. It required the explosion of the Japanese bombs to 
open the US Navy’s minds to the fact that the Japanese sailors and air-
men were highly trained, skilled, and dangerous opponents.
  It is natural that the diplomats should be asked to engage in negotia-
tion to try to find a peaceful solution. This was the case with the US 
Government in 1941. Diplomats must, of course, remain optimistic in 
order to negotiate but they must also be careful that optimism does 
not 
 mutate into over-sanguine interpretations of the attitude of the 
opposition.
  This was an asymmetrical intelligence war. The Japanese had been given 
free rein in Hawaii to roam, fly aeroplanes and sail around taking photo-
graphs as they pleased. Their tactical intelligence was voluminous and 
accurate. Short was instructed by Washington to be careful not to antago-
nise the Japanese residents by imposing restrictions on movement.
  In Japan, however, foreigners were forbidden to travel outside Tokyo, 
so they could not observe the training of low flying bombers or the 
assembly of a naval task force in the Kuril Islands north east of Japan. 
The FBI rejected Britain’s offer of a source who had intelligence suggest-
ing preparations were being made for an attack on Pearl Harbor. Dusko 
Popov, codenamed TRICYCLE, was a valuable British double agent, 

why spy?
130
and had been asked by the Abwehr to report in detail on the ships in 
Pearl Harbor, and to find out all he could about the techniques which 
had enabled the British to sink the Italian Fleet at Taranto. Fortunately 
for the Japanese, Hoover, the FBI’s Director, took an instant dislike to 
Popov and forbade the FBI from having any dealings with him.
  There were Sigint successes that provided a timely account of the 
diplomatic messages passing between Tokyo and its Ambassadors and 
consulates, and this traffic included Japanese intelligence briefs for the 
intelligence officers in the Honolulu Consulate. These briefs showed 
that Tokyo had a huge appetite for detail on the type and location of 
ships in the Harbor, detail useful to someone compiling a picture of a 
potential target. The discovery of the Japanese briefs caused hardly a 
ripple when they might have been taken as an indicator of possible 
preparations for an attack. It was also unfortunate for the US that the 
replies to the intelligence briefs did not go back to Tokyo on the diplo-
matic circuit but on the more secure Japanese naval circuit. The result 
was that US intelligence only knew the questions being asked by 
Japanese intelligence but not the answers.
Japanese intelligence
The Japanese were as prone to foolish generalisations, stereotyping and 
hubris as the Anglo-Saxons. Admiral Yamamoto, although he had spent 
many years in the US as a student and at the Japanese Embassy, under-
stood so little about the US temperament and psychology that he pre-
dicted that a successful Japanese assault on Pearl Harbor would persuade 
the US that the Japanese were too strong to fight.
  Since the Japanese had confined foreigners to Tokyo, it was easy to 
conceal the intensive activity that preceded the attack on Pearl Harbor. 
Japanese citizens and their controlled press did not need to be reminded 
to keep quiet. As it was, the Japanese did not need a complex deception 
plan, only a confusion plan. Aircraft carriers and warships were shuffled 
about, and task forces only assembled at the eleventh hour. Normal 
leave patterns continued until the last moment, suggesting business as 
usual in the fleet. Task forces were issued with cold weather as well as 
hot weather uniforms.
  Nonetheless, the fleet’s observance of radio silence was a major ele-
ment in the Japanese security plan. In the weeks before the surprise 
attack call signs were changed with increasing frequency and radio mes-

PEARL HARBOR
	
	
131
sages endlessly repeated, thus overloading the decrypting and linguistic 
resources of the small US Sigint sections, and frustrating attempts to 
maintain up-to-date accurate plots of naval deployments. Finally, the 
exhausted Siginters were frustrated by total radio silence within the 
Hawaiian Task Force at sea, which communicated only by flags during 
the day, and by shaded signal lights at night.
Conclusion
This well-known case of intelligence failure demonstrates many of the 
challenges of intelligence work. There was an institutional failure within 
American military intelligence to accept that there was a serious military 
threat. Like their British colleagues in Singapore, they believed that they 
were an impregnable fortress and that the Japanese were not a serious 
adversary. The central cause of the debacle was unwillingness on the part 
of most of the intelligence and operational staffs to open their minds to 
new facts and ideas. Pearl Harbor, they thought, could not conceivably 
be on the Japanese list of immediate targets.
  It would have been difficult for US intelligence to discover the 
Japanese target and the date of the attack, and this should be borne in 
mind when assessing the overall failure of the US to accept that a 
Japanese attack might take place. Sigint did well by providing evidence 
of Japanese intelligence interest in Pearl Harbor, but even if Sigint cover-
age had been significantly better, it would have had little effect on the 
situation since Japanese radio silence would have defeated the Sigint 
staff. Of course the sort of dominance that the Allies achieved over the 
Germans would only have been possible had the Japanese given the 
Allies a present by discussing their most secret plans by radio.
  So the blame for the lack of urgency must be shared throughout the 
whole intelligence community. Kimmel and Short were, rightly in my 
opinion, blamed for failing to consider whether in the light of the ‘war 
warnings’, however general, they should put the base on a war footing. 
Strategic warnings of a possible attack by the Japanese ought to have 
been acted on and the ships and aircraft at Pearl Harbor made less vul-
nerable. There was one other important familiar culprit though: the 
common tendency of operational staff to look down on the backroom 
intelligence staff. This serves as a reminder that for intelligence to 
achieve its potential, it is not only the intelligence staff who need to be 
good at their jobs but the consumers of intelligence too.


	
133
9
CUBA
THE BAY OF PIGS AND THE MISSILE CRISIS
‘[V]ictory has 100 fathers and defeat is an orphan.’
President Kennedy, 1961
‘How could I have been so stupid, to let them go ahead?’
President Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs disaster
‘Plausible denial was a pathetic illusion.’
Lyman Kirkpatrick, CIA Inspector General, October 1961
‘About 3,500 agent and refugee reports were analyzed … and of this number, 
only eight in retrospect were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the 
development of offensive missiles in Cuba.’
John McCone, DCI, 1962
What the Bay of Pigs case of 1961 illustrates above all is the difficulty of 
attempting to bring about regime change. It was a half-hearted effort to 
do so using an under-resourced invasion force very thinly disguised as 
indigenous counter-revolutionaries, and was an unmitigated disaster.
  The Cuban Missile Crisis of the following year was of a very different 
nature: since it ended without major engagement, it teaches different 
lessons. It brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war, and demon-

why spy?
134
strated the difficulty of discovering the intentions of the enemy. The 
Soviets and the Americans were dangerously ignorant of each other’s 
mindsets.
  Both cases illustrate the particular difficulty of validating human intel-
ligence when the sources are exiles. They also recognise that Rumint and 
Hunchint have useful roles to play. The two Cuban cases were also signifi-
cantly linked in terms of outcome: the Bay of Pigs disaster of 1961 led to 
a lack of confidence in the intelligence provided by Cuban sources, and to 
excessive confidence in the part of Cuba and their Soviet allies, a confi-
dence which went on to affect the course of the Cuban Missile Crisis.
The Bay of Pigs Disaster
Fidel Castro ousted Cuban dictator General Batista in 1959 and 
President Eisenhower came to view Castro’s new government with 
increasing unease. On 17 
 March 1960 Eisenhower ordered the CIA to 
produce a plan to overthrow the Cuban leader. Richard Bissell, the CIA’s 
Deputy Director of Plans, proposed to recruit, arm and train an expedi-
tionary ‘Brigade’ of around 1,500 Cuban exiles, equip them with land-
ing craft, guns and tanks, transport them to Cuba by a flotilla of mer-
chant ships, and support them with sixteen ex-US Air Force B-26 
bombers. Operation Pluto would begin two days before the invasion, 
when the B-26 bombers would be launched from Nicaragua in order to 
destroy Castro’s air force. The invasion flotilla would leave Nicaragua the 
following day. Early on the day of the invasion the Brigade would land 
undetected by Castro’s armed forces. Bissell envisaged that should the 
CIA-led invasion fail to bring about the immediate downfall of Castro, 
the Brigade would establish a guerrilla base in the hills and fight on.
  The plan was drastically and probably fatally amended when President 
Kennedy decided that the chosen landing point was unsuitable. Bissell 
offered the Bay of Pigs, around sixty miles to the west of the town of 
Trinidad, as an alternative. The Bay of Pigs, as the US was to learn the 
hard way, was operationally unsuitable. It had not been reconnoitred 
and was full of submerged rocks. In addition, the Zapata Swamp behind 
the Bay of Pigs was not a suitable base for guerrilla operations and fav­
ou­red the defending forces.
  On 15 
 April 1961 at 2 a.m., the pilots of the Brigade air force at 
Puerto Cabeza, Nicaragua, set off to attack the Cuban air force not 
knowing that Castro, anticipating air attack, had dispersed his planes. 

CUBA
	
	
135
Two B-26 bombers, two Sea Furies and two T-33 jets survived the 
attack. The Cubans and their international sympathisers ridiculed the 
cover story that anti-Castro defectors from the Cuban air force had 
flown the B-26s involved in the attack. Kennedy then decided to pro-
hibit any further B-26 operations thus giving the freedom of the skies to 
Castro’s planes.
  During the early hours of Monday 17 
 April, the invasion force began 
to land despite encountering jagged masses of coral. At dawn the Cuban 
air force arrived to strafe the beachhead and two ships from the invading 
forces’ flotilla were sunk and the rest were driven away. Although the 
invading Brigade fought hard it became increasingly evident that their 
1,500 men would, before long, be overwhelmed by the weight of the 
counterattack. The Brigade fought on, but by the end of three days the 
Cubans had captured most of them and Operation Pluto was over.
The performance of intelligence and its customers
It is difficult to know where to start a critique of this disaster as there 
were a number of intelligence failings. One of these was that the plan 
assumed Castro’s intelligence was so ineffective that the invasion would 
benefit from total surprise. This was incorrect. Had the US known more 
about Cuban intelligence, they might not have misjudged their chances 
of achieving surprise. They also misjudged international opinion and 
assumed that the world would believe they had no part in the operation. 
Instead, there was a howl of global protest after the rebels bombed Cuba, 
and the US was embarrassed by its involvement in the failed invasion.
  Much of the Humint on the strength of anti-Castro sentiment in 
Cuba was suspect because Exint had been given undue weight. Bissell 
failed to acknowledge that the informants had nothing to lose if the 
invasion failed and ignored the strong possibility that this intelligence 
was wildly optimistic. Bissell was also responsible for a failure of coordi-
nation within the CIA: he had excluded the CIA’s Intelligence Directo­
rate from the planning process thus denying his team independent vali-
dation and assessment.
  There were also failures of coordination between the CIA and others. 
Perhaps the most crippling flaw in the plan was the unspoken assump-
tion that, if the invasion stalled, Kennedy would allow US regular forces 
to join the battle. He did not, and this matter ought to have been clari-
fied by the CIA before the invasion went ahead.

why spy?
136
  We can also criticise the decision to launch this military operation 
without directly involving the US military. The Special Operations 
chapter engages at greater length with the issue of who should be 
involved and responsible for such activities. The Cuban ‘Brigade’ who 
fought for the US in the invasion were, however, well trained. Their US 
advisers succeeded in this respect.
  A far-reaching implication of the Bay of Pigs fiasco was that it led 
Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev to believe that Kennedy, the young 
new President of the US, was a weakling and would not react forcibly to 
Soviet military provocation in Cuba. The invasion confirmed Castro’s 
view that the US would stop at nothing in their attempts to destroy 
him, and he therefore welcomed a Soviet military presence. This pres-
ence took the form of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Cuban Missile Crisis
‘We’re eyeball to eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked.’
Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, when Soviet ships turned round 
before reaching the US’s blockade around Cuba, 1962
‘Nuclear catastrophe was hanging by a thread … and we weren’t counting days 
or hours, but minutes.’
Anatoly Gribkov, Soviet general, 1962
  When the Cuban Missile Crisis took place in October 1962 for a 
moment it looked as if the world might become embroiled in a Third 
World War; this time fought not with conventional armaments but with 
atomic weapons. This tense confrontation between the US and the 
Soviet Union is well documented. The US intelligence community had 
reported the growing Soviet presence in Cuba and the deployment of 
defensive SAMs there, but Humint reporting evidence of the deploy-
ment of MRBMs was not believed. Only one voice opposed this com-
placency: John McCone, Director of the CIA from November 1961 to 
April 1965, thought that the Soviets would exploit their opportunities 
in Cuba to the full and deploy MRBMs and ICBMs there. He did not 
make the mistake of mirror imaging that would have seen him assume 
that the Soviets would be thinking and behaving like the US in an 
analogous situation. Nor did he allow wishful thinking to influence his 
judgement.

CUBA
	
	
137
  On 15 
 October 1962, US aerial photographs showed that the Soviets 
were preparing sites designed to house ICBMs in Cuba, thus changing the 
nature of the threat to the US since such missiles, based in Cuba, would 
enable the Soviet Union to threaten the US homeland. The prospect of a 
nuclear Armageddon, which had dominated strategic planning since 
1945, was no longer a theoretical scenario but an immediate danger.
  Kennedy assembled a War Cabinet and, after days of tense discussion, 
issued an ultimatum to Premier Khrushchev, calling upon him to aban-
don his plans to deploy ICBMs to Cuba. The President announced that 
the US Navy would enforce a blockade to prevent further shipments of 
missile-related supplies. For two weeks there was a stand-off. Tension 
was increased when on 27 
 October Soviet SAMs shot down an 
American U-2 ‘spy plane’ over Cuba. On 28 
 October Khrushchev and 
Kennedy reached an agreement and the crisis was ended.
The performance of intelligence
As early as 22 
 August 1962, the CIA had noted unprecedented activity 
in Cuba and reported that ‘clearly something new and different is taking 
place.’ In mid-September, however, a National Intelligence Estimate 
concluded that the deployment of nuclear missiles would be ‘incompat-
ible with Soviet practice to date and with Soviet policy as we presently 
estimate it.’ In mid-October McGeorge Bundy, the President’s security 
adviser, said on television, ‘I think there is no present likelihood that the 
Cubans and the Cuban government and the Soviet government would 
in combination attempt to install a major offensive capability.’ In short, 
American policymakers found it inconceivable that the Soviets would 
do anything as irresponsible as deploying intercontinental missiles in the 
US’s backyard.
  The US was reluctant to believe that the Soviets would behave in an 
egregiously aggressive fashion in Cuba. This was wishful thinking. Their 
intelligence community also seems to have been guilty of mirror imag-
ing based on their belief that the US would not have indulged in so 
provocative an action close to the Soviet Union’s borders. It is odd that 
despite decades of experience of the workings of the Soviet mind, 
American analysts were so easily persuaded that the Soviets thought as 
they did.
  Intelligence, albeit belatedly, made a significant contribution when in 
mid-October air photography confirmed McCone’s hunch that the 

why spy?
138
Soviets would install MRBMs and ICBMs in Cuba, but it came as a sur-
prise to the US. 
 The Soviets were installing weapons that would give them 
the ability to strike at any target in the US. 
 But Imint had nothing to 
contribute to the debate about Khrushchev’s thought processes, however, 
and his motives for installing the MRBMs and ICBMs were not known.
  During the Missile Crisis that ensued, Robert Kennedy, US Attorney 
General, was in discreet contact with the Soviet Ambassador and 
assumed that he was telling him the truth. Even if that assumption had 
been correct, it did not guarantee that the Ambassador knew the whole 
story. On 26 
 October the Soviets opened a further ‘back channel’. The 
KGB Resident in Washington, Counsellor Alexander Fomin, invited 
John Scali, a senior US journalist, to meet him urgently and suggested 
a solution which would include dismantling and removing the Soviet 
missiles if the US would promise not to invade Cuba. Scali passed this 
message to Rusk, who responded immediately with an oral message 
indicating that the US might be interested. Khrushchev then sent a 
conciliatory letter to Kennedy in which he acknowledged the Soviet 
missile build up in Cuba.
  Any tendency to euphoria vanished when a second letter arrived from 
Khrushchev stating that in return for a Soviet withdrawal from Cuba 
they wanted the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey. Kennedy 
ignored this letter, and offered a compromise along the lines suggested 
in the first Fomin meeting. On Sunday 28 
 October Khrushchev and 
Kennedy reached an agreement and the Crisis was resolved.
  The US’s misreading of the situation and incorrect assumptions can 
be summarised as follows: first, it was thought that the Soviets would 
only put defensive weapons in Cuba. Mirror imaging again. Second, it 
was assumed that the Kremlin would not delegate authority to use 
SAMs to local commanders in Cuba. Yet this is what happened. Third, 
the US thought that the firing of the SAMs, which shot down a U-2 
over Cuba, was a deliberate gesture of escalation, when in fact it was the 
result of local initiative by a Soviet officer, not of a Kremlin ploy. Fourth, 
it was thought that Khrushchev’s conciliatory letter of 28 
 October was 
a deception ploy. In truth it was a genuine climb down.
  There were, however, some crucial intelligence successes for the West. 
Penkovsky, the GRU Colonel and the UK’s star source, provided pho-
tographs of the various stages in the construction of a Soviet missile 
base. These enabled US analysts to ascertain which types of missiles the 

CUBA
	
	
139
Soviets were installing in Cuba and how close they were to being ready 
to fire. He also provided a salutary corrective to over-pessimistic western 
assessments of the Soviets’ military capabilities. Their quality control was 
weak and their missiles of uncertain reliability.
  The Soviets made many errors too. They assumed, for instance, that 
the MRBMs and ICBMs in Cuba would not be detected until they were 
ready for action. Castro and his fledgling intelligence service also mis-
read the situation. They knew of a US contingency plan to attack Cuba, 
and were inclined to believe the US was willing to invade. In short, all 
three participants misunderstood the position of the other players. It 
was something of a miracle that, despite these major misunderstandings, 
the world escaped a nuclear war. There are, therefore, many useful les-
sons to be learnt from this much-analysed near catastrophe.
Conclusion
The dangers of mirror imaging and wishful thinking are all too evident 
in the US assessments that the Humint indicating the Soviet Union was 
installing MRBMs in Cuba was unreliable. It was Imint that finally 
convinced them there was a problem. Until then the general inclination 
among US intelligence and policymakers was to assume that the Soviets 
were only installing defensive systems.
  Intelligence on intentions was lacking throughout. The US had little 
or no knowledge of whether the Soviet Union intended to use the 
MRBMs and ICBMs being constructed in Cuba to attack the US. 
 But 
intelligence proved particularly valuable when, with Penkovsky’s assis-
tance, the US interpreted the aerial photographs, helping them to 
understand that the MRBMs were still under construction and not yet 
ready to launch. Intelligence, in Helms’ words, ‘bought [Kennedy] the 
time he needed.’
  The Bay of Pigs disaster provides further examples of timeless errors. 
Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy were naïve when they clung to their 
optimistic belief that the hand of the American government could be 
plausibly concealed in Operation Pluto. It is also difficult to forgive 
Kennedy’s decision, as the invasion was about to start, to prohibit a 
second air attack. This points to a lack of effective communication and 
coordination between the President and the CIA. 
 It also demonstrates 
the embarrassment that can be caused by an operation that is based on 

why spy?
140
insufficient intelligence. A better understanding of the landing site at the 
Bay of Pigs, and knowledge that Cuba had anticipated an invasion, 
would have cast doubt on the wisdom of going ahead with it.

	
141
10
IRAQ
THE INTELLIGENCE IMBROGLIO 
AND THE BUTLER REVIEW
‘[W]e were nearly all wrong.’
David Kay, Head of Iraq Survey Group, 2004
‘[Governments’] credible claims on our political loyalty have something to do 
with a demonstrable attention to truth, even unwelcome truth.’
Rowan Williams, Archbishop of Canterbury, 2004
‘The JIC … emerges as a craven creature that allowed the government’s presen-
tational priorities to take precedence over cautious and balanced assessment.’
Professor Eunan O’Halpin, 2005
‘[T]he human intelligence that we had was modest and … the nonhuman 
intelligence was dealing with a very hard target with a lot of underground 
capability… There were some things we knew quite a bit about and a lot of 
things we knew precious little about.’
Donald Rumsfeld, former Secretary of Defence
‘Our intelligence estimates are provided for the use of policymakers. They can 
be used in whole or in part. They can be ignored, torn up or thrown away, but 
they may not be changed.’
William H.  Webster, DCI, 1988

why spy?
142
In March 2003 a US-led coalition invaded Iraq. The military victory 
which followed the offensive was a model of its kind. Building a new 
democratic government, free from the control of Saddam Hussein’s 
Baath Party, was to prove much more difficult. The well intentioned 
attempt might have had some hope of success had it been the brainchild 
of a colonial power committed to a long stay, first as a government. 
There was really no hope that so drastic a change could be effected by 
bringing in advisers and pledging to leave as soon as possible. Anyone 
with some knowledge of such affairs could have predicted that the coali-
tion was embarking on an impossible mission. It takes generations not 
years to change cultures, even if you have enough experts to bridge the 
cultural gaps.
  The reputation of British intelligence was not enhanced by the Iraq 
affair. The British government built their case for war on intelligence 
assessments that claimed Iraq had a WMD capability. It appears that 
there was no such capability, that there had been tinkering with a JIC 
document, and that there had been a weakness in the validation process. 
It was alleged that intelligence had been ‘sexed up’ to suit the wish of the 
government, and so reviews were ordered. One was to be led by Lord 
Butler, a distinguished civil servant, who was tasked with reviewing 
intelligence on Iraqi WMD, and the other by Lord Hutton, a distin-
guished judge, who was asked to look into the circumstances surround-
ing the death of weapons expert Dr 
 David Kelly. The Reviews drew back 
a small part of the veil which normally conceals the affairs of our secret 
agencies, and considerable heat was generated. The media predictably 
called the Reviews ‘whitewashes’. Although they exonerated the intelli-
gence community from the charge of bending intelligence to suit their 
political masters, they did contain several criticisms.
  The rest of this chapter is concerned with the findings of the Butler 
Review, which commented on a range of important intelligence-related 
issues. I had the privilege of some discussion with Lord Butler at an 
Oxford Intelligence Conference. It was clear that, like Trend, he had a 
good feel for the intelligence business. It is a pity that neither was asked 
to conduct a serious study of the British intelligence system, and to push 
through needed reforms and improvements, which have yet to be car-
ried out.
  The Iraq imbroglio, the most recent of the cases in Why Spy?, took 
place at a time when I had been off the secret lists for over twenty years, 

IRAQ
	
	
143
although I continued to mix with intelligence professionals round the 
world, discussing assessments not secrets. As I write, Sir John Chilcot 
and the other members of the Iraq Inquiry are preparing their report. It 
is possible that they will comment on some of the aspects of the Iraq 
case included in this chapter. Rather than giving an overview of the 
whole affair,1 the chapter focuses on some of the most valuable observa-
tions arising from this case and the Butler Review.
The Butler Review
The report published by Lord Butler drew on his committee’s research 
and analysis of intelligence relating to Iraqi WMD. 
 The quotes given 
below are taken from his report, and the numbers given relate to the 
paragraph numbers in the report’s Summary of Conclusions. The fact 
that no heads rolled encouraged cries of ‘cover up’. But few critics had 
taken the trouble to study the report in detail, and it was not a ‘white-
wash’. Extracts from the report are provided below so that readers can 
judge for themselves whether the ‘whitewash’ description was justified.
  It would be impertinent to criticise the findings of the distinguished 
panel, particularly since they have had access to documents and wit-
nesses not available to me. In any case, broadly speaking I agree with 
their findings; but I would like to see such reports written in plain 
English, so that the general public can get a clearer picture. In this case, 
as so often, the document is written in beautifully crafted mandarin 
prose that tends to obscure the reality and soften criticism.
  Its conclusions on Humint included that:
14.  After the departure of the United Nations [weapons] inspectors in 
December 1998, information sources were sparse…
15.  The number of primary human intelligence sources remained few. 
…
17.  We do not believe that over-reliance on dissident and émigré 
sources was a major cause of subsequent weaknesses in the human 
intelligence relied on by the UK.
  But there may have been over-reliance on reporting from Exint 
sources regarding the feelings of the Iraqi people. Exint was likely the 
source of the coalition’s expectation that significant numbers of Iraqis 
would support them after the invasion. Exint, from whatever source—

why spy?
144
émigrés, exiles or dissidents—contains an element of bias, vested inter-
est, special pleading and so on, and must be treated with special care, as 
in the Bay of Pigs case. It is not difficult, however, to imagine the pres-
sure on the intelligence community in the run up to the invasion, and 
the difficulty of finding reliable human sources in a rigidly controlled 
police state where the fate of those suspected of espionage was torture 
and death.
  The Review also cast doubt on the validation process by which the 
reliability of Humint was judged. It stated:
16.  Validation of human intelligence sources after the war has thrown 
doubt on a high proportion of those sources and of their reports…
a.  One SIS main source reported authoritatively on some issues, 
but on others was passing on what he had heard within his 
circle.
b.  Reporting from a sub-source to a second SIS main source … 
must be open to doubt.
c.  Reports from a third SIS main source have been withdrawn as 
unreliable.
d.  Reports from two further SIS main sources continue to be 
regarded as reliable, although it is notable that their reports were 
less worrying than the rest about Iraqi chemical and biological 
weapons capabilities.
e.  Reports received from a liaison service on Iraqi production of 
biological agent [sic] were seriously flawed…
  Earlier validation had therefore been cast into doubt. The Review 
provided an explanation for this weakness:
19.  …part of the reason for the serious doubt being cast over a high 
proportion of human intelligence reports on Iraq arises in weak-
nesses in the effective application by SIS of its validation procedures 
and in their proper resourcing. … We urge the Chief of SIS to 
ensure that this task is properly resourced and organised. …
  The weak performance of the validation systems was related to the 
unfortunate fact that SIS had, for reasons of economy, abolished its 
requirements directorate and put requirements functions, which 
included validation of intelligence, into the operations arena. This 
meant that the SIS staff responsible for quality assurance had less power 
to question the validity of reports. Had a requirements directorate 

IRAQ
	
	
145
existed and been doing its job, it would have been able to make a signifi-
cant contribution to the validation process. To me and officers of my 
generation this was a fundamental breach of the important convention 
that operations people should not be the sole judges of their product. 
The Butler Review noted this breach with tradition but made little of it.
  It is evident that the intelligence material was weak. In effect there 
was no hard evidence that Iraq had any WMD. 
 The intelligence com-
munity did warn their customers of the uncertain nature of their intel-
ligence, but predictably the customers were more interested in grabbing 
intelligence straws which supported their views, than in underlining the 
weakness of the evidence.
  The fact that there were a number of secret reports suggesting that 
Iraq had retained a WMD capability should have been set against the 
fact that there was no hard evidence to support these reports. I had a 
long session with a retired Israeli intelligence general who considered 
that the JIC dossier on Iraqi WMD was an example of the tendency of 
Western intelligence to be over-reliant on inductive reasoning. In this 
case the fallacy ran ‘Saddam Hussein’s regime used to have WMD so 
they probably still have.’ My Israeli friend claimed that he had warned 
Israeli intelligence that the claims in the JIC dossier should be taken 
with a pinch of salt. The core problem was that the customers were 
grasping for confirmation and had no interest in the inconvenient fact 
that no reliable source had reported a sighting of WMD.
  On technical expertise in the intelligence chain, the Butler Review 
concluded:
59.  We consider that further steps are needed to integrate the relevant 
work of the DIS [the Defence Intelligence Staff, the home of the 
government’s scientific expertise] more closely with the rest of the 
intelligence community. … If that involved increasing the Secret 
Intelligence Account … we would support that.
  I am not surprised that, having abolished the Cabinet Office’s post of 
Scientific Adviser, scientific and technical advice seem to have been miss-
ing in the final stages of the JIC’s reporting. In my time we had Sir Alan 
Cottrell as Scientific Adviser to help us. When the Cabinet Office was the 
home of a Scientific Adviser, the JIC could consult them easily.
  We still seem to lack a good system for pooling the talents on both 
sides of the divide. Scientists can provide different perspectives. Their 

why spy?
146
input during the Iraq episode seems to have been small although the 
subject was technical. Had we still had a senior scientist in the Cabinet 
Office the story might have ended differently. The Review went on:
24.  We accept the need for careful handling of human intelligence 
reports to sustain the security of sources. We have, however, seen 
evidence of difficulties that arose from the unduly strict ‘compart-
mentalisation’ of intelligence. … arrangements should always be 
sought to ensure that the need for protection of sources should not 
prevent the exposure of reports on technical matters to the most 
expert available analysis.
  The scientific experts were not fully used by the intelligence 
community.
  The role of the JIC in the government’s case for war in Iraq is perhaps 
the most controversial aspect of the Iraq case. The JIC authored a dossier 
entitled ‘Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction’, which was published by 
the government in September 2002. This act of publication was unprec-
edented. This dossier became, of course, the focus of media criticism. It 
was alleged that it had been ‘sexed up’ to make a stronger case, and that 
it was written to support the government’s case for an invasion of Iraq. 
The Butler Review argued that neither of these allegations was true. But 
it was a serious departure from tradition to bring the JIC and its assess-
ments into the public domain. Such adventures are best avoided: secret 
intelligence should remain secret, and the JIC’s documents should 
remain secret too.
  The JIC was, however, found to have performed well in many respects:
20.  In general, we found that the original intelligence material was 
correctly reported in JIC assessments. An exception was the ‘45 
minute’ report. But this sort of example was rare.
21.  … we have found no evidence of deliberate distortion or culpable 
negligence.
22.  We found no evidence of JIC assessments and the judgements 
inside them being pulled in any particular direction to meet the 
policy concerns of senior officials on the JIC.
  The JIC was exonerated from any charges that they had adjusted their 
report or sexed it up to suit their customers. This was, in my opinion, 
charitable. It was not made abundantly clear to the customers how frail 

IRAQ
	
	
147
the evidence was. The ‘45 minute claim’ became the subject of much 
media attention, and doubt was later cast on the dossier’s claims that 
Iraq had chemical and biological weapons that could be deployed within 
45 minutes. The dossier ought to have specified what type of weapons it 
referred to. There was not enough emphasis on the weakness of the 
evidence. The wording used was of considerable significance, producing 
an image of deadly immediate retaliation.
  The Review’s comments on the JIC performance include:
32.  The JIC, with commendable motives, took responsibility for the 
dossier, in order that its content should properly reflect the judge-
ments of the intelligence community. They did their utmost to 
ensure this standard was met. But this will have put a strain on 
them…
  No doubt the JIC’s motives were entirely honourable, but they should 
have rejected the idea of drafting a document for public consumption.
33.  …in translating material from JIC assessments into the dossier, 
warnings were lost about the limited intelligence base … Language 
in the dossier may have left with readers the impression that there 
was fuller and firmer intelligence behind the judgements than was 
the case: our view … is that judgements in the dossier went to 
(although not beyond) the outer limits of the intelligence 
available.
  This is mandarin speak for ‘the JIC were on the brink of exaggera-
tion’.
  The government’s role in the September 2002 JIC dossier was also 
controversial. They were involved in the drafting of the dossier, and influ-
enced the wording of the ‘45 minute claim’. The Butler and Hutton 
Reviews agree that the JIC only accepted the government’s recommenda-
tions on the wording of the dossier when those suggestions were in keep-
ing with the intelligence, and the grave charge against the JIC that they 
had succumbed to pressure from No. 10 Downing Street was not upheld.
  The BBC asked at the time what my view was. I replied that I did not 
think that Trend would have allowed such interference in his day and I 
certainly thought it was wrong for No. 10 staff to have been involved in 
any way with the drafting of a JIC report. The situation was exacerbated 
by the exclusion of proper warnings about the reliability of intelligence 

why spy?
148
on which the dossier’s claims were based. It is difficult enough to edu-
cate lay customers in government so that they have a good understand-
ing of the limitations of intelligence. It is impossible to educate the 
general public. But it was a bad precedent. No. 10 was a customer and 
had no business debating the draft with the producers. There will always 
be a suspicion of contamination, conscious or unconscious, when joint 
drafting takes place. It would be better if we stuck with DCI Webster’s 
dictum that customers may reject, accept or ignore intelligence reports, 
but they must not alter them.
35.  We conclude, with the benefit of hindsight, that making public that 
the JIC had authorship of the dossier was a mistaken judgement… 
the publication of such a document in the name and with the 
authority of the JIC had the result that more weight was placed on 
the intelligence than it could bear. The consequence also was to put 
the JIC and its Chairman into an area of public controversy and 
arrangements must be made for the future which avoid putting the 
JIC and its Chairman in a similar position.
37.  …if intelligence is to be used more widely by governments in pub-
lic debate in future, those doing so must be careful to explain its 
uses and limitations. It will be essential, too, that clearer and more 
effective dividing lines between assessment and advocacy are estab-
lished …
  The phrase ‘more weight was placed on the intelligence than it could 
bear’ is particularly obfuscatory. In plain English, the JIC report pre-
sented conclusions which would only have been valid had the intelli-
gence reports been reliable. Since the intelligence was of doubtful valid-
ity, the conclusions were doubtful too. The JIC did not conceal the 
weakness of the intelligence base but neither did it emphasise it.
Conclusion
This was a classic case where reporting which seemed to confirm the 
received wisdom was welcomed almost unreservedly, whereas the 
absence of solid evidence was ignored. The Butler Review suggested that 
Humint on Iraqi WMD was of poor quality: the agents and sub-sources 
were reporting hearsay not information gathered by their own observa-
tion and direct knowledge. The intelligence professionals had warned 

IRAQ
	
	
149
the customers but failed to persuade them of the weakness of their intel-
ligence. The JIC’s customers should have been given more explicit warn-
ing about the weakness of the intelligence base on which the JIC had 
concluded that Iraq had WMD. 
 There was no devil’s advocate to attack 
the assessment, no bold spirit ready to incur the wrath of the govern-
ment by suggesting that the Emperor had no clothes.
  The shenanigans surrounding the drafting of the dossier should be 
avoided in future. This is a slippery slope leading to the infamous habits 
of dictators who, when faced with inconvenient intelligence, at best 
throw the intelligence away, at worst shoot the messenger. The job of 
intelligence is to discover the truth, however unpalatable, not to adjust 
the reporting to suit the customer.
  The Butler Review did a good job. It might, however, have high-
lighted the failure to grapple with the subject of providing a structured 
career for specialist assessment officers. Progress has, however, been 
made, as a professional Head of Intelligence Analysis has since been 
appointed. It was almost forty years since Trend had pointed to the need 
to address this subject. The British intelligence system has been the envy 
of many countries who failed to find a way of bringing warring depart-
ments together into a central machine but there was, and still is, a lot to 
be done to improve the end product. The weakness caused in SIS’s vali-
dation system by the false economy of abolishing the Directorate of 
Requirements was noted by the Review, but the serious implications of 
such a change were not. The savings derived from abolishing the inde-
pendent Requirements Directorate in SIS have cost us a lot. When look-
ing through the voluminous reporting after 9/11, I noted how often the 
official responsible referred to shortcomings that had been highlighted 
in previous reviews, which had not been dealt with. Let us hope that, as 
appears to be the case, the weaknesses have been given full attention and 
steps taken to remedy defects and learn from the experience.
  This case was an unprecedented, and hopefully not to be repeated, 
attempt to bring the JIC into the public domain. No. 10 blandly refuted 
the charge of meddling in the JIC’s drafting processes. But there were 
over ten messages between No. 10 and the JIC commenting on the 
draft. I trust we shall not see such behaviour again.


PART FOUR
NON-INFORMATION GATHERING 
INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS


	
153
11
SPECIAL OPERATIONS
‘Any nation’s attempt to dictate to other nations their form of government is 
indefensible.’
President Eisenhower, 1953
‘[A] King who alone wished to be absolutely just among the wicked and to 
remain good among the wolves would soon be devoured along with his flock.’
Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais, French spymaster, seeking approval 
from Louis XVI to covertly aid the Americans in the War of Independence 
against the British, 1775
‘Covert action should not be confused with missionary work.’
Attributed to Henry Kissinger, Secretary of State, 1975
‘[C]overt operations have their philosophical and practical difficulties, espe-
cially for America. But … I cannot accept the proposition that the United 
States is debarred from acting in the gray [sic] area between diplomacy and 
military intervention.’
Henry Kissinger, former Secretary of State, 1979
‘Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty are public evidence of CIA covert action 
projects that were successful, [and] served liberal democratic purposes.’
Ray Cline, former DDCI, 1976
‘My job is to hold the umbrella above you fellows and catch the crap so you can 
get on with your operating.’
Richard Helms, CIA operations chief

why spy?
154
‘The GRU and the KGB helped to fund just about every antiwar movement 
and organization in America and abroad. … the GRU and the KGB had a 
larger budget for antiwar propaganda in the United States than [they] did for 
economic and military support of the Vietnamese.’
Stanislav Lunev, former Colonel, GRU, 1998
‘Our “active measures” campaign did not discriminate on the basis of race, 
creed, or color [sic]: we went after everybody. …I had no qualms about stirring 
up as much trouble as possible for the U.S.  government.’
Oleg Kalugin, former KGB general, 1994
This chapter, and the book’s remaining chapters, look at clandestine 
activities that are not concerned with intelligence gathering or assess-
ments. Many Ambassadors and Pro Consuls tended to take a friendly 
view of the ‘funnies’, ‘irregulars’, or ‘spooks’ on their staff and, if they 
trusted them, let them get on with it. They were less relaxed, though, 
about covert action in their parish.
  Special Operations aim to affect events. They can be violent, such as 
the Bay of Pigs invasion discussed in Chapter Nine, or non-violent. In 
the 1950s and 1960s SIS called non-violent Special Operations ‘Special 
Political Action’. This was an omnibus term covering a wide range of 
activities including black propaganda, freedom radio stations, interven-
tion in elections, promoting coups d’état, supporting rebels, or any 
other form of clandestine skulduggery designed to help like-minded 
friends. This chapter will discuss Special Operations used by the West 
and by China, and the difficult question of whether the intelligence 
agencies of democratic states are suited to carrying out these activities.
  I had little involvement with classic Special Operations during my offi-
cial life. But I was on the periphery of such matters when we were seeking, 
alongside our Malaysian friends, to find ways of persuading Bung 
Soekarno of Indonesia to desist from his efforts to strangle the infant 
Malaysia in what was known as the Indonesian Confrontation or 
‘Konfrontasi’. My suggestions about the use of boats containing concealed 
naval detachments in the Straits of Malacca to discourage piratical activi-
ties by Indonesian patrol boats, or that we might mount a raid to destroy 
the oil refinery at Balikpapan, were not well received. My only direct 
participation was an operation to persuade the leaders, whose rebellion in 
Brunei had been foiled, to surrender. One did, the other did not. I have, 
however, also observed China’s Special Operations over many years.

SPECIAL OPERATIONS
	
	
155
  No serious attempt has been made in the democracies to find the 
most appropriate home for Special Operations. This is an untidy and 
highly controversial subject. As the quotations above suggest it is a topic 
which generates a great deal of heat, although at its height Special 
Operations never represented more than 3 per cent of the CIA’s activi-
ties. Although the involvement of the CIA and other states’ intelligence 
agencies in Special Operations today is more often alleged than proved, 
it retains the ability to cause great controversy among the public, and for 
state leaders uncomfortable with the idea of one state covertly influenc-
ing affairs within another.
  Special Operations is not an established term, but it seems bizarre to 
use generic terms such as ‘clandestine action’ and ‘covert action’ for 
disparate activities that seldom remain secret. These have little in com-
mon except that none of them fits tidily into the portfolio of the usual 
government departments. In the Second World War Britain created a 
Special Operations organisation under the cover title ‘Special Operations 
Executive’ (SOE) and the US created the Office of Strategic Services. In 
peacetime there is a tendency to look to the intelligence service as a 
convenient repository for such unconventional, uncomfortable activi-
ties, from which traditional departments prefer to withdraw their skirts. 
In the West, secret services have learnt to look such gift horses in the 
mouth. It may be flattering to discover that only your agency is thought 
to have the talents, imagination and enterprise to carry out such opera-
tions, and exciting to have an expanded budget. However, experience 
has taught that Special Operations are more likely than espionage opera-
tions to cause problems for Western intelligence services, thereby negat-
ing the benefits brought by an expanded portfolio.
  Special Operations that go wrong reverberate for years, particularly in 
the US where some politicians, like Senator Frank Church, chair of the 
Committee behind the 1976 report into intelligence and the US govern-
ment, seem almost to make a career out of attacking intelligence. The 
more successful a Special Operation in bringing about change, the more 
likely that it will come under public scrutiny. If part of an operation to 
effect regime change consisted, as it almost certainly would, of funding 
the opposition parties, the loser would naturally complain of corruption, 
rigging of the election and so on. It is now public knowledge that the CIA 
and SIS engineered the 1953 coup that overthrew Mohammad Mossadeq, 
Iran’s democratically elected leader. This adversely affected the reputation 

why spy?
156
of the CIA and its political masters in parts of the world where the US was 
fighting to win support in the context of the Cold War.
  The embarrassment potential is inevitably high in Special Operations. 
Whereas in espionage cases few will need to know of the operation or 
the agent’s identity, in Special Operations the number who will need to 
know is much greater, and leakage is therefore more likely. Many people 
will be involved in planning, training and preparation; there will be risk 
of seepage and speculation. Plus, a ‘blown’ Special Operation is likely to 
cause much more embarrassment than the exposure of even the most 
spectacular technical operation. Fidel Castro exploited the debacle at the 
Bay of Pigs to increase his prestige: Cuba was so strong, he claimed, that 
not even the US could defeat it.1
  Even in the celebrated case of Commander Crabb’s ill-fated underwa-
ter reconnaissance of the hull of the Soviet cruiser Ordzhonikidze during 
a state visit to Britain by Khrushchev in 1956, there was only momentary 
embarrassment. The Soviets enjoyed the opportunity to protest against 
this unseemly conduct. But their tongues were in their cheeks: they 
would have had no compunction, had a British cruiser entered a Russian 
port, in bringing their whole intelligence apparatus into play to uncover 
her secrets. In private the Soviets were amused. The embarrassment to 
Britain was not as great as it might have appeared from the newspapers; 
it was most keenly felt by the confirmed anti-intelligence school, which 
supports the view that ‘gentlemen do not read each other’s mail’. In any 
case, it was small beer compared with the dramatic expulsion, some years 
later, of over a hundred Russian intelligence apparatchiks, masquerading 
as diplomats, commercial officers, journalists, and so on in London. That 
overt blow, struck under the determined leadership of Foreign Secretary 
Sir Alec Douglas-Home, caused little more than threatening growls from 
the astonished Soviet Bear, which had grown accustomed to Western 
determination to avoid confrontation at almost any cost.
  The general public may be content that their government should have 
a secret intelligence service. But there are likely to be more questions 
about the ethics of Special Operations. Even less violent activities, such 
as the establishment of a ‘free’ radio station pretending to be the voice 
of resistance, sit ill with Western liberal opinion, which hates the idea of 
states controlling their citizens’ access to information. However, there is 
ample evidence that during the Cold War days of Iron and Bamboo 
Curtains the residents of the communist dictatorships derived huge 
comfort from such activities.

SPECIAL OPERATIONS
	
	
157
  It is wrong for governments to dump this ragbag of unconventional 
subjects on the intelligence services simply because it is too difficult to 
persuade cabinet ministers and their departments to accept them. If 
Special Operations are to continue, governments should look at the 
options rather than merely passing the parcel to intelligence. Take, for 
example, the peculiarly difficult subject of assassination. Should it be 
anathemised as something that no civilised country should even con-
template? Or should it be put on the back burner in a small section, 
keeping abreast of the subject so that in wartime there is a repository of 
folk memory and experience upon which to draw.2 Which part of gov-
ernment should be given the lead position for this unattractive task? 
Regardless of whether democratic states should engage in assassination, 
their possible use demands that attention be given to where they should 
be based. This would be an ideal occupation for one or two retired 
officers with appropriate experience to provide the folk memory. The 
cost would be negligible; they would be retreads drawing a pension for 
previous service and motivated by patriotic duty, unsullied by careerism.
  It is easy to nominate a home for military Special Operations. Secret 
services may have relevant language and cultural knowledge, and imagi-
nation, but they are chartered and staffed to gather intelligence, not to 
carry out military operations. It seems sensible to leave the planning and 
execution of military and paramilitary action, however small, to the mili-
tary. They have the experience, the skills and the weapons. The responsi-
bility should never be, as it was in the Bay of Pigs case, given to a civilian 
agency. A grey area exists perhaps in the matter of proxy wars. It may be 
sensible to give the lead to intelligence for gun running and communica-
tions; but military expertise and support must be involved, if only to help 
to evaluate the capability of the proxy forces they are subsidising.
Examples and Types of Special Operations
Special Operations covers a very wide range of actions. The list below is 
not exhaustive but reflects one I once drew up for the enlightenment of 
the Prime Minister of the day about the activities that might be under-
taken if the political will required the intelligence services to engage in 
total war against the enemy. The political masters took note, but only 
the less violent items were addressed. It can be divided into two broad 
categories, the non-violent, such as all forms of information work 

why spy?
158
including deception, and the violent, such as paramilitary action and 
assassination.
Category 1: Non-Violent
  Poison-pen letters
  Rumour mongering
  Leafleteering
  Planting articles
  Distributing seditious literature
  Creating and controlling media outlets
  Establishing ‘Free’ radio stations
  Feeding information or disinformation to the media
  Deception and disinformation operations3
  Funding individuals
  Financing political parties or associations and trade unions
  Bribery4
  Psychological warfare
  Black propaganda
Category 2: Violent
  Doctoring ammunition or weapons so that users injure themselves
  Kidnapping
Rendition (a modern US term for kidnapping in order to exploit a 
favourable legal jurisdiction)
  Paramilitary operations
  Q Operations5
  Training, arming and advising guerrilla movements
  Supporting proxies in military operations
  Assisting in coup d’états
  Assassination
  Non-violent types of Special Operations, including propaganda, psy-
war and subversion incur relatively small financial costs. DCI Woolsey 
was certain that the CIA’s Freedom Radio had contributed significantly 
to the collapse of the ‘Evil Empire’ and East European dissidents, such 
as the Poles, claimed that the broadcasts played a significant part in the 
battle. All around the world people listened secretly to the BBC despite 
the risk of being caught. Perhaps the best proof of the efficacy of ‘free-
dom’ broadcasts is provided by the huge effort expended by totalitarian 
governments to jam foreign broadcasts.

SPECIAL OPERATIONS
	
	
159
  In the 1960s imaginative people in SIS, such as Maurice Oldfield, 
were working with our liaison partners around the world, helping them 
to counter Communist subversion and other forms of undesirable activ-
ity. But SIS had been smitten with the debilitating fever which followed 
Philby’s defection to the Soviet Union in 1963 and counter-intelligence, 
seeking out other spies, seemed to take precedence over all else.
  MI5 and MI6 were both helping the newly independent nations. The 
difference between the cultures of the two Services was interesting. MI5, 
proud of its charter, never paused to wonder what the emerging inde-
pendent nations thought about their sometimes patronising tone. 
Christopher Andrew in his official history of MI5 accepts the MI5 view 
that they played an important role in liaison with the nascent nations 
that were preparing for independence. Of course they did, but their 
paternal attitude was not always appreciated. While SIS was in support, 
MI5 was advising.
  Liaison work was an important aspect of Special Political Action. 
During forty years working in Asia on and off after 1945 I made the 
most of the opportunity to forge friendships and keep them in good 
repair. Dividends from my specialisation were substantial and call into 
question the unsophisticated Whitehall view that ex-colonial officers 
should never be sent back to their former territories.
  The SOE’s history provides a useful example of Special Operations 
being conducted in wartime by a democracy. Fortunately many of the 
SOE documents, some of which remain classified, have been released 
into the public domain. The SOE style reflected the nature of the beast; 
SOE was a rambunctious newcomer set up by Churchill to set occupied 
Europe ablaze. Neither its members nor its prose style bore much rela-
tionship to the papers written by the JIC Secretariat. SOE committees 
discussed everything and anything, unconstrained by protocol or tradi-
tion. They recorded the detail without bothering about what was sensi-
tive and what was not, or genuflections to the amour-propre of other 
officials or concerns about ethics. The papers in the SOE files are rich in 
operational detail and uninhibited.
  The list of SOE activities touched upon in their documents includes 
the violent and non-violent. At one end of the scale are rumours and 
itching powder, at the other extreme there are plans for assassination, 
and in between many ingenious and imaginative ploys such as stoking 
inflation in Germany. There are proposals to start rumours in their areas. 

why spy?
160
One ‘whisper’ started in Switzerland was, within two weeks, the cause 
of a Vatican condemnation of the practice of using incurables as guinea 
pigs for medical experiments in Dachau’s concentration camp. This gave 
the Nazis cause to think, although alas, not enough.
  Just as the Pearl Harbor disaster provides a rich cornucopia of exam-
ples of how not to handle intelligence when a belligerent opponent is 
squaring up for a fight, so the Bay of Pigs provides rich pickings for the 
student of the violent category of Special Operations. The CIA was not 
qualified to organise and direct an amphibious invasion and the US 
military, although privy to the planning, had no responsibility for the 
operation.
  It is highly likely that canny military personnel would not have pro-
ceeded with the operation on the terms laid down by President Kennedy. 
It was under-equipped, undermanned, insufficiently reconnoitred, and 
too dependent on unknown factors outside their control, such as the 
strength of anti-Castro feeling. Successful Special Operations of a mili-
tary nature have tended to be conducted by Special Forces, not by intel-
ligence agencies.
  Two former DCIs, Helms and Colby, both well qualified to make a 
judgement on the relationship between intelligence and Special 
Operations, shared their thoughts with me on this topic. The first was a 
close observer of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the second was a highly success-
ful Special Operations operator in Vietnam. Neither thought it sensible 
to give military tasks to the CIA. 
 Helms, reflecting on the Bay of Pigs, 
wrote in his memoirs that he could not understand the failure by DCI 
Allen Dulles and his Chief of Operations Richard Bissell, to look more 
deeply into the facts before undertaking the operation. He could only 
suppose that their recent brilliant successes with U-2 and satellite imag-
ery programmes had led to a suspension of judgement and collective 
overconfidence.
  In Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan within the last half century Special 
Operations have played a significant part, but who can say whether 
without these interventions the result might not have been much the 
same or, perish the thought, preferable. Such operations are not labora-
tory experiments. However, as former DCI Woolsey said, ‘[t]he United 
States must retain the capability to do something in between sending in 
the Marines and sending in former President Carter’: in other words, a 
‘third way’ between overt military action and negotiations. Politicians 

SPECIAL OPERATIONS
	
	
161
who recoil do so for pragmatic not philosophical reasons; Special 
Operations can open a Pandora’s box of unintended consequences.
China and Special Operations
I observed China’s Special Operations for thirty years first as a colonial 
civil servant in Malaya, and later in Whitehall and from British diplo-
matic missions in Asia. In the 1960s China’s intelligence agencies had 
received instruction in Moscow and had considerable practice in the 
civil war against the KMT. 
 Like the security agencies of the late Qing 
period (1644–1911) they had no regard for the niceties of international 
law when pursuing subversives overseas. Sun Yat Sen, the leading 
spokesman for revolution in the last years of the Qing Dynasty, was 
kidnapped and incarcerated in a basement of the Chinese Embassy in 
London. He managed to throw a note out of his window, which brought 
his plight to the attention of the British Government, and so he lived to 
see the overthrow of the Qings. In several well-known instances Chinese 
operators have enthusiastically followed the kidnapping tradition estab-
lished by the Qings.
  China became notorious for violent and non-violent Special Opera­
tions, using agitation and propaganda (known as agitprop), subversion, 
kidnapping, torture and bribery with a blatant disregard for the normal 
civilities of relations between nations. Embassies in Beijing were 
assaulted and foreigners imprisoned without trial. Mao made no attempt 
to conceal his contempt for the legal, bourgeois, conventions of the 
West, and did not welcome the diplomatic recognition of his country 
by Britain. He would have preferred to have no Western diplomats in 
China observing his activities.
  The Chinese campaign in all its forms—propaganda, subversion, brib-
ery, training, arming, and officering guerrilla armies—was expensive, but 
Mao ruled the Communist Party through terror, and woe betide anyone 
who challenged his policy. President Liu Shaoqi and Marshal Peng 
Dehuai, who attempted to restrain Mao’s excesses, suffered years of 
imprisonment, torture and agonising deaths for their impertinence.
  China’s Special Operations were evident in the American hemisphere. 
Chinese intelligence officers ranged vigorously from Cuba through Haiti, 
Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru. These Chinese efforts were not, how-
ever, particularly successful in the face of determined efforts by local 

why spy?
162
counter-intelligence supported by the CIA. 
 Lavish expenditure and hyper 
activity did not produce the revolutionary results that Mao sought.
  Zhou Enlai, the Chinese premier’s, public statement that Africa ‘was 
ripe for revolution’, although an exaggeration, reflected the Chinese 
intention to exploit opportunities in newly independent countries aban-
doned by their erstwhile imperial masters. And the intelligence officers, 
commanded by Chinese intelligence chief Kang Sheng, exploited every 
fissure; flattered, entertained sumptuously, bribed, provided arms and 
training, and even constructed a railway system in Tanzania. Chinese 
Special Operations activities were extensive and successful.
  During my time in China in the early 1960s Beijing was awash with 
delegations and students from the Third World. The sight of people they 
perceived to be barbarians being entertained royally while they were on 
short rations did not please the Chinese people. From the maps which 
hung on my office walls, the world looked as if it was suffering from 
measles; they were covered with pins marking the ubiquitous presence 
of the Chinese Embassies. The New Chinese News Agency, which had 
offices around the world, might as well have been entitled the New 
China Intelligence Agency since they made no attempt to conceal the 
fact that they were engaged in Special Operations. It did not require 
secret sources to establish the scale and success of their mischief making. 
For example, Colonel Gao Liang, a Chinese military intelligence officer, 
performed very effectively as a Head of the NCNA office in Zanzibar. 
He engineered the marriage of Tanganyika and Zanzibar and master-
minded the railway project to link the two countries. Gao Liang’s brazen 
performance, using NCNA cover, included participation in a coup 
d’état in Zanzibar. Overall, the Chinese performance overseas in the 
twilight zone of propaganda, subsidy and support was masterly.
Conclusion
As the examples of China and the SOE demonstrate, Special Operations 
have been used extensively by democracies and totalitarian states. 
Perhaps wider debate is needed about Special Operations. Views on 
their acceptability and morality differ widely. In wartime, consciences 
are likely to be less tender. Governments of democratic states have dif-
ferent views, and operate under different pressures, to those of totalitar-
ian states. The issues of proper training, proper governance and a proper 
home for Special Operations remain unsolved and under-discussed.

SPECIAL OPERATIONS
	
	
163
  I agree with the views of the realpolitik school: we should retain some 
option between going to war and negotiation. But history has shown 
how difficult it is to effect regime change and, even more so, to create an 
effective alternative government unless, perish the thought, you are pre-
pared to embark on a colonial style, long-term, exercise.


	
165
12
DECEPTION OPERATIONS
‘[w]e can cause the doomed spy to carry false tidings to the enemy.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
‘You must search for enemy agents who have come to spy on us. Tempt them 
with profits, instruct and retain them.’
Sun Tzu, ‘The Art of War’, fifth century BC
Deception operations are designed to influence events and are heavily 
dependent on intelligence in every sense of the word. Guesswork about 
the enemy is unlikely to provide an adequate foundation upon which to 
create a plausible deception that will fit well with the target’s prejudices 
and preconceptions. The twentieth century is populated with deception 
operations that have been publicly exposed. The operation widely con-
sidered to have been the most successful deception of all time was 
Operation Fortitude of the Second World War (see below).
Eighteenth-Century Deception
Deception operations have been part of warfare since the beginning of 
history. During the 1745 Jacobite rebellion, the Hanoverian forces had 
great difficulty in deciding where to position their three armies in order 
to intercept the Jacobites because Prince Charlie’s staff consistently 

why spy?
166
deceived the government commanders about the Jacobite strength and 
movements. Their method was simple: they despatched, along routes 
which the Jacobite Army had no intention of using, small detachments 
of troops seeking billets and supplies. These activities were faithfully 
reported by Hanoverian spies, and led the Hanoverians to grossly over-
estimate the strength of the Jacobites, as well as deceiving them about 
the Jacobite plans.
  But the Hanoverians knew the value of deception too. In Derby, the 
most southerly point of the Jacobite march, while the Prince was trying 
to persuade his commanders that they should continue their advance 
upon London, a well-dressed, well-mounted, charming and plausible 
cavalier, calling himself Macdonald, rode in and offered his services as a 
trooper. He was, in fact, a Hanoverian spy. The Prince and his staff 
welcomed ‘Macdonald’ with open arms. He told them that he had just 
ridden through the Duke of Cumberland’s Army at Lichfield: the Duke’s 
army was poised to cut off the Highland army, the Duke of Richmond’s 
army was ready to attack on the right flank and a third army, 8,000 
strong, was waiting for them at Northampton. This disinformation was, 
apparently, accepted by the Prince’s staff. To the Prince’s fury, his officers 
decided to abandon their march to London. This case provides a very 
clear lesson: armies should have a solid counter-espionage department 
to prevent espionage, capture spies, and ensure security measures are in 
place that prevent the enemy from collecting intelligence.
The First World War
One of the best-known deception operations in the First World War is 
attributed to Richard Meinertzhagen, the British Colonel and brilliant 
and imaginative military intelligence officer. Meinertzhagen prepared a 
collection of fake papers, including staff appreciations, minutes of meet-
ings and intelligence assessments, all of which implied that the British 
staff had decided that an attack on Beersheba in Southern Palestine, now 
part of Israel, was out of the question and that Gaza should be the target 
for General Edmund Allenby’s offensive.
  There had been two previous unsuccessful attempts to plant disinfor-
mation on the Turks by simulating a careless dropping of official papers, 
but on both occasions the Turks failed to discover the packages. This 
time Meinertzhagen cantered off in front of the British lines on what he 

DECEPTION OPERATIONS
	
	
167
hoped would be interpreted by the enemy as a foolhardy reconnaissance 
mission. When the Turkish cavalry galloped out to intercept him, he 
dismounted, fired a few shots in their general direction, remounted and 
galloped off dropping a blood stained rifle, equipment and his haver-
sack. This time the Turks found the haversack. As a result of this opera-
tion the Turks concentrated on the defence of Gaza and Allenby was 
able to conquer Beersheba with comparative ease.
  The haversack trick was not Meinertzhagen’s only contribution to the 
victory at Beersheba. During the preparation for the battle he had, as 
part of his Psywar operations, been airdropping messages enclosed in 
packets of cigarettes on the Turkish Army. Just before the attack on 
Beersheba, he added opium to the cigarettes, adversely affecting the 
performance of the Turkish defenders.
  Meinertzhagen was always interested in the use of intelligence as an 
offensive weapon. Twice during his career he imitated the ruthless tactic 
used by the Chinese General Ts’ao, writing letters to his enemy counter-
parts, pretending to thank them for their help and enclosing cash as a 
token of gratitude, knowing that his opponents would almost certainly 
intercept the letters. But he also excelled in the information-gathering 
role. His methods included the inspection of the paper used in enemy 
latrines, which was often discarded staff papers.
  A variation on the ‘haversack’ trick was used in the Second World 
War to mislead German Intelligence about British intentions in the 
Mediterranean. In this case, popularly known as The Man Who Never 
Was, or Operation Mincemeat, the medium for deception was a corpse, 
clothed in the uniform of a British Major, with a briefcase containing 
planted papers chained to his wrist. The corpse was set adrift off the 
Spanish coast, and was recovered by the Spanish who passed the case to 
German intelligence, who swallowed the bait. As a result, the German 
High Command was seriously misled about the Allied plans in the 
Mediterranean.1
Soviet Deception
Deception has always been a favourite activity of the Russian secret 
service. Probably the best known case of Soviet deception was Prince 
Potemkin’s alleged late eighteenth-century ploy to convince Catherine 
the Great that all was well in the Russian countryside by arranging a 

why spy?
168
series of well-painted hoardings along the road, depicting prosperous 
villages in the distance.
  A large scale deception operation, codenamed Trest, involved the 
creation of the Monarchist Association of Central Russia (MOR), which 
Felix Dzerzhinsky, a Polish aristocrat turned extreme revolutionary, 
designed as a means of penetrating Russian émigré circles. Its public aim 
was to overthrow the Bolsheviks, but the Cheka, the Russian intelli-
gence agency, used MOR as a channel to the principal White Russian 
émigré organisations. For six-years MOR was seen by Russian émigrés 
and Western intelligence officers alike as an anti-Communist organisa-
tion, but it provided Dzerzhinsky with a cornucopia of counter-intelli-
gence material on Russian anti-Communist exiles. Trest had a large 
number of members who were genuine anti-Bolsheviks, but who unwit-
tingly betrayed contacts and operations to the enemy as they talked 
freely to their fellows. Trest also gave Dzerzhinsky a bonus in the shape 
of identification of the Western intelligence officers who saw the 
Association as an ideal area for talent spotting and recruitment of agents.
Operation Fortitude
The sheer magnitude, complexity and success of Operation Fortitude far 
surpasses that of any other deception operation. It was a strategic 
weapon, which paralysed the Wehrmacht and Hitler when the Allies 
invaded Normandy. While the Nazis dithered waiting for another attack 
by our non-existent Second Army Group, the Allies were able to con-
solidate their bridgeheads. Any major deception operation, depends 
upon a complex mix of truth and lies. The truth, colloquially known as 
‘chicken feed’, must convince the enemy that they have acquired a reli-
able source with good access, but not be of such importance that it will 
give them significant help.
  The deception package must be tailored to fit into the enemy’s intel-
ligence mosaic and preconceptions. In addition, in wartime there may 
be a need to provide fake models of weapons and vehicles so that Imint 
can mislead the enemy as to the strength of your forces. The whole 
package must be meticulously coordinated; one small slip can cause the 
enemy to smell a rat. Finally a plausible means must be found to bring 
the deception to the enemy’s attention.
  Operation Fortitude met all these requirements. It is impossible to 
know the number of lives that Fortitude saved by persuading the 

DECEPTION OPERATIONS
	
	
169
German staff that after 6 
 June 1944, the first day of the Normandy 
Landings and the day known as D-Day, there were still more than 
twenty Allied divisions in Britain preparing to launch a second invasion. 
The German belief in these phantom divisions made a crucial contribu-
tion to their dithering, after D-Day, about whether to commit all their 
tank reserves to the battle for Normandy, or whether to await another 
blow. By the time Hitler and his Field Marshals had concluded that 
there would be no second attack, it was too late. The Allies had consoli-
dated their positions.
  Fortitude succeeded in persuading the enemy that there were at least 
twenty Allied Divisions ready to launch a further assault on mainland 
Europe. On 19 
 June, two weeks after D-Day, the German ORBAT map 
still showed more than twelve Allied Divisions in reserve. They had 
estimated that there were seventy-nine Divisions in Britain before 
D-Day; the real number was only fifty-two. The High Command had 
been comprehensively bamboozled by Fortitude.
  Members of 49 Division, including myself, were puzzled by the fre-
quency of our moves up, down, around and across Britain in the two 
years before D-Day. In these years my battalion moved eight times, from 
Iceland to Llanelli, to the Welsh Border, to Scotland, to Velindre, to 
Lowestoft, to Southwold and finally to Thetford. This seemed odd in a 
country suffering severe petrol rationing. No doubt these frenetic move-
ments added to the difficulties of the German staff trying to maintain 
an up-to-date ORBAT picture.
The Double Cross Operation
Fortitude was supported by Double Cross, a highly successful operation 
using double agents developed by Britain’s Double Cross Committee. 
Unbeknown to the Germans, Britain had extensively penetrated the 
network of German agents operating in Britain during the Second 
World War. The system is described in Masterman’s book The Double-
Cross System: a fascinating read. It underlines the sophistication required 
to keep so complex a machine working for years, without any hint to the 
enemy that Britain controlled their agents.2
  There were three leading agents in the double cross system. The first 
was agent GARBO, a Spaniard who had once served in General Franco’s 
Army. He offered his services to the Abwehr, and quickly persuaded 
them that he had an active network of agents working for him in 

why spy?
170
Britain. It took him longer to persuade MI5 that he was a suitable 
double agent. By the time that Operation Fortitude was launched, how-
ever, GARBO had created twenty-four fictitious sub-agents who, as far 
as the Abwehr knew, were providing them with intelligence. In fact it 
was all chicken feed or misinformation.
  The second was BRUTUS, a Polish officer, who having been arrested 
by the Abwehr for espionage, managed to persuade his captors that he had 
changed his allegiance. He was then despatched armed with radio equip-
ment to Britain and created a mythical dissident Pole to assist him. Agent 
TRICYCLE, the third of the leading players in the double cross operation, 
was a Yugoslav lawyer who, as soon as the Abwehr recruited him, offered 
his services to Britain. Other double agents who had been captured and 
turned maintained radio contact with their Abwehr case officers.
  The following information from the German files show how effec-
tively the system worked.
1944
April 13
GARBO reports by radio that he has seen a lot of troops 
and vehicles of 49th Division in the Norwich area. [This was 
chicken feed].
April 14
Germans record that a trustworthy Abwehr report locates 
the 9th US Infantry Division in the UK. 
 [More chicken 
feed from GARBO].
May 16
FREAK reports by radio that 15th Division, composed 
mainly of Scottish troops, has moved to mid-Sussex. [More 
chicken feed].
May 20
German files record that 15th Division has moved to the 
Horsham area. [FREAK’s chicken feed was noted].
May 31
BRUTUS reports by radio that he will send a series of 
­messages about the (fictitious) First US Army Group 
(FUSAG). His understanding is that the Allied Expedi­
tionary Forces include FUSAG, commanded by General 
Patton, and two armies, 1st Canadian, centred on Leather­
head, and 3rd American, location not yet known. [This was 
false information].
June 6
German files record that, according to a reliable Abwehr 
message, the forces now in the south of England are organ-
ised as two army groups; 21st English [sic] and 1st American. 
[This was also false information].

DECEPTION OPERATIONS
	
	
171
June 14
BRUTUS reports that British 2nd Corps is now part of 
FUSAG and about to move south.
June 16
GARBO reports that US 8th and 9th Air Forces will give 
heavy support to FUSAG’s assault.
June 17
German files record that 2nd English [sic] Army Corps is 
subordinated to FUSAG, which is in south-east England, 
and has up to twenty-seven divisions.
June 19
Germans record that a particularly trustworthy source has 
reported that FUSAG will be supported by strong portions 
of the heavy bomber force, which suggests an assault on 
strong fortifications along the middle of the channel coast.
August 31
German ORBAT maps still include FUSAG.
  It was not until December 1944 that the German analysts finally 
decided that there was no danger of a second invasion. The double cross 
system had been an outstanding success.
Conclusion
Those who question the value of intelligence work should remember 
Operation Fortitude. Intelligence did in this case save millions of lives 
and shorten the war. As a soldier who participated in the Normandy 
battle, I knew nothing of such matters as we fought for weeks against 
the still powerful German Army. I shudder to think, however, of what 
might have happened had we not succeeded in our deception and Hitler 
had allowed his generals to launch all his Panzer reserves against us.
  The German records suggest that neither their Sigint nor their Imint 
contributed significantly to our success. German Sigint intercepted only 
three messages out of the treasure trove of FUSAG radio messages, so 
elaborately concocted for their delectation, and the brilliant visual 
hoaxes created by the Fortitude team were not challenged by aerial pho-
tography since the Luftwaffe’s operations had become extremely 
restricted. So it was our fake Humint passed on through the credulous 
and trusting Abwehr which did the trick.
  Many of the examples in this chapter are drawn from World Wars 
where huge resources were spent on deception operations. Smaller 
operations, successful or otherwise, in peacetime are much less likely to 
be revealed in the public records.


	
173
13
ASSASSINATION
‘[I]f evil men were not now and then slain it would not be a good world for 
weaponless dreamers.’
Rudyard Kipling, ‘Kim’, 1901
‘In eight months of dramatic investigation, Senator Church had managed to 
determine that CIA had never assassinated anyone.’
Richard Helms, former DCI, 2003
‘[I]n peacetime the assassination of troublesome persons is morally and opera-
tionally indefensible.’
Richard Helms, former DCI, 2003
‘No person employed by or acting on behalf of the United States Government 
shall engage in, or conspire to engage in, assassination.’
President Jimmy Carter’s Executive Order, 24  January 1978 
(an expansion of President Gerald R.  Ford’s Executive Order of 1976)
‘I am against it [assassination] for at least three good reasons: it’s against the law 
of God, it’s against the law of man, and it doesn’t work.’
Vernon Walters, DDCI, 1976
‘The Security Service does not kill people or arrange their assassination.’
MI5 website

why spy?
174
‘If anyone has committed or is planning to carry out terrorist attacks, he has to 
be hit… It is effective, precise, and just.’
Ephraim Sneh, Israel’s Deputy Defence Minister, 2001
There were no doubt cases of murder for political reasons long before 
there were written records. The Romans were always assassinating their 
rulers. According to Suetonius, the Roman scholar, eight or even nine 
of the twelve rulers he described died between 49BC and AD96 at the 
hands of an assassin. Julius Caesar was one of them. The prize for the 
assassination which has had the widest and deepest impact on world 
history should surely go to Gavrilo Princip: his botched, but successful, 
shooting of the Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand was the immediate 
cause of the First World War, a war which brought the whole of Europe 
to battle and changed the world. This case reminds us that the conse-
quences of an assassination are unpredictable. For this reason alone—
and there are many others—the decision to assassinate an inconvenient 
ruler should not be taken, however disagreeable the tyrant may be.
  Like deception operations and Special Operations, assassination can 
be conducted by, or on behalf of, intelligence agencies and can make use 
of intelligence. When non-state actors such as terrorist groups carry out 
assassinations, just as with their other operations, they are informed by 
their own intelligence. One of the many risks involved in conducting 
assassination is that no amount of intelligence can predict the conse-
quences. The 2010 assassination of Hamas official Mahmoud al-Mab-
houh in his hotel room in Dubai is believed to have been carried out by 
Mossad, the Israeli intelligence service. Passports from various western 
states were used in this operation, bringing about international repercus-
sions that included Ireland’s expulsion of an Israeli diplomat from the 
embassy in Dublin. Various security measures are used to protect state 
leaders from these kinds of attack, ranging from physical measures such 
as armoured cars, to counter-intelligence efforts to stop hostile forces 
from gaining intelligence on state personnel, methods or organisations.
  Assassination is a form of special action not favoured in peacetime by 
democratic governments. In peacetime the extrajudicial assassination 
weapon has always been anathema among British intelligence services. 
British scruples did not, however, extend into the Second World War. 
SOE files, now in the public domain, show that assassination was readily 

ASSASSINATION
	
	
175
accepted as a potential weapon against troublesome enemy agents, but 
even in wartime Britain it was not universally accepted. A senior Royal 
Air Force (RAF) officer refused to authorise the use of RAF planes to 
drop SOE agents bound for assassination missions in Europe.1 The char-
ters for MI5 and SIS have never included a licence to kill.
  The US too has taken a public stance against dirty tricks of this 
nature. Founding Father Thomas Jefferson wrote in 1789 that assassina-
tion, poisoning and perjury were ‘legitimate principles in the dark 
ages… but exploded and held in just horror in the 18th century.’ 
Nevertheless, in 1916 four assassins were despatched to Mexico by the 
US Army in an attempt to poison the rebel leader Pancho Villa. 
Kennedy said publicly in 1961, ‘[w]e cannot, as a free nation, compete 
with our adversaries in tactics of terror, [and] assassination’. A Senate 
Committee set up to study the subject of presidential involvement in 
assassination produced an ambiguous verdict in 1976 on the degree of 
knowledge that Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson had pos-
sessed about plans to eliminate Cuban leader Castro. Former DCI 
Helms said in testimony to the Senate, ‘I believe it was the policy at the 
time to get rid of Castro, and if killing him was one of the things that 
was to be done in this connection, that was within what was expected… 
no limitations were put on this injunction.’
  Yet President Ford issued a directive in 1976 forbidding any US 
Government employee from engaging in, or conspiring to engage in, 
assassination operations, and later Presidents have issued similar decrees. 
However, in May 2011, a US Special Forces operation in Abbottabad, 
Pakistan led to the death of the Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden. His 
death was celebrated on the streets of the US by delighted crowds.
  Lethal force has also been used by the US, and by Britain, to elimi-
nate terrorist leaders in the Middle East by firing missiles from UAVs in 
complex legal environments. Despite the media attention already paid 
to the Abbottabad operation and others, there remains scope for further 
analysis of the relationships between the collection and assessment roles 
played by intelligence agencies, military action, and political authorisa-
tion of the assassination operations.
  The Soviets have never seemed bothered about the morality of assas-
sination. They have a long history of brutal secret police. The murder of 
Bolshevik Leon Trotsky in Mexico in 1940 is, perhaps, the best known 
of post-Imperial ‘out of country’ assassinations, but there have been 

why spy?
176
many notorious cases inside and outside the Soviet Empire, where 
strange and dreadful devices have been used: poison-tipped umbrellas, 
cyanide-tipped bullets in silenced pistols, and a tube the size of a cigar 
containing an ampoule of prussic acid designed to spray a victim’s face 
and cause instant death. Oleg Kalugin, ex-KGB, was not coy about 
assassination in his memoirs: he described the KGB laboratory dedi-
cated to refining and inventing weapons for assassins, and it is widely 
assumed that the successors to the KGB continue to maintain their skills 
in this field.2
  Eisenhower remarked in the context of suggestion that even if any 
good came from the assassination of Castro, which he doubted, it was 
immoral and might lead to a chain of assassinations around the world. 
But SOE had no compunction about assassination in the Second World 
War. The case of Baron Von Hentig, a German operating in the Middle 
East in this period, illustrates their philosophy. The only concerns evi-
dent in the SOE’s war diaries were about repercussions and the opposi-
tion of Sir Miles Lampson in Cairo. The war diaries contain many notes 
relevant to this topic. For example:
… it was understood that Hentig had left on the 26th [of January, 1941] for 
Damascus and Aleppo. This movement should permit the necessary action to 
be taken.
… high authorities at Cairo were opposed to any form of assassination which 
might disturb Syria.
… the High Authorities interested were most disappointed at the failure to deal 
with HENTIG, and instructed that an attempt should be made to liquidate his 
assistants KARL RASWEN and MAX VON OPPENHEIM who were in 
Beyrout.3
Conclusion
The word assassination is scarcely mentioned in the British literature. 
Our intelligence services are no more trained to assassinate than they are 
to torture. Such training raises moral issues, as does asking or ordering 
someone to carry out this task in peacetime. And there is no certainty as 
to what happens afterwards: who will take the assassinated leader’s place? 
Despite this there is evidence to suggest that whilst western democracies 
have traditionally and quite publicly opposed the use of assassination, 
their attitudes towards targeting individuals for political and security 

ASSASSINATION
	
	
177
reasons have altered since 2001. While the legal, practical and moral 
objections still remain, those whom the west believes are part of the 
asymmetric threat to their states, and who are located in areas where it 
is not always clear whether they meet the legal status of ‘war zone’, are 
now being specifically targeted with the help of intelligence agencies.


	
179
	
pp. [xix–20]
NOTES
PREFACE
1.  Herman, Michael, Intelligence Power in Peace and War, London: Royal 
Institute for International Affairs, 1996.
2.  Omand, David, Securing the State, London: Hurst, 2010.
3.  Andrew, Christopher, The Defence of the Realm: The Authorised History of 
MI5, London: Allen Lane, 2009.
4.  Jeffery, Keith, MI6: The History of the Secret Intelligence Service, 1909–1949, 
London: Bloomsbury, 2010.
5.  Goodman, Michael S., The Official History of the Joint Intelligence Committee: 
Volume I: From the Approach of the Second World War to the Suez Crisis, Oxford: 
Routledge, 2014.
6.  Aldrich, Richard, GCHQ: The Uncensored Story of Britain’s Most Secret 
Intelligence Agency, London: Harper Press, 2010.
1.  THE MALAYAN EMERGENCY: AN INTELLIGENCE SUCCESS 
STORY
1.  The best all round account of the Malayan Emergency is provided by Tony 
Short’s monumental work, which uses Malayan and British records to pro-
vide a broad brush picture of those troubled years. See Short, Anthony, 
Communist Insurrection in Malaya, 1948–60, London: Muller, 1975.
2.  Those interested in more detail on SB operations will find them in Stewart, 
Brian T. 
 W., Smashing Terrorism in the Malayan Emergency: The Vital 
Contribution of the Police, Malaysia: Pelanduk, 2004, and the note on Leng 
Chee Woh therein.
3.  The view that the KMT should not be called in aid against the Communists 

NOTES
180
pp. [21–68]
and the Commander in Chief’s view that the KMT was a worse menace than 
the Communists was not challenged. The KMT had been the traditional 
enemy before the war and communist China was not yet seen as a threat.
4.  There was no solid basis for this assertion: fortunately for the government 
the MCP were not clients of any foreign party.
2.  VIETNAM: A CAN OF WORMS
1.  McNamara, Robert S. 
 with Brian VanDeMark, In Retrospect: The Tragedy 
and Lessons of Vietnam, New York: Vintage Books, 1995, pp. 321–3.
2.  Peng, Chin, My Side of History: Alias Chin Peng, Singapore: Media Masters, 
2003.
3.  CHINESE AFFAIRS
1.  See Cheng, Nien, Life and Death in Shanghai, New York: Grove Press, 1987.
4.  THE ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY OF INTELLIGENCE
1.  Goodman, Michael S., The Official History of the Joint Intelligence Committee: 
Volume I: From the Approach of the Second World War to the Suez Crisis, Oxford: 
Routledge, 2014.
2.  Penkovsky, Oleg, The Penkovsky Papers, London: Collins, 1965.
3.  At the time of writing these were, in alphabetical order: Aberystwyth Univer­
sity, Brunel University, King’s College London, Staffordshire University, The 
University of Buckingham and The University of Salford.
5.  TYPES OF INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION METHODS
1.  There is no simple way of satisfying everyone in the matter of the Romanisation 
of Chinese words. I have chosen what I think is probably the easiest to remem-
ber: Sun Tzu. It is also difficult to agree on translations and there is no agreed 
standard text for Sun Tzu and the other Chinese military classics. The edi-
tions used in this book are: Bin, Sun, Sun Zi, Wu Xianlin, Zheng Tian and 
Sun Tzu, edited by Wu Rusong, Zhang He and Lin Wusun, Sun Zi: The Art 
of War and Sun Pin: The Art of War, Beijing: China Publishing House, 1995; 
Sawyer, Ralph D., The Seven Military Classics of Ancient China, Oxford: 
Westview Press, 1993; Zi, Sun, The Art of War, London: Hodder and 
Stoughton, 1981.

NOTES
	
	
181
	
pp. [88–111]
6.  ASSESSMENT: PROBLEMS AND COMMON FALLACIES
1.  Blainey, Geoffrey, The Causes of War, New York: The Free Press, 1988 (third 
edition).
2.  Clancy, Tom, Executive Orders, London: Harper Collins, 1997.
3.  Cockburn, Andrew, The Threat: Inside the Soviet Military Machine, New York: 
Random House, 1983.
4.  Personal information from Sir Maurice Oldfield, then Chief of SIS.
7.  MORAL DILEMMAS
1.  For more accounts of interrogation in the Malayan Emergency see Stewart, 
Brian T. 
 W., Smashing Terrorism in the Malayan Emergency: The Vital 
Contribution of the Police, Singapore: Pelanduk, 2004.
2.  Hoare, Oliver (ed.), Camp 020: MI5 and the Nazi Spies, London: Public 
Record Office, 2000, pp. 57–8, 117–19.
3.  Cheng, Nien, Life and Death in Shanghai, New York: Grove Press, 1987.
4.  CIA, KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation, July 1963; CIA, Human 
Resource Exploitation Training Manual—1983, 1983, The National Security 
Archive, http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB122/, last 
accessed 12  Dec. 2014.
5.  CIA, KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation, July 1963, The National 
Security Archive, http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB122/, 
last accessed 12  Dec. 2014.
6.  Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study of the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 13 
 Dec. 2012, 
http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/study2014/sscistudy1.pdf, last accessed 
15  Dec. 2014; Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study 
of the Central Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program: 
Minority Views of Vice Chairman Chambliss joined by Senators Burr, Risch, 
Coats, Rubio, and Coburn, 20 
 June 2014, http://www.intelligence.senate.
gov/study2014/sscistudy3.pdf, last accessed 15  Dec. 2014.
7.  For details of the 1971–2 debate over interrogation techniques in Northern 
Ireland and further identification of the roles played by heads of service and 
others, see Newbery, Samantha, Interrogation, Intelligence and Security: 
Controversial British Techniques, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 
forthcoming (2015).
8.  The document is reproduced in Newbery, Samantha, Bob Brecher, Philippe 
Sands and Brian Stewart, ‘Interrogation, intelligence and the issue of human 
rights’, Intelligence and National Security, 24, 5 (2009), pp. 631–43.
9.  Penkovsky, Oleg, The Penkovsky Papers, London: Collins, 1965.

NOTES
182
pp. [112–156]
10.  For more, see Bunn, Geoffrey C., ‘The lie detector’s ambivalent powers’, 
History of Psychology, 10, 2 (2007), pp. 156–78.
11.  Kahn, David, The Codebreakers, London: Sphere, 1973; MacLachlan, 
Donald, Room 39: Naval Intelligence in Action 1939–45, London: Weidenfeld 
and Nicolson, 1968.
12.  Masterman, John, The Double-Cross System: The Incredible True Story of how 
Nazi Spies were Turned into Double Agents, New York: Lyons Press, 2000. 
First published as The Double-Cross System in the War of 1939–1945 in 1972 
by Yale University Press.
13.  Hinsley, F. 
 Harry, with E. 
 E. 
 Thomas, C. 
 F. 
 G. 
 Ransome and R. 
 C. 
 Knight, 
British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 1: Its Influence on Strategy 
and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1979; Hinsley, 
with Thomas, Ransome and Knight, British Intelligence in the Second World 
War: Volume 2: Its Influence on Strategy and Operations, London: Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1981; Hinsley, with Thomas, Ransome and 
Knight, British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 3, Part 1: Its 
Influence on Strategy and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery 
Office, 1984; Hinsley, with Thomas, C. 
 A. 
 G. 
 Simkins and Ransome, British 
Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 3, Part 2: Its Influence on Strategy 
and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1985; Hinsley 
and Simkins, British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 4: Security 
and Counter-Intelligence, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1990.
14.  Andrew, Christopher, The Defence of the Realm: The Authorised History of 
MI5, London: Allen Lane, 2009.
15.  Chapter Thirteen is devoted to the subject of assassination, including the 
moral issues it raises.
10.  IRAQ: THE INTELLIGENCE IMBROGLIO AND THE BUTLER 
REVIEW
1.  Readers can find a detailed account in the Butler Review and the Hutton 
Review. See Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction: Report 
of a Committee of Privy Counsellors, Chairman: The Rt Hon The Lord 
Butler of Brockwell KG GCB CVO, London: The Stationery Office, 2004, 
HC 898 (Butler Report); Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances 
Surrounding the Death of Dr 
 David Kelly C.M.G., Lord Hutton, London: 
The Stationery Office, 2004, HC 247 (Hutton Report).
11.  SPECIAL OPERATIONS
1.  For more on the Bay of Pigs invasion see Chapter Nine.

NOTES
	
	
183
	
pp. [157–176]
2.  For further discussion of assassination see Chapter Thirteen.
3.  See Chapter Twelve.
4.  Bribery was a standard weapon for diplomats until the twentieth century. In 
modern times it may be called by other names, such as ‘aid’.
5.  This term was used in the First World War to mean operations where the 
hulls of ships appearing to be innocent and decrepit concealed a naval detach-
ment with a naval gun.
12.  DECEPTION OPERATIONS
1.  For more on Operation Mincemeat see Montague, Ewan, The Man Who 
Never Was, London: Evans Bros, 1953.
2.  Masterman, John, The Double-Cross System: The Incredible True Story of how 
Nazi Spies were Turned into Double Agents, New York: Lyons Press, 2000.
13.  ASSASSINATION
1.  For more on the SOE see Chapter Eleven.
2.  Kalugin, Oleg, Spymaster: My Thirty-Two Years in Intelligence and Espionage 
against the West, London: Smith Gryphon, 1994.
3.  SOE War Diaries, 29 
 January 1941, HS 7/212, The National Archives 
(TNA); SOE War Diaries, 12 and 5  February 1941, HS 7/213, TNA.


	
185
VALEDICTORY
Most of my adult life was spent overseas in Crown Service. Britain was 
experiencing at first hand regular war, civil war, guerrilla war, colonial 
administration and postcolonial participation. A very small part of those 
years were spent in government offices handling government paper. It 
would be surprising if at the end of such a career my views, perspectives 
and priorities had not been affected.
  Why Spy? has aimed to give a picture of the main elements in a mod-
ern intelligence community and the problems they face in seeking the 
truth in support of the defence of their country. It has discussed the 
uses, abuses, misunderstandings, weaknesses, strengths, value and limita-
tions of intelligence, and crystallised the rules for good intelligence work 
into ten commandments. Intelligence alone cannot win a war, but it can 
be a force multiplier, and can, as in the Malayan case, be a valuable 
ingredient of victory.
  Nonetheless, intelligence, however good, could not have given victory 
to the US in Vietnam where the basic circumstances assured defeat, not 
victory. In Iraq the misuse of intelligence contributed to the unfortunate 
invasion. In many cases, including Pearl Harbor and Afghanistan, it was 
not intelligence that was needed so much as a much better knowledge 
of history.
  It is theoretically possible to calculate the cost of all our intelligence 
and security activities, but this is the stuff of accountants. Billions may 
be spent on security but there is no way of calculating its monetary 
value. Intelligence is valueless unless the customer puts it to good use.
  Those who suggest they know the value of intelligence may only 
mean that they know that it has been significant. Military commanders 

VALEDICTORY
186
sometimes credit intelligence with significant contributions to victory, 
but intelligence is most often mentioned in the context of failures. The 
cost of failure could well be the disintegration of society as we know it. 
I defy anyone to put a price on that.
  Although the nature of the threats has changed over time, good intel-
ligence is still a priceless asset. The terrorism we successfully defeated in 
Malaya was a comparatively primitive affair, and so was the terrorism of 
the Irish Fenians and other anarchists of the nineteenth century. Those 
unpleasant activities were small beer compared with the activities of the 
jihadis of today, equipped with mobile phones and armed with plastic 
explosives. As the world becomes ever more complex, intelligence con-
tinues to be an essential weapon in the armoury of any state seeking to 
protect its citizens. I salute the intelligence and security officers who, 
gallantly and doggedly, continue to fight an enemy who are only inter-
ested in the rule of law and human rights in so far as such doctrines help 
them to evade justice.
  Valedictories by Ambassadors used to be a fine art; some were strong 
meat, all were potentially embarrassing. Alas they are no more. This vale-
dictory is of a different sort. This is a farewell after a long life in which 
seventy adult years were connected in some way with intelligence.
  My first Ambassador told me that he liked having an ‘irregular’ on his 
staff, and one of my ambassadorial friends told me after reading my 
autobiography that I had led a much more interesting life than he had. 
I enjoyed it all immensely, and I hope I made a useful contribution. 
Intelligence provided me not only with fascinating work, but a hobby 
for life.
  Farewell. I would like to thank all those in the intelligence business 
with whom I worked over so many years. It was a wonderful club cross-
ing national boundaries. I thank my stars for my involvement in the 
intelligence world. Friends have asked me whether I would live the same 
life again. The answer is, ‘yes, indeed’. I cannot imagine a more satisfac-
tory occupation, working for Her Majesty, with good company, and my 
reports sometimes going straight to the Prime Minister and to the 
President of the US.
  I wish my successors well in their sterling efforts to keep British 
people safe in our turbulent world. They deserve our thanks for their 
persistence and for their dedication to a profession which may give them 
job satisfaction but is unlikely to gain them public acclaim.

VALEDICTORY
	
	
187
  I leave the last words of Why Spy? to Sun Tzu who said, ‘what enables 
the great general to achieve things beyond the reach of ordinary men is 
foreknowledge… This cannot be obtained by induction or deduction 
but through spies.’


	
189
GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS
9/11
The terrorist attacks of 11  September 2001
Abwehr
German military intelligence
ARVN
Army of the Republic of Vietnam, or South Vietnam 
Army
Audint
Audio intelligence
BMA
British Military Administration
BND
German foreign intelligence service
Cabint
Cab or taxi intelligence
Cheka
Communist Russia’s espionage and security organ-
isation, 1917–54
Chicken feed
Genuine intelligence used in a deception operation 
to give the recipients false confidence in the prove-
nance of accompanying, fabricated, intelligence
CIA
Central Intelligence Agency (US)
CINCPAC
Commander in Chief, Pacific Command (US)
CT
Communist-Terrorists (Malaya)
DCI
Director of Central Intelligence (US). The post-
holder served as Director of the CIA and as national 
intelligence coordinator. In 2005 this post was 
replaced by two new posts: Director of the CIA and 
Director of National Intelligence
DDCI
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (US). This 
post was replaced in 2005
DIS
Defence Intelligence Staff (UK)
DNI
Director of National Intelligence (US). This post

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS
190
was created in 2005 to oversee the US intelligence 
community
Docint
Documentary intelligence
Exint
Exile intelligence
FBI
Federal Bureau of Investigation (US)
FUSAG
First US Army Group
GCHQ
Government Communications Headquarters (UK)
GRU
Russian Military Intelligence
Head of Mission
The name given to the most senior representative of 
a country when stationed in a host country
Humint
Human intelligence
Hunchint
Hunch intelligence
ICBMs
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles
ICC
International Control Commission
Imint
Imagery intelligence
ISC
Intelligence and Security Committee (UK)
JIC
Joint Intelligence Committee (UK)
KGB
Soviet Union’s security, intelligence and police 
organisation
KMT
Kuomintang, Nationalists China’s ruling party until 
1949
KUBARK
The cryptonym for CIA Headquarters
MCP
Malayan Communist Party
MI5
The Security Service (UK)
MOR
Monarchist Association of Central Russia
MRBMs
Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles
MSS
Malayan Security Service
NCNA
New China News Agency
NSA
National Security Agency (US)
NVA
North Vietnamese Army
ORBAT
Order of Battle
Osint
Open source intelligence, or overt intelligence
PSB
Public Security Bureau (China)
Psywar
Psychological warfare
RAF
Royal Air Force (UK)
RUC
Royal Ulster Constabulary
Rumint
Rumour intelligence
SAMs
Surface to Air Missiles

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS
	
	
191
SB
Special Branch
SCA
Secretary for Chinese Affairs
Security forces
The military and the police
Sigint
Signal intelligence
SIS
Secret Intelligence Service (UK). Also known as MI6
Sitreps
Situation reports
SOE
Special Operations Executive (UK)
SWECs
State War Executive Committees (Malaya)
Techint
Technical intelligence
TNA
The National Archives, London
Trashint
Trash intelligence
U-2
American photo reconnaissance aircraft
UAVs
Unmanned aerial vehicles. Also known as drones
VC
Vietnamese Communists. Also known as the Vietcong
WMD
Weapons of Mass Destruction


	
193
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aldrich, Richard, The Hidden Hand: Britain, America and Cold War Secret 
Intelligence, London: John Murray, 2001.
——— GCHQ: The Uncensored Story of Britain’s Most Secret Intelligence Agency, 
London: Harper Press, 2010.
Andrew, Christopher and Oleg Gordievsky, KGB: The Inside Story of its Foreign 
Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1990.
Andrew, Christopher, For the President’s Eyes Only: Secret Intelligence and the 
American Presidency from Washington to Bush, London: HarperCollins, 1996.
——— The Defence of the Realm: The Authorised History of MI5, London: Allen 
Lane, 2009.
Barker, Nick, Beyond Endurance: An Epic of Whitehall and the South Atlantic 
Conflict, London: Lee Cooper, 1997.
Bin, Sun, Sun Zi, Wu Xianlin, Zheng Tian and Sun Tzu, edited by Wu Rusong, 
Zhang He and Lin Wusun, Sun Zi: The Art of War and Sun Pin: The Art of 
War, Beijing: China Publishing House,1995.
Blainey, Geoffrey, The Causes of War, New York: The Free Press, 1988 (third 
edition).
Blix, Hans, Disarming Iraq: The Search for Weapons of Mass Destruction, London: 
Bloomsbury, 2004.
Borovik, Genrikh, The Philby Files: The Secret Life of the Master Spy—KGB 
Archives Revealed, London: Little Brown, 1994.
British Army Field Manual, Volume 1, Part 10, Countering Insurgency, October 
2009.
Bunn, Geoffrey C., ‘The lie detector’s ambivalent powers’, History of Psychology, 
10, 2 (2007), pp. 156–78.
Cheng, Nien, Life and Death in Shanghai, New York: Grove Press, 1987.
CIA, KUBARK Counterintelligence Interrogation, July 1963, The National 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
194
Security Archive, http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB122/, 
last accessed 12  Dec. 2014.
CIA, Human Resource Exploitation Training Manual—1983, 1983, The 
National Security Archive, http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/
NSAEBB122/, last accessed 12  Dec. 2014.
Clancy, Tom, Executive Orders, London: Harper Collins, 1997.
Clarke, Richard, Against All Enemies: Inside America’s War on Terror, London: 
Simon and Schuster, 2004.
Cline, Ray, Secret Spies and Scholars: Blueprint of the Essential CIA, Washington: 
Acropolis Press, 1974.
Cline, Ray and William V. 
 Kennedy, The Intelligence War: Penetrating the World 
of Today’s Advanced Technology Conflict, London: Salamander Books, 1987.
Cockburn, Andrew, The Threat: Inside the Soviet Military Machine, New York: 
Random House, 1983.
Cocker, Mark, Richard Meinertzhagen: Soldier, Scientist and Spy, London: 
Secker & Warburg, 1989.
Colby, William, Honourable Men: My Life in the CIA, New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978.
Colby, William with James McCargar, Lost Victory: A Firsthand Account of 
America’s Sixteen-Year Involvement in Vietnam, Chicago: Contemporary 
Books, 1989.
Comber, Leon, Malaya’s Secret Police, 1945–60: The Role of the Special Branch 
in the Malayan Emergency, Victoria: Monash University Press, 2008.
Craddock, Percy, In Pursuit of British Interests: Reflections on Foreign Policy under 
Margaret Thatcher and John Major, London: John Murray, 1997.
Douglas, Hugh, Jacobite Spy Wars: Moles, Rogues and Treachery, Stroud: Sutton 
Publishing, 1999.
Dower, John W., War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War, New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1986.
Duiker, William J., U.S. 
 Containment Policy and the Conflict in Indochina, 
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994.
Dulles, Allen W., The Craft of Intelligence, London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 
1963.
Elphick, Peter, Singapore: The Pregnable Fortress: A Study in Deception, Discord 
and Desertion, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1995.
Falkland Islands Review: Report of a Committee of Privy Counsellors, 
Chairman The Rt Hon the Lord Franks, OM, GCMG, KCB, CBE, London: 
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1983, Cmnd. 8787.
Festinger, Leon, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance, New York: Row Petersen, 
1957.
Ford, Harold P., CIA and the Vietnam Policymakers: Three Episodes 1962–1968, 
Langley: Centre for the Study of Intelligence, 1998.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
	
	
195
Gates, Robert M., From the Shadows: The Ultimate Insider’s Story of Five 
Presidents and How They Won the Cold War, New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1996.
Gill, Peter and Mark Phythian, Intelligence in an Insecure World, Cambridge: 
Polity, 2012 (second edition).
Goodman, Michael S., The Official History of the Joint Intelligence Committee: 
Volume I: From the Approach of the Second World War to the Suez Crisis, 
Oxford: Routledge, 2014.
Gordievsky, Oleg, Next Stop Execution, London: Macmillan, 1995.
Griffiths, Samuel B., The Art of War, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963.
Grose, Peter, Gentleman Spy: Life of Allen Dulles, London: Andre Deutsch, 
1995.
Haig, Alexander M., Caveat: Realism, Reagan and Foreign Policy, New York: 
Macmillan, 1984.
Helms, Richard and William Hood, A Look Over My Shoulder: A Life in the 
Central Intelligence Agency, London: Random House, 2003.
Herman, Michael, Intelligence Power in Peace and War, London: Royal Institute 
for International Affairs, 1996.
Hinsley, F. 
 Harry, with E. 
 E. 
 Thomas, C. 
 F. 
 G. 
 Ransome and R. 
 C. 
 Knight, 
British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 1: Its Influence on Strategy 
and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1979.
——— British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 2: Its Influence on 
Strategy and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1981.
——— British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 3, Part 1: Its 
Influence on Strategy and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery 
Office, 1984.
Hinsley, F. 
 Harry, with E. 
 E. 
 Thomas, C. 
 A. 
 G. 
 Simkins and C. 
 F. 
 G. 
 Ransome, 
British Intelligence in the Second World War: Volume 3, Part 2: Its Influence on 
Strategy and Operations, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1985.
Hinsley, F. 
 Harry and C. 
 A. 
 G. 
 Simkins, British Intelligence in the Second World 
War: Volume 4: Security and Counter-Intelligence, London: Her Majesty’s 
Stationery Office, 1990.
Hoare, Oliver (ed.), Camp 020: MI5 and the Nazi Spies, London: Public Record 
Office, 2000.
Howard, Michael, Strategic Deception in the Second World War, New York: 
W.  W.  Norton, 1996.
Hughes-Wilson, John, Military Blunders and Cover Ups, London: Robinson, 
2004.
Jeffery, Keith, MI6: The History of the Secret Intelligence Service, 1909–1949, 
London: Bloomsbury, 2010.
Jones, Reginald V., Most Secret War, London: Hamish Hamilton, 1978.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
196
Jones, Reginald V., Reflections on Intelligence, Portsmouth: Heinemann, 1989.
Kahn, David, The Codebreakers, London: Sphere, 1973.
Kalugin, Oleg, Spymaster: My Thirty-Two Years in Intelligence and Espionage 
against the West, London: Smith Gryphon, 1994.
Keegan, John, Intelligence in War: Knowledge of the Enemy from Napoleon to 
Al-Qaeda, London: Pimlico, 2004.
Kennedy, Robert F., Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis, New 
York: W.  W.  Norton, 1969.
Kessler, Ronald, Inside the CIA, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Knightley, Philip, The Second Oldest Profession: The Spy as Bureaucrat, Patriot, 
Fantasist and Whore, London: Deutsch, 1986.
Lathrop, Charles E., The Literary Spy: The Ultimate Source for Quotations on 
Espionage and Intelligence, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.
Laqueur, Walter, The Uses and Limits of Intelligence, New Brunswick: Transaction 
Publishers, 1995 (new edition).
MacLachlan, Donald, Room 39: Naval Intelligence in Action 1939–45, London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1968.
MacLaren, Vance V., ‘A quantitative review of the guilty knowledge test’, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 4 (2001), pp. 674–83.
Masterman, John, The Double-Cross System: The Incredible True Story of How 
Nazi Spies were Turned into Double Agents, New York: Lyons Press, 2000.
McNamara, Robert S. 
 with Brian VanDeMark, In Retrospect: The Tragedy and 
Lessons of Vietnam, New York: Vintage Books, 1995.
Meijer, Ewout H. 
 and Bruno Verschuere, ‘The polygraph and the detection of 
deception’, Journal of Forensic Psychology Practice, 10, 4 (2010), pp. 325–38.
Meinertzhagen, Richard, Middle East Diary, 1917–1956, London: Cresset 
Press, 1959.
Misra, Amalendu, Afghanistan: The Labyrinth of Violence, Cambridge: Polity, 
2004.
Montague, Ewan, The Man Who Never Was, London: Evans Bros, 1953.
Newbery, Samantha, Interrogation, Intelligence and Security: Controversial British 
Techniques, Manchester: Manchester University Press, forthcoming (2015).
Newbery, Samantha, Bob Brecher, Philippe Sands and Brian Stewart, 
‘Interrogation, intelligence and the issue of human rights’, Intelligence and 
National Security, 24, 5 (2009), pp. 631–43.
Newsinger, John, British Counterinsurgency: From Palestine to Northern Ireland, 
Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002.
Office of the Inspector General, CIA, Report on CIA Accountability with Respect 
to the 9/11 Attacks, 2005.
O’Halpin, Eunan, ‘British intelligence and the case for confronting Iraq: 
Evidence from the Butler and Hutton Reports’, Irish Studies in International 
Affairs, 16 (2005), pp. 89–102.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
	
	
197
Omand, David, Securing the State, London: Hurst, 2010.
Payne, Ronald, Mossad: Israel’s Most Secret Intelligence Service, London: Corgi, 
1991.
Peceny, Mark, Democracy at the Point of Bayonets, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania 
State University, 1999.
Peng, Chin, My Side of History: Alias Chin Peng, Singapore: Media Masters, 
2003.
Penkovsky, Oleg, The Penkovsky Papers, London: Collins, 1965.
Radzinsky, Edvard, Stalin, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1996.
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of 
Dr 
 David Kelly C.M.G., Lord Hutton, London: The Stationery Office, 
2004, HC 247 (Hutton Report).
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction: Report of a 
Committee of Privy Counsellors, Chairman: The Rt Hon The Lord Butler of 
Brockwell KG GCB CVO, London: The Stationery Office, 2004, HC 898 
(Butler Report).
Richelson, Jeffery T., A Century of Spies: Intelligence in the Twentieth Century, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Ronge, Maximilian, The Treachery of Colonel Redl, London, 1921.
Rusk, Dean, As I Saw It, New York: W.  W.  Norton, 1990.
Ryan, Cornelius, A Bridge Too Far, London: Hamish Hamilton, 1971.
Sawyer, Ralph D., The Seven Military Classics of Ancient China, Oxford: 
Westview Press, 1993.
Scarborough, Rowan, Rumsfeld’s War: The Untold Story of America’s Anti-Terrorist 
Commander, Washington: Regnery Publishing, 2004.
Schlesinger Jnr, Arthur M., A Thousand Days: John F. 
 Kennedy in the White 
House, Boston: Houghton Mieflin, 1965.
Schmidt, Paul and R. 
 H. 
 C. 
 Steed, Hitler’s Interpreter, Melbourne: Heinemann, 
1951.
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study of the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program, 13 
 Dec. 2012, 
http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/study2014/sscistudy1.pdf, last accessed 
15  Dec. 2014.
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Committee Study of the Central 
Intelligence Agency’s Detention and Interrogation Program: Minority Views 
of Vice Chairman Chambliss joined by Senators Burr, Risch, Coats, Rubio, 
and Coburn, 20 
 June 2014, http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/study2014/
sscistudy3.pdf, last accessed 15  Dec. 2014.
Shackley, Ted and Richard A. 
 Finney, Spymaster: My Life in the CIA, Dulles: 
Potomac Books, 2005.
Short, Anthony, Communist Insurrection in Malaya, 1948–60, London: Muller, 
1975.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
198
Stewart, Brian, ‘Winning in Malaya: An Intelligence Success Story’, Intelligence 
and National Security, 14, 4 (1999), pp. 267–83.
——— Smashing Terrorism in the Malayan Emergency: The Vital Contribution 
of the Police, Malaysia: Pelanduk, 2004.
Stewart, Rory, The Places In Between, London: Picador, 2004.
Strong, Kenneth, Intelligence at the Top, London: Cassell, 1968.
——— Men of Intelligence, London: Cassell, 1970.
Tenet, George and Bill Harlow, At the Centre of the Storm: My Years in the CIA, 
London: Harper Press, 2007.
Thompson, Robert Smith, The Missiles of October: The Declassified Story of John 
F. 
 Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis, New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1992.
Tuchman, Barbara W., The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam, New York: 
Knopf, 1984.
Westerfield. H. 
 Bradford, Inside CIA’s Private World: Declassified Articles from 
the Agency’s Internal Journal, 1955–92, Yale: Yale University Press, 1995.
Whymant, Robert, Stalin’s Spy: Richard Sorge and the Tokyo Espionage Ring, 
London: I.  B.  Tauris, 1996.
Wirtz, James J., The Tet Offensive: Intelligence Failure in War, Cornell: Cornell 
University Press, 1991.
Wise, David and Thomas B. 
 Ross, The U-2 Affair, London: Cressel Press, 1963.
Wohlstetter, Roberta, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision, California: Stanford 
University Press, 1962.
Zi, Sun, The Art of War, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1981.

	
199
INDEX
Abbottabad, Pakistan 175
Abrams, Creighton 25
absolutism 102, 111
Abwehr 69, 130, 169–71
accountancy 94
aerial photography 78, 79, 88, 137
aerial platforms 75
Afghanistan
1979–1989 Soviet War 60–1
2001–2014 US-led war 30, 93, 
160
agents 4, 7, 15, 68–70, 96, 126, 
129, 133, 148, 156, 165, 168, 
169–71, 175
agitprop 161
Ah Baat 46
Aldrich, Richard xix
Aleppo, Syria 176
Allenby, Edmund 166–7
Amery, Richard 80
Ames, Aldrich 73
analysis of material 16, 50, 51, 58, 
59
Andrew, Christopher xix, 115, 159
Andropov School for Intelligence 
Officers, Moscow 115
Angkatan Pemudaan 22
Annam, Vietnam 34
Argentina 60, 82, 86, 96–7
Army of the Republic of Viet Nam 
(ARVN) 29, 33, 36
arrogance 7, 88, 122, 128, 130
Ars Poetica (Horace) xvii
Art of War, The (Sun Tzu) 2, 41, 68, 
69, 85, 165
assassination 157, 173–7
assessment of material 7, 12, 18–23, 
30, 46, 50, 51, 55, 58, 59, 83, 
85–98, 122
asymmetrical warfare 38
audio intelligence (Audint) 66, 
80–1
Austria 116, 174
B-26 bombers 134, 135
Baath Party 142
‘back channel’ negotiations 138
Bakelite telephones 75
Baldwin, Stanley 79
Balikpapan, Borneo 154
ballerinas 116
Bao Dai 28
Batista, Fulgencio 134
Bay of Pigs Invasion (1961) 6, 58, 

INDEX
200
72, 133–6, 139–40, 154, 156, 
157, 160
de Beaumarchais, Pierre-Augustin 
Caron 153
Beersheba, Palestine 166–7
beheadings 102
Beijing, China 27, 42, 43–4, 92, 
161
Beirut, Lebanon 176
Belfast, Northern Ireland 83
Beria, Lavrenty 53
bias xv, 7, 34, 72, 88, 144
‘big brother’ services 54
Bin Laden, Osama 175
biplanes 75
Bissell, Richard 134, 135, 160
‘black chambers’ 76, 78
black propaganda 154
Black Watch 26
blackmail 115–17
Blainey, Geoffrey 87
Bletchley Park computer 75
Bloodworth, Dennis 46
BND (Bundesnachrichtendienst) 54
‘bomber gap’ 80
Borneo 154
Boy’s Own Paper 103
brainwashing 107
Brazil 161
bribery 91, 161
Briggs, Harold 17
British Advisory Group, Saigon 37
British Army xv, 16, 97, 128, 
169–71
Counter-Insurgency Field Manual 
(2009) 16
British Broadcasting Corporation 
(BBC) 81, 147, 158
British Diplomatic Mission, Beijing 
42
British Imperial Services 91
British Military Administration 
(BMA), Malaya 12, 14, 23
brothels 115, 116–17
Brunei 154
BRUTUS 170–1
Brzezinski, Zbigniew 35
‘bugging’ 76, 78, 80, 103, 106, 116
Bundy, McGeorge 137
Burma 74
burning at the stake 102
Bush, George Herbert Walker 58, 
66, 113
Bush, George Walker 49, 107
business 21, 41, 46, 80, 91, 94
Butler Inquiry (2004) xvi, 87, 
141–9
Butler, Robin, baron Butler of 
Brockwell 142
Butterworth Station, Penang 12
cab intelligence (Cabint) 73
Cabinet Office xviii, xix, 50, 52, 55, 
56, 69, 83, 87, 108, 145–6
Caesar, Julius 174
Cairo, Egypt 176
Callaghan, James 96
Calvocoressi, Peter 81
Cambridge Five 4, 90
cameras 75, 77
Camp 020, Latchmere House 103
Canada 26
Canton, China 45, 46
le Carré, John 86
Carter, James Earl ‘Jimmy’ 160, 173
Carver, Michael, Baron Carver 11
case officers 4
Castro, Fidel 134, 135, 136, 139, 
156, 160, 175, 176
Catherine II (the Great), empress 
and autocrat of All the Russias 
167–8

INDEX
	
	
201
cattle prods 102
Causes of War, The (Blainey) 87
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) 
2–3, 25, 35–6, 50, 52, 60, 66, 
72–3, 77–8, 80, 82, 87, 105–6, 
112, 153, 155–8, 161, 173
1953 Station Chief Edward Ellis 
Smith sent home from Moscow 
after ‘swallow’ scandal 116
1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion 6, 58, 
72, 133–6, 139–40, 154, 156, 
157, 160
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis 136
1963 publication of KUBARK 
document on torture 106
1993 shootings at headquarters 
61
1999 dedication of George Bush 
Centre for Intelligence 113
2002 pressure on German BND 
for access to CURVEBALL 54
2012 Senate Select Committee 
study of interrogation pro-
gramme 107
2014 tripling of estimate on 
number of Islamic State fighters 
in Iraq and Syria 95
chain of intelligence 50
Changan Da Jie, Beijing 92
Charles Edward Stewart ‘Bonnie 
Prince Charlie’ 165–6
Cheka 71, 168
Cheney, Richard ‘Dick’ 49
‘chicken feed’ 168–71
Chilcot, John 143
Chin Peng 11, 38
China xv, xviii, 2, 3, 4, 5, 28, 35, 
41–6, 66, 76–7, 79, 81, 83, 91, 
101, 122, 154, 161–3
1644–1911 Qing period 161
1927–1950 Chinese Civil War 
18, 19, 20, 22–3, 71, 161
1937–1945 Sino-Japanese War 
123, 125
1948 Kuomintang evacuate to 
Taiwan 71
1955–1975 Vietnam War 26–7, 
30, 37
1958–1961 Great Leap Forward 
42, 45
1960 Sino-Soviet split; Russian 
experts sent home 43
1964 Zanzibar Revolution 162
1966–1976 Cultural Revolution 
42, 43, 45, 74, 105
1969 Sino-Soviet border conflict 
83
1970 construction of TAZARA 
Railway in Tanzania 162
1989 Tiananmen Square mas-
sacre 92
China Democratic League 22
Chinese Secretariat (Malaya) 17
Christ Church College, Oxford 114
Church, Frank 155, 173
Churchill, Winston xviii, 2, 3, 15, 
51, 159
ciphers 3, 78, 127
Civil Service
Indian 13
Malayan 12, 42
Clancy, Tom 88
‘clandestine action’ 155
von Clausewitz, Carl 3
Cline, Ray 25, 153
Cockburn, Andrew 95
Codebreakers, The (Kahn) 114
Colby, William ‘Bill’ 35, 113, 160
Cold War 4–5, 61–2, 75, 90, 94–5, 
115–17, 156, 158
collection of intelligence 5, 6, 12, 
42, 44, 49, 50, 51, 57, 58, 65–84
Colonial Office 14, 57, 159

INDEX
202
Colonial Service xv, 14, 30, 41
Commander in Chief, Pacific 
Command (CINCPAC) 30, 123
Communism 19–23, 26–39, 42–6, 
57, 69, 71, 103, 159, 161
Communist-Terrorists (CTs) 12, 
15–17, 29, 103, 108
computers 50, 73, 75
Condor, USS 127
Conrad, Joseph 85
Consul General 27, 34, 42
contracts 91
‘coolies’ 30
coordination 51–8
copying machines 75
Cornwall, England xvi
Corona satellite programme 80
corruption 155
Cossacks 92
Cottrell, Alan 145
counter-insurgency 11–17
Counter-Insurgency Field Manual 
(British Army) 16
coups d’état 28–9, 154, 155, 162, 
163
covert intelligence 4, 153–63
Crabb, Lionel 156
creaking floorboards 76
Crimea
1853–1856 Crimean War 82, 
100
2014 Russian annexation 88
cryptography 76, 78, 106
Cuba 79, 161, 175, 176
1959 Fidel Castro comes to 
power 134
1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion 6, 58, 
72, 133–6, 139–40, 154, 156, 
157, 160
1962 Missile Crisis 6, 72, 133–4, 
136–9
Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) 
42, 43, 45, 74, 105
cultural stereotyping 88, 122, 128, 
130
Cumberland, Duke of see William, 
Duke of Cumberland
Current Intelligence Groups 86
CURVEBALL 54
customers 2, 3, 6, 7, 18, 22–3, 36, 
50, 55, 58–9, 89, 149
Czechoslovakia 91–2
D-Day see Normandy, Allied 
invasion of
Dachau concentration camp 160
Daily Telegraph, The 82
Dalley, John 18, 19–22
Damascus, Syria 176
Dato’ Onn 21
deception 5, 6, 66–7, 69, 74, 81
Deception Operations 81, 165–71
defectors 68, 70–1
defence attachés 4, 44
Defence Intelligence xvi, 50, 145
Defence Intelligence Staff xvi, 145
Defence of the Realm, The (Andrew) 
xix, 115
Dejean, Maurice 116
democracy 20, 32, 46, 65, 92, 98, 
112, 153, 157
Democratic Republic of Vietnam 25
Deng Xiaoping 44, 45, 92
Deputy Director of Central 
Intelligence (DDCI) 25, 87, 99, 
153, 173
Derby, England 166
Diem, Ngo Dinh 31
Dien Bien Phu, battle of (1954) 29, 
36, 90
digital cameras 75
Diplomatic Corps 27

INDEX
	
	
203
diplomats 4, 26–8, 41–6, 51, 80, 
81, 82, 83, 116, 124, 154, 161
Director of Central Intelligence 
(DCI) 25, 35, 49, 53, 58, 72, 75, 
77, 82, 85, 99, 112, 113, 133, 
148, 158, 160, 173, 175
Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) 51, 52–3, 63
document intelligence (Docint) 81
domino theory 35
Double Cross Operation 169–71
Double-Cross System, The 
(Masterman) 114
Douglas-Home, Alec 114, 156
Downing Street, London 147
drones 75, 77, 88, 175
drugs 115–17
Dubai, United Arab Emirates 174
Dublin, Ireland 83
Dulles, Allen 99, 160
Dzerzhinsky, Felix 168
East Germany 116–17
Ecuador 161
Egypt 27, 90, 93, 95, 176
Eisenhower, Dwight David 2, 69, 
74, 134, 139, 153, 175, 176
elections 154, 155
electronic warfare systems 75
Emergency Regulations (Malayan) 
13, 17
Estimate of Threats 126
ethics 5, 91, 99–117, 159
European Convention on Human 
Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms 101
European Court of Human Rights, 
Strasbourg 105, 107, 110
executions 102
exile intelligence (Exint) 68, 71–2, 
135, 143–4
Faddis, Charles Samuel 121
failure of intelligence 1, 5, 17–23, 
30–9, 49, 58, 86, 87–8, 121–131, 
141–9
Falklands War (1982) 60, 82, 86, 
96–7
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI) 52, 53, 123, 129–30
‘Female of the Species, The’ 
(Kipling) 115
Ferdinand, Franz 174
FitzMaurice, Gerald 110
Fleming, Ian 86
Fletcher, Gus 11
floorboards 76
Florida, United States 72
Fomin, Alexander 138
Ford, Gerald Rudolph 173, 175
Foreign Affairs Bureau, Democratic 
Republic of Vietnam 27
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
55, 98
Foreign Office xviii, 3, 19, 41, 43, 
52, 97
forged documents 81
Forward Interrogation Centres 104
France 26–9, 78
1775–1783 American War of 
Independence 153
1789 French Revolution; aboli-
tion of torture 102
1887–1945 colonial occupation 
of Vietnam 37–8
1940–1945 Vichy French period 
28
1944 Operation Fortitude 165, 
168–71
1944 Allied invasion of Norman-
dy 69, 97–8, 168–71
1946–1954 First Indo-China 
War 18–19, 26, 29, 35

INDEX
204
1954 battle of Dien Bien Phu 29, 
36, 90
1964 French Ambassador 
Maurice Dejean recalled from 
Moscow after ‘swallow’ scandal 
116
Franco, Francisco 169
FREAK 170
Frederick II (the Great), king of 
Prussia 67
freedom of information xvii, 65, 
112–15
Freedom of Information Act (2000) 
113
Freedom Radio 158
freedom radio stations 154, 156, 
158
FUSAG (First US Army Group) 
170–1
Galbraith, John Kenneth 31
Galtieri, Leopoldo 60, 82, 96–7
Gao Liang 162
GARBO 169–71
Gates, Robert 53, 87
de Gaulle, Charles 38
Gaza, Palestine 166–7
Gent, Edward 14, 20, 21
George Bush Centre for Intelligence 
113
Germany 28, 37, 116–17
1914–1918 World War I 87
1939–1945 World War II 37, 
58–9, 69, 94, 97–8, 107, 114, 
122, 129–30, 131, 159–60
1940 Tripartite Pact 122
1941 invasion of Soviet Union 94
1941 Abwehr sends Dusko Popov 
to report on ships in Pearl 
Harbor 129–30
1942–1943 battle of Stalingrad 
37
1943 Operation Mincemeat 167
1944 Operation Fortitude 165, 
168–71
1944 Allied invasion of Norman-
dy 69, 97–8, 168–71
1944 Operation Market Garden 
58–9
1998 BND recruits CURVE-
BALL 54
2002 CIA presses BND for access 
to CURVEBALL 54
Giap, Vo Nguyen 29, 36
Glenalmond College, Perth 95
Gloucester, Duchess of 105
‘good cop/bad cop’ 106
Goodman, Michael S.  xix
Gordievsky, Oleg 62, 69
Government Communications 
Headquarters (GCHQ) xviii, xix, 
51, 113
Gracey, Douglas 28–9
graffiti 66
grass is greener 97–8
Great Leap Forward (1958–1961) 
42, 45
Greece xviii, 90, 96, 101
Greene, Graham 86
Grew, Joseph 124
Gribkov, Anatoly 136
groupthink 7, 89, 93, 128
GRU (Glavnoje Razvedyvatel’noje 
Upravlenije) 62, 138, 154
Guilty Knowledge Test 112
Gulf of Tonkin Incident (1964) 29
Gurney, Henry 14
Haiti 161
Hamas 174
Han Su Yin 43
hanging, drawing and quartering 
102

INDEX
	
	
205
Hanoi, Vietnam 25–9, 32–3, 35
‘haversack’ trick 167
Hawaii, United States 1, 6, 14, 36, 
67, 82, 88, 96, 121–31, 160
Hawaiian Task Force 123, 125, 126, 
131
Hayden, Michael 107
Head of Mission 43
Healey, Denis xv–xvi
‘hearts and minds’ 15, 29, 30
Heath, Edward 108
Helms, Richard ‘Dick’ 25, 35, 59, 
77, 82, 85, 99, 112, 139, 153, 
160, 173, 175
von Hentig, Baron 176
Herman, Michael xix
Hibbert, Reginald 3, 72
Him Po 46
Hinsley, Harry 115
History of the Second World War 
(Churchill) xviii
Hitler, Adolf 168, 169, 171
Hitokappu Bay, Kuril Islands 125
Ho Chi Minh 18, 29, 38
Ho Chi Minh Trail 30
Holocaust 160
Home Office 52
homosexuality 116
honey traps 116–17
Hong Kong 44, 45, 127
Honolulu, Hawaii 130
Hood, William 99
hooding 109, 110
Hoover, John Edgar 52, 130
Hopkins, Harry 129
Horace xvii
Hue, Vietnam 34, 36
Hull, Cordell 126
human intelligence (Humint) 65, 
66, 67–74, 76–8, 84, 98, 100, 
135, 136–8, 139, 143–9, 171
human rights xvii, 46, 92, 101, 102, 
105
hunch intelligence (Hunchint) 66, 
72
Hussein, Saddam 142, 145
Hutton Inquiry (2003) xvi, 147
image intensifiers 76
imagery intelligence (Imint) 66, 
79–80, 138–9, 168
Imperial Cossack Cavalry 92
Imperial Intelligence Services 116
India 18, 22, 27, 37, 60, 74
Indian Civil Service 13
Indonesia 18, 22, 27, 35
Indonesian Confrontation (1963–
1966) 154
inductive reasoning 145
information definition of 3
infrared devices 76, 88
Institute of Defence Analysis 31
intelligence, definition of 3
Intelligence and Security 
Committee of Parliament (ISC) 
113–14
Intelligence and Security 
Coordinator 63
Intelligence Coordinator 52, 56, 63, 
86, 87, 108–10
intelligence officers 4, 7
Intelligence Power in Peace and War 
(Herman) xix
Intelligence Reform and Terrorism 
Prevention Act (2004) 52
Intelligence Science Board 106–7
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles 
(ICBMs) 95, 137, 138, 139
International Control Commission 
(ICC) 26
interrogation 74, 100–12
Iran 156, 160

INDEX
206
Iraq
1998 withdrawal of UN weapons 
inspectors 143
1998 German BND recruits 
CURVEBALL 54
2002 CIA presses BND for access 
to CURVEBALL 54
2003–2011 Iraq War 6, 30, 54, 
55, 59, 86, 87, 89, 141–9, 160
2014 CIA triples estimate of 
number of Islamic State fighters 
95
Iraq Survey Group 141
‘Iraq’s Weapons of Mass 
Destruction’ dossier 146–8
Ireland 57, 83, 107–10, 174
Irish Republican Army (IRA) 
108–10
Islamabad, Pakistan 61
Islamic State 95
Israel 93, 95, 112, 145, 166, 174
Italy 28, 107, 129, 130
Jacobite rebellion (1745) 165–6
Japan 3, 79, 107, 112
1904–1905 Russo-Japanese War 
88, 122
1937 invasion of China 123
1940 Tripartite Pact 122
1941 Yosuke Matsuoka announc-
es Japanese intent to control 
Western Pacific 122
1941 invasion of Malaya 128
1941–1945 occupation of Ma-
laya xvii, 12, 13, 14
1941 attack at Pearl Harbor 1, 6, 
14, 36, 67, 82, 88, 96, 121–31, 
160
1942 invasion of Singapore 128, 
131
1945 coup d’état in Vietnam 
28–9
Japanese Navy 125
Japanese Secret Police (Kempeitai) 
14, 28
Jefferson, Thomas 175
Jeffery, Keith xix
Jiang Zemin xviii, 45
jihad 88, 107
Johnson, Lyndon Baines 3, 25, 29, 
34, 175
‘joho’ 3
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) 
xv, xviii, xix, xx, 3, 50, 52, 54–8, 
59, 60, 63, 84, 86–7, 108, 115, 
142, 145–9, 159
Assessment Staff 86, 87
Far East 18
Intelligence Coordinator 52, 56, 
63, 86, 87, 108–10
Secretariat 86, 87, 159
Journal of Applied Psychology 112
journalism 4, 43, 46, 81
Justice and Security Act (2013) 114
Kabul, Afghanistan 61
Kahn, David 114
Kalugin, Oleg 154, 176
Kang Sheng 162
Kansi, Mir Aimal 61
Kay, David 141
Keeler, Leonard 111
Kelly, David 142
Kempeitai (Japanese Secret Police) 
14, 28
Kennedy, John Fitzgerald 31, 58, 
133, 134, 135, 137–9, 160, 175
Kennedy, Robert 138
KGB (Komitet gosudarstvennoy 
bezopasnosti) 5, 62, 68, 73, 81, 
88, 90, 111, 117, 138, 154, 176
Khe San, Vietnam 36
Khrushchev, Nikita 136, 137, 138, 
156

INDEX
	
	
207
kidnapping 161
‘Kim’ (Kipling) 173
Kimmel, Husband 123, 124, 126, 
127, 131
Kipling, Rudyard 115, 173
Kirkpatrick, Lyman 133
Kissinger, Henry 153
Knightley, Philip 81, 99
Knox, Frank 121, 129
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 26
KUBARK 106
Kuomintang (KMT) 18, 19, 20, 
22–3, 71, 161
Kuril Islands 125, 129
LaDany, Laszlo 83
Lampson, Miles 176
Langley, Virginia 61
Latchmere House, London 103
Laycock, Captain 96
Layton, Edwin 127
Le Bailly, Louis xv–xvi
Lebanon 176
Leningrad (St Petersburg), Russia 
116
Lennox, Charles, 2nd duke of 
Richmond 166
liaison 7, 54, 59, 159
Lichfield, England 166
lie detectors 111–12
Liu Shaoqi 161
Loi Tak 18, 23, 38
London, England 103, 124, 127, 
156, 161, 166
London University 105
long-range bombers 75
Louis XVI, king of France 153
Luftwaffe 171
Lunev, Stanislav 154
al-Mabhouh, Mahmoud 174
MacArthur, Douglas 129
Macau xviii
Macdonald, Malcolm 19–21
Machiavelli, Niccolò 2
Mackenzie, Compton 86
MacLachlan, Donald 114
MacLaren, Vance 112
Maddox, USS 29
Malacca, Malaysia 13, 17, 22
Malacca Straits 13, 154
Malayan Civil Service 12, 42
Malayan Communist Party (MCP) 
xviii, 11, 13, 14–23, 28, 37–8, 
42, 103
Malayan Emergency (1948–1960) 
xviii
Malayan People’s Liberation Army 
16
Malayan Police 21
Malayan Security Service (MSS) 18
Malayan Union 20
Malaysia xv
1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty 14
1941–1945 Japanese occupation 
of Malaya xvii, 12, 13, 14, 28
1948–1960 Malayan Emergency 
xviii, 5, 11–23, 29, 35, 37–8, 
42, 56–7, 91, 102–3, 108
1948 death of Edward Gent in 
plane crash 14
1951 Henry Gurney killed in 
MCP ambush 14
1952 Walter Templer takes com-
mand as High Commissioner 
14–15
1953 Central District of Malacca 
designated as ‘white area’ 17
1963–1966 Indonesian Confron-
tation 154
malina (‘honey trap’) 116–17
Man Who Never Was, The (Montague) 
167

INDEX
208
Manila, Philippines 127
Manning, Chelsea 117
Mao Tsetung 42, 45, 66, 103, 161
Marine Corps 160
Marshall, George 126
Marston, William 112
Masterman, John 114
Mata Hari 68
Matsuoka, Yosuke 122
McCone, John Alexander 72, 133, 
136, 137
McConnell, John M.  ‘Mike’ 51, 53
McNamara, Robert 30–2, 36
Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles 
(MRBMs) 72, 136, 138, 139
Mei Yao-chen 68
Meinertzhagen, Richard 166–7
Mexico 161, 175
MI5 (Security Service) xviii, xix, 19, 
51, 52, 62, 99, 102, 103, 113, 
159, 173
MI6 (Secret Intelligence Service) 
xviii, xix, 51, 52, 60, 62, 110, 
111, 113, 144, 149, 155, 159
MI6: The History of the Secret 
Intelligence Service 1909–1949 
(Jeffery) xix
microphones 76, 78, 80, 103, 106, 
116
military attachés 4, 44
Ministry of Defence 52, 55, 110
Ministry of Information 3
mirror imaging 7, 28, 32, 37, 39, 
88, 89–93, 101, 136, 137, 139
missile gap 95
mobile phones 75, 78
Monarchist Association of Central 
Russia (MOR) 168
Moscow, Russia 80, 81, 111, 115, 
116, 161
Mossad 174
Mossadeq, Mohammad 155
Myanmar 74
Napoleon I, emperor of the French 
67
National Archives, The, London 28, 
44, 108
National Intelligence Estimate 137
National Security Agency (NSA) 53, 
66, 77
nationalism 18, 22, 32, 38
Negroponte, John 53
Netherlands 13, 58
New China News Agency (NCNA) 
83, 162
New Villages (Malaya) 15, 16
newspapers 82, 83, 162
Nicaragua 134
Nicholas I, Emperor and Autocrat 
of All the Russias 82
Nicholas II, Emperor and Autocrat 
of All the Russias 87
Nien Cheng 44–5, 105
NKVD (Narodnyy komissariat 
vnutrennikh del) 53
Nomura, Kichisaburo 124, 125
Normandy, Allied invasion of 
(1944) 69, 97–8, 168–71
North Vietnamese Army (NVA) 30, 
33, 36
Northampton, England 166
Northern Ireland 57, 83, 107–10
Northwestern University 111
numbers fallacy 94–6
numbers game 30–9, 89
O’Halpin, Eunan 141
Office of Strategic Services (OSS) 
155
Oldfield, Maurice 57, 111, 159
Omand, David xix, 56

INDEX
	
	
209
open source intelligence (Osint) 4, 
22, 28, 41–6, 51, 65–6, 82–4, 
125
Operation Double Cross 169–71
Operation Fortitude 165, 168–9, 
170
Operation Market Garden 58–9
Operation Mincemeat 167
Operation Pluto 134, 135, 139
Operation Rolling Thunder 31
Operation Trest 71, 168
von Oppenheim, Max 176
order of battle (ORBAT) 16, 110, 
169–71
Ordzhonikidze 156
Ottoman Empire 166–7
oversight 112–15
Oxford Intelligence Conference 142
Oxford University 3, 72, 114
Christ Church College 114
Worcester College 95, 114
Pakistan 61, 175
Palestine 14, 166–7
Pancho Villa 175
Panzers 58, 97, 171
Parker, Hubert Lister, Baron Parker 
of Waddington 108
Parker Committee 110
Patton, George Smith 170
Paul Doumer Bridge, Hanoi 26
Pearl Harbor, Hawaii 1, 6, 14, 36, 
67, 82, 88, 96, 121–31, 160
Penang, Malaya 12, 13, 14, 22
Peng Dehuai 161
Penkovsky, Oleg 62, 69, 111, 138–9
Pentagon 30, 37, 53
Perthshire, Scotland xvi
Peru 124, 161
Peterson, Martin 80
Philby, Kim 4–5, 50, 90, 102, 159
Philippines 127
Places In Between, The (Stewart) xvi
du Plessis, Armand Jean, Cardinal-
Duke of Richelieu 78
pocket tape recorders 75
Poland 158, 168, 170
police states 44, 53, 71, 82, 111, 
144
policymaking 16, 26, 27, 84
Politburo
China 92
Soviet Union 53, 80
Vietnam 27, 28, 33
Political Intelligence Journal (MSS) 
19, 21–3
polygraphs 111–12
Popov, Dusko 129–30
Port Arthur, Manchuria 88
Potemkin, Grigory 167–8
Powers, Gary 66
Prague Spring (1968) 91–2
Predator drones 75, 77
prejudice 6, 46, 72, 88, 165
pressure 101, 102, 106
Princip, Gavrilo 174
Privy Counsellors 108
propaganda 81, 153, 154, 156, 158, 
161
proxy wars 157
psychological warfare (psywar) 15, 
103, 158, 167
psychology 101, 106, 117, 130
public executions 102
Public Security Bureau (PSB), 
Shanghai 44
Puerto Cabeza, Nicaragua 134
Pulau Jerejak, Malaya 12
Putin, Vladimir 88
Al Qaeda 30, 58, 88, 107, 115, 121, 
175

INDEX
210
Qianmen Hotel, Beijing 43
Qing Dynasty (1644–1911) 161
‘qingbao’ 3
rack 102
radio 75, 82, 83, 130–1
radio stations 154, 156, 158
Freedom Radio 158
Radio Free Europe 153
Radio Liberty 153
Raswen, Karl 176
realpolitik 163
Red Guards 27, 74
Redl, Alfred 116
regime change 163
requirements 7, 59–61, 63, 112, 
117, 144, 149
Research and Development 75
Richards, Brooks xviii
Richelieu, Cardinal see du Plessis, 
Armand Jean 78
Richmond, Duke of see Lennox, 
Charles
Roman Empire/Republic 90, 174
Room 39 (MacLachlan) 114
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano 122, 
129
Royal Air Force (RAF) 175
Royal Artillery 97
Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) 
57
rule of law xvii, 46, 92
rumour intelligence (Rumint) 66, 
68, 73–4, 124
Rumsfeld, Donald 49, 51, 69, 141
Rusk, Dean 136, 138
Russia 4–5, 27, 53, 55, 60, 61–3, 
78, 79, 82, 90, 94–5, 111, 
115–17
1787 Grigory Potemkin erects 
fake village to impress Cath-
erine the Great 167–8
1853–1856 Crimean War 82, 
100
1904–1905 Russo-Japanese War 
88, 122
1905 Bloody Sunday 92
1913 Austrian Colonel Alfred 
Redl exposed as Russian agent 
116
1914–1918 World War I 87
1921–1926 Operation Trest 71, 
168
1940 assassination of Leon 
Trotsky 175–6
1941 German invasion 94
1942–1943 battle of Stalingrad 
37
1953 CIA Station Chief Edward 
Ellis Smith sent home from 
Moscow 116
1953 death of Joseph Stalin; ex-
ecution of Lavrenty Beria 53
1955–1975 Vietnam War 30, 37, 
154
1956 Crabb affair 156
1956 U-2 Mission 2020 dis-
proves ‘bomber gap’ 80
1960 U-2 shoot-down 66, 79
1960 Sino-Soviet split 43
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis 6, 72, 
133–4, 136–9
1963 defection of Kim Philby 
159
1964 French Ambassador Mau-
rice Dejean recalled to Paris 
after ‘swallow’ scandal 116
1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia 
91–2
1969 Sino-Soviet border conflict 
83
1979 construction of US Em-
bassy in Moscow 81

INDEX
	
	
211
1979–1989 Soviet-Afghan War 
60–1
2014 annexation of Crimea 88
Russian Imperial Cossack Cavalry 
92
Russian Imperial Intelligence 
Services 116
Saigon, Vietnam 26, 27, 31, 33, 36, 
105
sanctity of contracts 91
satellite photography 75, 78, 80, 88, 
160
Scali, John 138
Schlesinger, James Rodney 77
Scientific Adviser 145
Sea Furies 135
Second Oldest Profession, The 
(Knightley) 81
secret, definition of 3
secret intelligence 4, 76
Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) 
xviii, xix, 51, 52, 60, 62, 110, 
111, 113, 144, 149, 155, 159
Secret Self Defence Forces (SSDF) 
25
secret writing 76
Secretaries for Chinese Affairs 
19–21
Securing the State (Omand) xix
security 112–15
Security and Intelligence 
Coordinator 56
Security Service (MI5) xviii, xix, 19, 
51, 52, 62, 99, 102, 103, 113, 
159, 173
Self Defence Forces (SD) 25
Senate Select Committee 107
September 11 attacks (2001) 30, 58, 
88, 107, 115, 121
sex 115–17
Shanghai, China 27, 42, 105
Shanghai Public Security Bureau 
(PSB) 44
Sherman, William Tecumseh 68
‘shop’ talk 76
Short, Walter 123, 127, 129, 131
signals intelligence (Sigint) 65, 66, 
67, 76, 77, 78–9, 87, 122, 124–8, 
130–1, 171
Singapore xvii, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 23, 34, 35, 42, 127, 128, 
131
Skardon, William 99
sleep deprivation 102, 110
Smith, Edward Ellis 116
Sneh, Ephraim 174
Snow, Edgar 42
Snowden, Edward 50, 66, 117
Soekarno, Bung 19, 154
sources 7, 51, 68
Soviet Union 4–5, 27, 30, 37, 53, 
55, 61–3, 79, 90, 94–5, 111, 
115–17
1921–1926 Operation Trest 71, 
168
1940 assassination of Leon 
Trotsky 175–6
1941 German invasion 94
1942–1943 battle of Stalingrad 
37
1953 CIA Station Chief Edward 
Ellis Smith sent home from 
Moscow 116
1953 death of Joseph Stalin; ex-
ecution of Lavrenty Beria 53
1955–1975 Vietnam War 30, 37, 
154
1956 Crabb affair 156
1956 U-2 Mission 2020 dis-
proves ‘bomber gap’ 80
1960 U-2 shoot-down 66, 79

INDEX
212
1960 Sino-Soviet split 43
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis 6, 72, 
133–4, 136–9
1963 defection of Kim Philby 
159
1964 French Ambassador Mau-
rice Dejean recalled to Paris 
after ‘swallow’ scandal 116
1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia 
91–2
1969 Sino-Soviet border conflict 
83
1979 construction of US Em-
bassy in Moscow 81
1979–1989 Soviet-Afghan War 
60–1
Spain 167, 169
Special Branch (SB) 13, 15, 17, 57, 
103
Special Constables 15
Special Forces 113, 175
Special Operations 5, 136, 153–63
Special Operations Executive (SOE) 
155, 159, 174–5, 176
‘Special Political Action’ 154
Spitfire 75
SR-71 planes 79
St Petersburg, Russia 116
Staff College 62–3
staff officers 4
Stalin, Joseph 53, 68
Stalingrad, battle of (1942–3) 37
State Department 30, 31, 53
State War Executive Committees 
(SWECs) 16–17
Steele, Frank 110
Stephens, Robin 103–4
stereotyping 88, 122, 128, 130
Stewart, Brian xv, 11–23, 25–39, 
41–6, 55, 97–8, 161–2
Stewart, Rory xvi
Stimson, Henry 1, 99, 106
Straits of Malacca 13, 154
Straits Settlements 13
Strasbourg, France 105, 107
Strasbourg case (1971–1978) 
107–10
strategic intelligence 4
submarines 96, 123–4, 127–8
subversion 158, 161
Suetonius 174
summary justice 12
Sun Tzu 2, 41, 68, 69, 85, 165
Sun Yat Sen 161
supersonic planes 75
Surface to Air Missiles (SAMs) 95, 
136, 137, 138
Suzuki, Suguru 126
‘swallows’ 116
Switzerland 160
Syria 95, 176
T-33 jets 135
tactical/operational intelligence 4
Taiwan xviii, 71
Tanzania 162
Taranto, battle of (1940) 129, 130
technical intelligence (Techint) 65, 
66, 67, 68, 74–8, 84, 98
telephones 75, 76
Templer, Gerald Walter Robert 11, 
12, 14, 16, 17, 37, 38, 56–7
ten commandments 6–7
10 Downing Street, London 147
Tenet, George 49, 58, 112
terrorism 2, 30, 58, 88, 107, 
108–10, 107, 115, 121
Tet Offensive (1968) 33–4
Thailand 15, 16, 35, 37
Thompson, Robert 38
Threat, The (Cockburn) 95
thumbscrews 102

INDEX
	
	
213
Tiananmen Square, Beijing 92
‘ticking bomb’ justification 102
Tiger tanks 98
Times 82
Tokyo, Japan 124, 125, 129, 130
torpedo boats 12
torture 74, 100–11, 144, 161
Towkay (business) class (Malaya) 21
trade unions 19, 22
training/education of officers 61–3
transparency xvii, 65, 112–15
trash intelligence (Trashint) 66, 
72–3
Treasury 55
Trend, Burke xviii, 56, 86–7, 147, 
149
Triads 22, 103
TRICYCLE (Dusko Popov) 
129–30, 170
triplanes 75
Trojan horse 96
Trotsky, Leon 175–6
Ts’ao, General 167
Tu Mu 68
Turkey 138, 166–7
Turner, Stansfield 66–7, 77–8
U-2 planes 66, 72, 74, 79–80, 137, 
160
Ukraine 88, 95
United Arab Emirates 174
United Kingdom 44, 54–8, 62–3, 
78, 79, 81, 83, 84, 85, 98, 
111–15, 122
1640 abolition of torture in 
England 102
1745 Jacobite rebellion 165–6
1775–1783 American War of 
Independence 153
1853–1856 Crimean War 82, 
100
1914–1918 World War I 67, 87, 
166–7
1917 battle of Beersheba 166–7
1939–1945 World War II 58–9, 
69, 97–8, 103, 107, 114–15, 
129–31, 155, 159–60, 168–71, 
174–5
1940 MI5 open Camp 020 at 
Latchmere House 103
1940 battle of Taranto 129, 130
1941 double agent Dusko Popov 
reports on ships in Pearl Har-
bor 130
1941 Japanese invasion of Malaya 
128
1942 Japanese invasion of Singa-
pore 128, 131
1943 Operation Mincemeat 167
1944 Operation Fortitude 165, 
168–71
1944 invasion of Normandy 69, 
97–8, 168–71
1944 Operation Market Garden 
58–9
1948–1960 Malayan Emergency 
xviii, 5, 11–23, 29, 35, 37–8, 
42, 56–7, 91, 102–3, 108
1956 Crabb affair 156
1963 defection of Kim Philby to 
Soviet Union 159
1968–1998 Northern Ireland 
conflict 57, 107–10
1968 reform of Joint Intelligence 
Committee (JIC) 86–7
1971–1978 Strasbourg case 
107–10
1972 John Masterman receives 
permission to publish The 
Double-Cross System 114
1982 Falklands War 60, 82, 86, 
96–7

INDEX
214
1985 signing of UN Convention 
Against Torture 101
2002 JIC releases ‘Iraq’s Weapons 
of Mass Destruction’ dossier 
146
2003–2011 Iraq War 6, 86, 87, 
141–9
2003 Hutton Review xvi, 147
2004 Butler Review xvi, 87, 
141–9
2005 Intelligence Science Board 
review on interrogation 106–7
2009–2011 Chilcot Inquiry 143
United Malays National 
Organisation 21
United Nations (UN) 101, 143
Convention Against Torture 101
United States 1, 2, 44, 52–4, 63, 
77–8, 85, 87, 106–7
1775–1783 American War of 
Independence 153
1916 US Army assassination at-
tempt on Pancho Villa 175
1941 FBI rejects Dusko Popov’s 
intelligence on Pearl Harbor 
129–30
1941 Japanese attack at Pearl 
Harbor 1, 6, 14, 36, 67, 82, 
88, 96, 121–31, 160
1944 invasion of Normandy 69, 
97–8
1953 CIA Station Chief Edward 
Ellis Smith sent home from 
Moscow 116
1955–1975 Vietnam War 3, 5, 
13, 25–39, 90, 95, 105, 154
1956 U-2 Mission 2020 dis-
proves ‘bomber gap’ 80
1960 U-2 shoot-down over Rus-
sia 66, 79
1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion 6, 58, 
72, 133–6, 139–40, 154, 156, 
157, 160
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis 6, 72, 
133–4, 136–9
1963 publication of CIA 
KUBARK document on torture 
106
1964 Gulf of Tonkin Incident 29
1968 Tet Offensive 33–4, 36
1976 Gerald Ford issues directive 
forbidding assassination opera-
tions 175
1979 construction of US Em-
bassy in Moscow 81
1979–1989 Soviet-Afghan War 
60–1
1993 shootings at CIA headquar-
ters 61
1999 dedication of George Bush 
Centre for Intelligence 113
2001 September 11 attacks 30, 
58, 88, 107, 115, 121
2001–2014 Afghanistan War 30, 
160
2002 CIA presses German BND 
for access to CURVEBALL 54
2003–2011 Iraq War 30, 54, 
142, 160
2008 Congressional attempt to 
limit interrogation techniques 
vetoed 107
2011 assassination of Osama bin 
Laden 175
2012 Senate Select Committee 
study of CIA interrogation 
programme 107
2014 CIA triples estimate of 
number of Islamic State fighters 
in Iraq and Syria 95
United States Army 107, 122, 123, 
126, 170–1, 175

INDEX
	
	
215
United States Navy 53, 121, 129
University of New Brunswick 112
‘unknown unknowns’ 69
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) 
75, 77, 88, 175
Ussuri River 83
validation of reports 7
Vatican 160
Vichy France 28
Vietcong (VC) 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 
33–4, 105
Vietnam
1887–1945 French colonial oc-
cupation 37–8
1940–1945 Vichy French period 
28
1945 Japanese coup d’état; Bao 
Dai installed as emperor 28
1946–1954 First Indo-China 
War 18–19, 26, 29, 35
1954 battle of Dien Bien Phu 29, 
36, 90
1954 Geneva Agreement 29
1955–1975 Vietnam War 3, 5, 
13, 25–39, 90, 95, 105, 154
1964 Gulf of Tonkin Incident 29
1968 Tet Offensive 33–4, 36
Virginia, United States 61
wall-standing 109, 110
walk-ins 68, 70–1
Walters, Vernon 99, 173
Ward, USS 127
Washington, George 2
water torture 102
Weapons of Mass Destruction 
(WMD) 6, 54, 55, 59, 86, 87, 
141–9
Webster, William Hedgcock 141, 
148
Wehrmacht 168
Wellesley, Arthur, 1st Duke of 
Wellington 2
Westmoreland, William 25, 26, 30, 
34, 37
whistleblowers 50, 66, 117
‘white areas’ (Malaya) 17
white noise 109, 110
White, Dick 52, 56, 102, 108–10, 
114
Wilde, Oscar 116
Wilhelm II, German emperor 87
William, Duke of Cumberland 166
Williams, Rowan 141
‘Winds’ messages 125–6
wire recorders 75
wishful thinking 96–7, 128, 137, 
139
Wolf, Markus 116–17
Woolsey, Robert James 75, 158, 160
Worcester College, Oxford 95, 114
World War I (1914–1918) 1, 67, 
87, 166–7, 174
World War II (1939–1945) xvii, 
xviii, 1, 3, 67, 75, 77, 79, 90, 94, 
107, 114–15, 159–60, 174–5
1940 MI5 open Camp 020 at 
Latchmere House, London 103
1940 Tripartite Pact 122
1940 battle of Taranto 129, 130
1941–1945 Japanese occupation 
of Malaya xvii, 12, 13, 14
1941 Yosuke Matsuoka announc-
es Japanese intent to control 
Western Pacific 122
1941 German invasion of Soviet 
Union 94
1941 British double agent Dusko 
Popov reports on ships in Pearl 
Harbor 129–30
1941 Japanese invasion of Malaya 
128

INDEX
216
1941 Japanese attack at Pearl 
Harbor 1, 6, 14, 36, 67, 82, 
88, 96, 121–31, 160
1942 Japanese invasion of Singa-
pore 128, 131
1942–1943 battle of Stalingrad 
37
1943 Operation Mincemeat 167
1944 Operation Fortitude 165, 
168–71
1944 Allied invasion of Norman-
dy 69, 97–8, 168–71
1944 Operation Market Garden 
58–9
1945 Japanese coup d’état in 
Vietnam 28–9
Yamamoto, Isoroku 123, 130
Yenan, China 42
Yom Kippur War (1973) 93, 95
Yugoslavia 170
Zacharias, Ellis 125
Zanzibar 162
Zapata Swamp, Cuba 134
Zekia, Mehmet 110
Zero fighters 123, 129
Zhou Enlai 162

