http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
WHY WE NEED FRIENDLY AI
Luke Muehlhauser and Nick Bostrom
Humans will not always be the most intelligent
agents on Earth, the ones steering the future. What
will happen to us when we no longer play that role,
and how can we prepare for this transition?
The human level of intelligence is an evolutionary acci-
dent – a small basecamp on a vast mountain side, far
below the highest ridges of intelligence allowed by physics.
If we were visited by extraterrestrials, these beings would
almost certainly be very much more intelligent and techno-
logically advanced than we are, and thus our future would
depend entirely on the content of their goals and desires.
But aliens are unlikely to make contact anytime soon. In
the near term, it seems more likely we will create our intel-
lectual successors. Computers far outperform humans in
many narrow niches (e.g. arithmetic and chess), and there
is reason to believe that similar large improvements over
human performance are possible for general reasoning and
technological development.
Though some doubt that machines can possess certain
mental properties like consciousness, the absence of such
mental properties would not prevent machines from becom-
ing vastly more able than humans to efficiently steer the
future in pursuit of their goals. As Alan Turing wrote, ‘. . .it
seems probable that once the machine thinking method
has started, it would not take long to outstrip our feeble
powers. . . At some stage therefore we should have to
expect the machines to take control. . .’
There is, of course, a risk in passing control of the future
to machines, for they may not share our values. This risk is
increased by two factors that may cause the transition from
doi:10.1017/S1477175613000316
# The Royal Institute of Philosophy, 2014
Think 36, Vol. 13 (Spring 2014)
Think Spring 2014 † 41

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
human control to machine control to be quite sudden and
rapid: the possibilities of computing overhang and recursive
self-improvement.
What is computing overhang? Suppose that computing
power continues to double according to Moore’s law, but
figuring out the algorithms for human-like general intelli-
gence proves to be fiendishly difficult. When the software
for general intelligence is finally realized, there could exist
a ‘computing overhang’: tremendous amounts of cheap
computing power available to run human-level artificial intel-
ligences (AIs). AIs could be copied across the hardware
base, causing the AI population to quickly surpass the
human population. These digital minds might run thou-
sands or millions of times faster than human minds. AIs
might have further advantages, such as superior communi-
cation speed, transparency and self-editability, goal coordi-
nation, and improved rationality.
And what is recursive self-improvement? We can predict
that advanced AIs will have instrumental goals to preserve
themselves, acquire resources, and self-improve, because
those goals are useful intermediaries to the achievement of
almost any set of final goals. Thus, when we build an AI
that is as skilled as we are at the task of designing AI systems,
we may thereby initiate a rapid, AI-motivated cascade of self-
improvement cycles. Now when the AI improves itself, it
improves the intelligence that does the improving, quickly
leaving the human level of intelligence far behind.
A superintelligent AI might thus quickly become superior
to humanity in harvesting resources, manufacturing, scienti-
fic discovery, social aptitude, and strategic action, among
other abilities. We might not be in a position to negotiate
with it or its descendants, just as chimpanzees are not in a
position to negotiate with humans.
At the same time, the convergent instrumental goal of
acquiring resources poses a threat to humanity, for it
means that a superintelligent machine with almost any final
goal (say, of solving the Riemann hypothesis) would want
to take the resources we depend on for its own use. Such
Muehlhauser and Bostrom
Why We Need Friendly AI † 42

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
an AI ‘does not love you, nor does it hate you, but you are
made of atoms it can use for something else’.1 Moreover,
the AI would correctly recognize that humans do not
want their resources used for the AI’s purposes, and that
humans therefore pose a threat to the fulfillment of its
goals – a threat to be mitigated however possible.
But because we will create our own successors, we may
have the ability to influence their goals and make them
friendly to our concerns. The problem of encoding human
(or at least humane) values into an AI’s utility function is a
challenging one, but it may be possible. If we can build
such a ‘Friendly AI,’ we may not only avert catastrophe, but
also use the powers of machine superintelligence to do
enormous good.
Many scientific naturalists accept that machines can be
far more intelligent and powerful than humans, and that this
could pose a danger for the things we value. Still, they may
have objections to the line of thought we have developed
so far. Philosopher David Chalmers has responded to
many of these objections;2 we will respond to only a few of
them here.
First: why not just keep potentially dangerous AIs safely
confined, e.g. without access to the internet? This may
sound promising, but there are many complications.3 In
general,
such
solutions
would
pit
human
intelligence
against superhuman intelligence, and we shouldn’t be con-
fident the former would prevail. Moreover, such methods
may only delay AI risk without preventing it. If one AI devel-
opment team has built a human-level or superintelligent AI
and successfully confined it, then other AI development
teams are probably not far behind them, and these other
teams may not be as cautious. Governments will recognize
that human-level AI is a powerful tool, and the race to be
the first nation with such a great advantage may incentivize
development speed over development safety. (Confinement
measures may, however, be useful as an extra precaution
during the development phase of safe AI.)
Think Spring 2014 † 43

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
Second: some have suggested that advanced AIs’ greater
intelligence will cause them to be more moral than we are; in
that case, who are we to protest when they do not respect
our primitive values? That would be downright immoral!
Intelligent
search
for
instrumentally
optimal
plans,
however, can be performed in the service of any goal.
Intelligence and motivation are in this sense logically
orthogonal axes along which possible artificial intellects
can vary freely. The imputed connection between intelli-
gence and morality is therefore sheer anthropomorphism.
(It is an anthropomorphism that does not even hold true for
humans: it is easy to find humans who are quite intelligent
but immoral, or who are unintelligent but thoroughly decent.)
Economist Robin Hanson suggests that inter-generational
conflicts analogous to the ones that could arise between
humans and machines are common. Generations old and new
compete for resources, and the older generation often wants
to control the values of the younger generation. The values of
the younger generation end up dominating as the older gener-
ation passes away. Must we be so selfish as to insist that the
values of Homo sapiens dominate the solar system forever?
Along a similar line, the roboticist Hans Moravec once
suggested that while we should expect that future robotic
corporations will eventually overrun humanity and expropri-
ate our resources, we should think of these robotic descen-
dants as our ‘mind children.’ Framed in this way, Moravec
thought, the prospect might seem more attractive.
It must be said that a scenario in which the children kill
and cannibalize their parents is not everyone’s idea of a
happy family dynamic. But even if we were willing to sacri-
fice ourselves (and our fellow human beings?) for the sake
of some ‘greater good,’ we would still have to put in hard
work to ensure that the result would be something more
worthwhile than masses of computer hardware used only
to evaluate the Riemann hypothesis (or to calculate the
decimals of pi, or to manufacture as many paperclips as
possible, or some other arbitrary goal that might be easier
to specify than what humans value).
Muehlhauser and Bostrom
Why We Need Friendly AI † 44

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
There is, however, one good reason not to insist that
superhuman machines be made to share all our current
values. Suppose that the ancient Greeks had been the
ones to face the transition from human to machine control,
and they coded their own values as the machines’ final
goal. From our perspective, this would have resulted in
tragedy, for we tend to believe we have seen moral pro-
gress since the Ancient Greeks (e.g. the prohibition of
slavery). But presumably we are still far from perfection.
We therefore need to allow for continued moral progress.
One proposed solution is to give machines an algorithm
for figuring out what our values would be if we knew more,
were wiser, were more the people we wished to be, and so
on. Philosophers have wrestled with this approach to the
theory of values for decades, and it may be a productive
solution for machine ethics.
Third: others object that we are too far from the transition
from human to machine control to work on the problem
now. But we must remember that economic incentives
favor
development
speed
over
development
safety.
Moreover, our scientific curiosity can sometimes overwhelm
other considerations such as safety. To quote J. Robert
Oppenheimer, the physicist who headed the Manhattan
Project: ‘When you see something that is technically sweet,
you go ahead and do it and you argue about what to do
about it only after you have had your technical success.
That is the way it was with the atomic bomb.’4
Still, one might ask: What can we do about the problem
of AI risk when we know so little about the design of future
AIs? For a start, we can do the kind of work currently per-
formed by the two research institutes currently working
most
directly
on
this
difficult
problem:
the
Machine
Intelligence Research Institute in Berkeley and the Future
of Humanity Institute at Oxford University. This includes:
1. Strategic research. Which types of technological
development
are
risk-increasing
or
risk-
decreasing,
and
how
can
we
encourage
Think Spring 2014 † 45

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
governments and corporations to shift funding
from the former to the latter? What is the
expected value of certain kinds of research, or
of
certain
kinds
of
engagement
with
governments and the public? What can we do
to reduce the risk of an AI arms race? How
does AI risk compare to risks from nuclear
weapons,
biotechnology,
near earth
objects,
etc.? Can economic models predict anything
about the impact of AI technologies? Can we
develop
technological
forecasting
methods
capable
of
giving
advance
warning
of
the
invention of AI?
2. Technical
research.
Can
we
develop
safe
confinement methods for powerful AIs? How
can an agent with a desirable-to-humans utility
function maintain its desirable goals during
updates to the ontology over which it has
preferences? How can we extract a coherent
utility
function
from
inconsistent
human
behavior, and use it to inform an AI’s own
utility function? Can we develop an advanced
AI that will answer questions but not manifest
the dangerous capacities of a superintelligent
agent?
3. Raising awareness. Outreach to researchers,
philanthropists, and the public can attract more
monetary and human capital with which to
attack the problem.
The quest for AI has come a long way. Computer scientists
and other researchers must begin to take the implications
of AI more seriously.
Luke Muehlhauser is Executive Director of the Machine
Intelligence Research Institute. Nick Bostrom is Director of
the Future of Humanity Institute at the University of Oxford.
luke@intelligence.org
Muehlhauser and Bostrom
Why We Need Friendly AI † 46

http://journals.cambridge.orgDownloaded: 18 Dec 2013
IP address: 140.142.214.159
Notes
1 E. Yudkowsky, ‘AI as a positive and a negative factor in
global risk’, Global Catastrophic Risks (eds) N. Bostrom and
M. Cirkovic (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008).
2 D. Chalmers, ‘The Singularity: a reply to commentators’,
Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 19, nos. 7–8 (2012),
141–167.
3 S. Armstrong, A. Sandberg, N. Bostrom, ‘Thinking inside
the
box:
Using
and
controlling
Oracle
AI’,
Minds
and
Machines, vol. 22, no. 4 (2012), 299–324.
4 Robert Jungk, Brighter than a Thousand Suns: A Personal
History
of
the
Atomic
Scientists,
trans.
Lames
Cleugh
(New York: Harcourt Harvest, 1958), 296.
Think Spring 2014 † 47

