Edited by Dennis Vanden Auweele
T inking Metaxologically
William Desmond’s 
Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, 
Ethics, and Aesthetics

William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics

Dennis Vanden Auweele
Editor
William Desmond’s 
Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, 
Ethics, and Aesthetics
Thinking Metaxologically

ISBN 978-3-319-98991-4        ISBN 978-3-319-98992-1  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018958416
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer 
International Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of 
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the 
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to 
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The 
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Cover design by Ran Shauli
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Editor
Dennis Vanden Auweele
KU Leuven (University of Leuven)
Leuven, Belgium

There is simple gratitude for the sweetness of being that no one merits 
and that no act of thanks can ever repay.
William Desmond

To William
Teacher, friend and inspiration

ix
William Desmond held an appointment at the Institute of Philosophy at 
KU Leuven (University of Leuven) from December 1994 until his retire-
ment in 2016. In the spring of 2017 (April 19–20), an international con-
ference was organized in honor and recognition of his philosophical 
achievement. The turnout was—both for speakers and for attendees—far 
beyond expectation, and the subsequent quality of keynote and split ses-
sions presentations was impressive. After the conference ended on a high 
with a round table including John Milbank, Cyril O’Regan, Sander 
Griffioen and William himself, the organizer—yours truly—thought it 
more than appropriate to collect some of these excellent contributions, 
adding some essays commissioned especially for this volume, in order to 
give life to the present volume.
Why such an undertaking is of philosophical importance, now more 
than ever, will be discussed in the introduction and the chapters to come. 
There are, however, also reasons of a more personal nature why I think 
that this book, both critical and honorific, had to appear. When I had 
become a master’s student at KU Leuven, I had my fill of German idealism 
and hoped to work on Nietzsche. Only two courses in the curriculum 
promised discussion of Nietzsche, both of which were by William 
Desmond, but to my regret they also promised ample discussion of Kant 
and Hegel. Grudgingly I decided to weather those discussions of ‘tran-
scendental critique’ and ‘absolute spirit’ once again in the hopes of hear-
ing the sweet rhetoric of Nietzsche. To my surprise, I was taken in by a 
new way of thinking about German idealism, one not merely expository 
and reconstructive, but critical and engaging, serious and playful. I was 
Preface

x 
PREFACE
excited about this class many weeks before Nietzsche was even mentioned. 
This explains the image on the cover of this book: the serious playfulness 
of a child, on the beach, running after birds.
I mention this anecdote because it might give readers a first impression 
into what makes Desmond’s philosophy unique: it allows new discussion, 
new thoughts, and new engagements, with topics and authors that are, by 
some, assigned to the dustbin of philosophical history. Many colleagues 
have told me that they similarly felt revitalized by the metaxological 
approach to philosophy. While I had no plans to continue philosophy after 
my master’s, I was to finish my studies in law, William’s classes inspired me 
onward, toward a research master and even a doctorate. To this day, I am 
still engrossed in philosophy, which would not have been the case without 
William—whether this is for better or for worse, I have no clue. Throughout 
these years, he was my gentle doctoral supervisor (as they say in German: 
Doktorvater) and we slowly became friends. Much like William’s teaching, 
our conversations mix the high and the low, the critical and the apprecia-
tive, the metaphysical and the profane. Years later, I learned that William 
adapted his style to the needs of his students. One colleague of mine once 
described William as a gardener, tending to the garden with insight and 
finesse. Some of us needed confidence, others needed constraint; some 
needed a firm hand, others needed to be let free. Most appreciated 
William’s style, which is evident from the good number of former students 
who flocked from all over the world to William’s retirement conference.
I hope that this volume would get his gentle approval. Ironic. When I 
write, there is always music playing on my computer. The songs ‘shuffle’ 
randomly, which sometimes works well, sometimes not. When I came to 
this paragraph and was looking for a way to close this preface, the song 
‘Life Is Good’ by the Irish-American folk-punk band Flogging Molly 
started playing, and that seems appropriate. The song is itself expressive 
of a desire for someone who would bring peace, but the search for that 
someone tends to be a gamble. The chorus repeats ‘life is good’, even 
though the advances toward the other are not always successful and life 
will come to an end someday. The song is bittersweet, but it truthfully 
expresses intimacy and displacement, love and estrangement—similar 
sensations emerge when reading through metaxology. Flogging Molly 
comes to the bridge now, and the chorus will soon repeat: “But I could 
walk across the ocean / Find ourselves a little peace / Where all our 
troubles are forgotten / And wars will someday cease / Life is good, life 

xi
  PREFACE 
is good / Life is fine, life is fine / Life is everything we loathe and so 
unkind / They say death is cruel, / But death unwinds / It comes natu-
rally to all us here alive”.1
I feel confident to say that this volume is good as well, which is to some 
extent the case because it came to be under fortunate circumstances: many 
had written excellent papers on the topics of metaxology. There was an 
abundance of good work to select from, and I express my heartfelt grati-
tude for the commitment and diligence of all contributors to this volume. 
Although some negotiations with regard to deadlines were in order at 
times, the process ran fairly smoothly. When I contacted the editorial staff 
of Palgrave Macmillan, I was happy to find that Amy Invernizzi was enthu-
siastic about the project. The book proposal passed a favorable review, and 
I am very grateful to the anonymous reviewer for his or her comments and 
suggestions, most of which I have incorporated in this volume. The edito-
rial staff at Palgrave Macmillan works very efficiently, and I do want to 
voice gratitude toward all of them.
Leuven, Belgium
Dennis Vanden Auweele
1 Flogging Molly, ‘Life Is Good’. From the album Life Is Good (2017), released by 
Vanguard, Spinefarm.

xiii
Contents
	 1	 Introduction
      1
Dennis Vanden Auweele
Part I  Being, Knowing and Intimacy
    13
	 2	 Number and the Between
    15
John Milbank
	 3	 True Being and Being True: Metaxology and the Retrieval 
of Metaphysics
    45
D. C. Schindler
	 4	 Hermeneutical Selving as Metaxological Selving: Bridging 
the Perceived Gap Between Theological Hermeneutics 
and Metaphysics
    59
Daniel Minch
	 5	 Metaxology and New Realist Philosophy
    77
Sandra Lehmann

xiv 
Contents
Part II  Absolute Being and Talking God
    93
	 6	 The Metaxology of the Divine Names
    95
Brendan Thomas Sammon
	 7	 Metaxologizing Our God-Talk: Desmond, Kearney, and  
the Divine Between
  113
Mark F. Novak
	 8	 Espousing Intimacies: Mystics and the Metaxological
  129
Patrick Ryan Cooper
Part III  Autonomy, Porosity, and Goodness
  149
	 9	 Evil: From Phenomenology to Thought
  151
Cyril O’Regan
	10	 Retrieving the Primal Ethos of Life: (Bio)Ethics in the  
Love of Being
  177
Roberto Dell’Oro
	11	 Silence, Excess, and Autonomy
  195
Dennis Vanden Auweele
	12	 Reactivating Christian Metaphysical Glory in the Wake 
of Its Eclipse: William Desmond Contra Giorgio 
Agamben
  209
Philip John Paul Gonzales
Part IV  On Wholeness, Hegel and Pan(en)theism
  227
	13	 The Real and the Glitter: Apropos William Desmond’s 
Hegel’s God
  229
Sander Griffioen

xv
  Contents 
	14	 Transcendence in Metaxology and Sophiology
  243
Josephien van Kessel
	15	 Panentheism and Hegelian Controversies
  257
Philip A. Gottschalk
Part V  Creation, Embodied Being and Beauty
  269
	16	 The Gift of Creation
  271
Richard Kearney
	17	 On Speaking the Amen: Augustinian Soliloquy 
in Shakespeare’s Metaxu
  285
Renée Köhler-Ryan
	18	 Metaxology and Environmental Ethics: On the Ethical 
Response to the Aesthetics of Nature as Other in the 
Between
  303
Alexandra Romanyshyn
	19	 Responding Metaxologically
  317
William Desmond
Index
337

xvii
List of Contributors
Patrick Ryan Cooper  Saint Meinrad Seminary, Rockport, IN, USA
Roberto Dell’Oro  Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA, USA
William Desmond  KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Villanova University, 
Villanova, PA, USA; and Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland
Philip John Paul Gonzales  University of Dallas, Irving, TX, USA
Philip  A.  Gottschalk  Tyndale Theological Seminary, Badhoevedorp, 
Netherlands
Sander Griffioen  VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Richard Kearney  Philosophy Department, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, 
MA, USA
Renée Köhler-Ryan  The University of Notre Dame Australia, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia
Sandra Lehmann  University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
John Milbank  University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Daniel Minch  KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
Mark F. Novak  McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
Cyril O’Regan  University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
Alexandra Romanyshyn  Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO, USA

xviii 
List of Contributors
Brendan Thomas Sammon  Saint Joseph’s University, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA
D. C. Schindler  The John Paul II Institute, The Catholic University of 
America, Washington, DC, USA
Josephien van Kessel  Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
Dennis Vanden Auweele  KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, 
Belgium

xix
Abbreviations
AA	
Art and the Absolute: A Study in Hegel’s Aesthetics (Albany: SUNY Press, 
1986)
AOO	
Art, Origins, Otherness (Albany: SUNY Pres, 2003)
BB	
Being and the Between (Albany: SUNY Press, 1995)
BHD	
Beyond Hegel and Dialectic (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992)
DDO	
Desire, Dialectic and Otherness (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
1987)
EB	
Ethics and the Between (Albany: SUNY Press, 2001)
GB	
God and the Between (Oxford: Blackwell, 2008)
HG	
Hegel’s God: A Counterfeit Double? (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003)
ISB	
The Intimate Strangeness of Being: Metaphysics after Dialectic 
(Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press, 2012)
IST	
Is There a Sabbath for Thought? Between Religion and Philosophy (New 
York: Fordham University Press, 2005)
IU	
The Intimate Universal: The Hidden Porosity among Religion, Art, 
Philosophy, and Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016)
PO	
Philosophy and Its Others (Albany: SUNY Press, 1990)
PU	
Perplexity and Ultimacy (Albany: SUNY Press, 1995)

1
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Dennis Vanden Auweele
Of late, philosophy appears to have become a business of trends, including 
trend watchers who make us aware of what counts for these days—hot and 
what not. There are trends that promised to be the next big thing but now 
seem passé such as deconstruction (which seems to have passed its sell-by 
date), but also trends that grow from older fads such as neo-Thomism. 
Nostalgia can be a trend too: endlessly and voraciously scavenging in texts 
of yore, looking to apply old insights in new contexts. Philosophical trends 
make philosophy not only a business but also an epochal practice: there is a 
time for this, and then there is a time for that. What would it mean to stand 
outside of all of this? How is one ever not in the business of doing philoso-
phy, not in the business of following the latest trends and not in the busi-
ness of reducing philosophy to its merely epochal concerns? In such a case, 
one would be an outsider who transcends the business of the day whilst 
donning a mischievous grin. Culture is replete with images of outsiders, 
and many believe themselves to be one of these. Perhaps the literary most 
pronounced outsider is Dostoyevsky’s anonymous protagonist in Notes 
from the Underground. In raising the middle finger to polite society, he puts 
himself on the fringes, shamelessly abusing all others. Not coincidentally, 
D. Vanden Auweele (*) 
KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: Dennis.Vandenauweele@kuleuven.be

2
Nietzsche felt immediate kinship to Dostoevsky’s most ­misanthropic char-
acter. Both of them were in recognition of the overwhelming strength and 
authority of the business of the day, but refused to blend smoothly within 
it: “Of course I cannot break through the wall by battering my head against 
it if I really have not the strength to knock it down, but I am not going to 
be reconciled to it simply because it is a stone wall and I have not the 
strength” (1918, p. 59). I have come to believe that such outsiders are 
parasitic upon the insider, desperately seeking recognition through their 
dissidence. Ultimately, these blend into epochs of their own; they will have 
their day like Schopenhauer who in his old age finally received the recogni-
tion he believed to deserve. Nietzsche said of God that He is not now our 
taste. Are the outsiders Nietzsche, Dostoyevsky or Schopenhauer now our 
taste? Or have we, as Nietzsche suggests at times, forsaken all discerning 
taste and have now become voracious gluttons incapable of saving our-
selves for the finer things?
For sure, William Desmond is an outsider in the business of philosophy, 
but not in the same way as the agonal rebellion of a Nietzsche or the nihil-
ism of Dostoevsky’s man of the underground. Desmond’s thought is not 
parasitic upon existing ways of doing philosophy and not in any trend or 
business, though he does clearly enjoy kinship with phenomenology and 
its theological turnings, dialectical philosophy and neo-Thomism. He is 
this, and more. In a word, William Desmond’s philosophy is metaxology, 
and metaxology is metaphysics. Metaphysics is not only not now to our 
taste, but it is not a matter of tastes of trends. Metaphysics is of all times 
and of none; there is always a time for metaphysics, but no specific time 
from which to do metaphysics. Perhaps this is the cause of why Desmond 
has been slow to receive mainstream attention, simply because of standing 
outside and above such mainstream? Metaphysics is attentive to its own 
history, but it is not exhausted by its history. This is so because metaphys-
ics must always start again from wonder, which Plato told us is the true 
beginning of all philosophy. But if wonder is the beginning of philosophy, 
is there a way for thought to move beyond wonder determinatively? Can 
we just take wonder as a brief moment of perplexity that can be determi-
natively overcome by scientific or dialectical thought? Is there a return to 
wonder after wonder? And is our philosophical attempt at determinacy 
then not chastised by its inability to cut the cord with wonder?
These are some of the issues that are at the fore of metaxological phi-
losophy: a metaphysical and therefore timeless returning of philosophy to 
wonder, again and again refreshing thought beyond its self-complacent 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

3
systematics. These brief introductory pages hope to serve as an initial 
guide through the maze of metaxological philosophy. Even Dante did not 
stop short at one guide and neither should the student of metaxology. 
After our initial descent with Virgil in this introduction (though, hope-
fully, not into inferno), the chapters to follow serve as the outstretching 
hand of Beatrice, hoping to ascend from Purgatory towards Paradise. At 
the end of the book, this guide, too, will have to be left behind. Hopefully, 
Saint Bernard is awaiting in other work.1
According to a well-known anecdote, Martin Heidegger was once asked 
which term in the title of his opus magnum Being and Time was most 
important. His impish response was ‘and’. Metaxology is in some ways 
similar to Heidegger’s playful response, as its focus is first on intermedia-
tion. Metaxology is Greek-English, a logos or speaking from the metaxu or 
between. But when one says the word ‘between’, one is immediately asked: 
between what and what? Like Heidegger, Desmond is not primarily inter-
ested in the two or more terms to which a relationship should be coordi-
nated (although these surely play a role of importance), but with the very 
idea of relationality itself. The between is an openness or porosity, a space 
of passing and communication. In one place, Desmond defines it as “an 
ontological milieu that is overdeterminate: both indeterminate and deter-
minate, taking form in a plurivocal interplay between otherness and same-
ness, openness and definition, and yet excessive to final fixation” (EB 1).
What does it mean to philosophize from the between, from this space 
where different views, ideas and passions transverse? This means that one 
is attentive to the singular identity of any idea but also the dialectical, even 
non-dialectical, relationality of things. Philosophy has taken some time to 
come to think of relationality on a par with identity. In the beginning of 
philosophy, and even still today in some circles, much of philosophy has 
fancied its binary oppositions: being and non-being, intelligible and unin-
telligible, good and evil, and so on. Desmond opposes such easy binary 
opposition as, borrowing a phrase from Blaise Pascal, an overindulgence 
in esprit de géométrie rather than the subtleness of esprit de finesse. This is 
unsurprising because Desmond’s initial fame came as a student of Hegel, 
1 Next to the voluminous monographs written by Desmond himself, I would recommend 
the following resources: Kelly (2007), Simpson (2009) and Griffioen (2010). A recent 
anthology puts Desmond in dialogue with some of the more prominent theologians of the 
past and today: Simpson and Sammon (2017). In previous work, I have made humble 
attempts at outlining Desmond’s philosophy: Vanden Auweele (2013a, b).
  INTRODUCTION 

4
who was renowned for his search to overcome binary opposition. Hegel’s 
one-time philosophical compatriot Schelling would even point out that 
the “main weakness of all modern philosophy” was that it “lacks an inter-
mediate concept” which results in that “everything that does not have 
being is nothing, and everything that is not spiritual in the highest sense is 
material in the crudest sense, and everything that is not morally free is 
mechanical, and everything that is not intelligent is uncomprehending” 
(2000, p. 64 [286]). To think of reality in terms of simple opposition is 
simplistic. There is a constant going-over and going-under, a dialectical 
back and forth between abstract oppositions. All things exceed simple 
determination in pre-established systems of rationalist intelligibility. With 
and after Kant, philosophy started to stress relationality and dialectics over 
simple, univocal determinacy.
Metaxology takes its cues initially from dialectical philosophy, but as 
one repays a teacher poorly by remaining ever faithful—or so Nietzsche 
says in Thus spoke Zarathustra2—so Desmond has said his farewells to 
Hegel after taking his inheritance. He senses there to be something amiss 
with dialectical thought à la Hegel. The stress is there on dialectical self-­
determination, which leads easily towards a higher sense of determinate 
univocity, not fully true to the challenge of thinking otherness as other-
ness. This is Desmond’s main qualm with Hegel even before Hegel’s God: 
A Counterfeit Double?3 where God, as the capitalized Other, is turned into 
the developmental progress of historical self-determination through spirit 
(Geist). Hegel might have thought that he overcame Kantian dualism by 
rethinking and revamping the absolute in terms of world history but, in 
truth, while Hegel might have believed this to be a step forwards, it is not 
progress. Something of the other as other is lost here, which leaves open 
the door for a potentially tyrannical appropriation of otherness by means 
of an over-reaching of dialectical self-mediation. One might even ask if the 
theodicy of Hegel’s God is one that justifies all on the slaughter bench of 
history.
This is not the only sense of dialectical philosophy to be sure, as, for 
instance, the Socratic or Platonic practice of dialogue is more apt to escape 
potential tyranny. Hegelian dialectics had then a good point of departure, 
but it did not make it to the finish line unscathed. It is time then perhaps 
2 “One repays a teacher badly if one always remains a pupil only. And why would you not 
want to pluck at my wreath?” (Nietzsche 2006, p. 59).
3 This issue was already at stake in Desire, Dialectic and Otherness (DDO).
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

5
for Hegel, Schelling and even Nietzsche to pass the relay stick to different 
ways of thinking about the community of being, being good and absolute 
being. This would have to be a way of thinking that is mindful of (abso-
lute) difference, but open to infinite mediation and revelation. There is 
intimacy and familiarity in the between, but also mind-boggling strange-
ness. All of this is to be accounted for as intelligently as possible. In one 
place, such an approach is described thus: “It lives between peril and crux. 
As a figuring of the primal ethos, it divines the nature of the togetherness, 
the absolved relativity, with heed to the difference, and without forgetting 
the transcendence of the divine and its reserves. We need a finessed, trans-
dialectical logos of the metaxu” (GB 117). In order to come to such a 
rethinking, we are in need foremost of two things: a phenomenologically 
robust account of wonder, astonishment and perplexity and a community 
between philosophy, religion and art.
In a number of places, Desmond outlines what could be called his phil-
osophical method. This is not alike to a methodology that navigates from 
research question to results—as one is forced to write in ‘research projects’ 
these days. Instead, this is a method that is wary of the fact that the out-
comes might not answer the questions fully, and so invite a return to the 
question. In Perplexity and Ultimacy, Desmond even praises the “nobility 
of philosophical thought” in terms of its “willingness to risk questions it 
may not be able to answer definitively” (PU 167).
Philosophy starts in wonder at profound questions about being, being 
good and divine being. These are three major questions of metaphysics, 
but they have gone out of fashion. There are numerous reasons for their 
untimeliness, such as excessive reliance on positivist truth, a watering 
down of transcendence in favour of autonomy or even a simple uneasiness 
with regard to questions that forestall final resolution. Such hesitations lull 
the human mind into a sleep of mere immanent finitude, where questions 
of more ultimate concern do not arise easily. In opposition to the tempta-
tion of excessive reductionism, one is to take up such questions again and 
again, da capo. When one then reflects on these topics, there are different 
responses that might emerge: marvel, familiarity, perplexity and astonish-
ment (see, e.g., GB 118–121). The human condition is not entirely mar-
vel and estrangement, but there is equally comfortable familiarity. We 
participate in the marvel of being before we are able to be reflective of that 
marvel.
Modern thought does not always take kindly to such a dwelling with 
marvel. In general, modern philosophy sought to think of perplexity in 
  INTRODUCTION 

6
uniquely negative terms, namely as a challenge to be overcome. This is 
what Desmond calls a move from indeterminacy to determinacy, where 
the strange is made into the familiar. And indeed, many a thing can be 
rendered intelligible, but never without a certain reserve in excess to 
determinability. The perplexity is never merely negative; it is something 
constitutive of the subject matter. We can never exhaust metaphysical 
questions; there is never a way to settle things once and for all. But when 
one emphasizes such relatively univocal frames of thought, then one might 
beget answers to metaphysical questions. But these answers risk being 
shallow reactions to profound experiences.
One way to illustrate such a methodology is by what Desmond calls the 
hyperboles of being (GB 122–158). These attempt to navigate from the 
human condition towards absolute being: how does one think of God in 
the between? Most think then of the proofs of God, and they do have their 
role to play. These proofs were famously assaulted by Heidegger and oth-
ers as unappreciative of the constitutive difference between beings and 
Being. In other words, the proofs of God are thought of as attempts to fill 
up a gap, they are signs of a lack in the between that is filled by absolute 
being. In doings so, one would miss the constitutive difference between 
immanent reason and transcendent poetry, so says Heidegger. Indeed, it is 
a perennial danger for any metaphysics to put God and being on a con-
tinuum that obviates the distinctness between these two. This was Hegel’s 
mistake, but there are different ways of thinking from the between to 
God. Rather than univocal directions, these are indirections that propel or 
throw (ballein) one beyond (hyper) oneself. It is abundance that propels 
thought, not emptiness. The mere appearance of good, beauty and com-
munal being makes one stagger. If contemplated sincerely, they occasion 
of themselves a move beyond finitude. Metaphysics must then not be 
abandoned as many would advocate today, but it only has to be returned 
to its source of inspiration: the overabundant plenitude of dwelling in the 
primal ethos of the between.
Thought is propelled by an excess to determinability. Whether or not 
philosophy can stay, by its means alone, faithful to such an excess is ques-
tionable. Philosophy is driven by a desire for understanding, an eros that 
seeks determination. At its best, philosophy allows itself to end up in apo-
ria, like many of Plato’s dialogues, but at times philosophy was an unfaith-
ful friend of wisdom. When a desire for self-determination clogs up a 
porosity towards things in excess of determination, philosophy falls into 
the trap of homogeneity. One remedy to this challenge is to keep philoso-
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

7
phy open to its others, most importantly art and religion: “Art and reli-
gion are ways of dealing affirmatively with the surplus equivocity; they are 
not defects from a univocity whose fastness allows us only to condemn 
equivocity. They offer forms of porosity, filled with finesse, to what is com-
municated in the saturated equivocity” (IU 171).
Taking its initial cues from Hegelian dialectic, metaxology realizes that 
one cannot divorce philosophy—as the attempt to think the absolute—
from religion and art as respectively ways of symbolizing and representing 
the absolute. In Hegelian thought, this ultimately works out to the benefit 
of philosophy since it is most capable of thinking the absolute. In other 
words, Hegel recognizes the unique contribution of religion and art but 
ultimately mitigates that uniqueness by sublating their identity into phi-
losophy. Metaxology is an attempt to think the community of art, religion 
and philosophy in a more robust way that recognizes at once the unique-
ness and absolved relativity of these practices.
The first three chapters of Desmond’s latest monograph, The Intimate 
Universal (2016), discuss respectively how religion, art and philosophy 
deal with the reality of an intimate universal in different but similar ways. 
The intimate universal is the revelation of being, goodness and divine 
being that is intimate and particular to one individual, but also universal 
to humanity. Philosophy, art and religion all have similar ways of dealing 
with such a thing, but their ways of interacting retain a constitutive differ-
ence. In each of these chapters, the emphasis is on thinking the intimate 
universal between the universalism that is associated with Enlightenment 
thought and the particularity of postmodern philosophy. This means that 
being religious is not merely a matter of personal belief or conviction but 
neither is there one cosmopolitan religion. Likewise, art is not merely the 
sensible representation or imitation of abstract thought but neither is it 
absolutely spontaneous self-creation. And this means that philosophy is 
not merely an abstract, universal theory or a personal practice of thinking. 
This is what makes art, religion and philosophy similar as these are all 
attempts to dwell in wonder and astonishment of the absolute but, at the 
same time, trying to find ways to revamp the absolute strangeness of such 
events.
This means that Desmond is, as no other, attentive to the importance 
of keeping an open line between art, religion and philosophy as attempts 
to accomplish similar ends. There are two ways in which this could go 
amiss. First, one could think of art, religion and philosophy as absolutely 
separate domains of human experience. In this case, philosophy proceeds 
  INTRODUCTION 

8
as divorced from poetic revelation and becomes unresponsive to religious 
themes (which is perhaps the case in mainstream philosophy today); reli-
gion would then divorce itself from philosophical self-reflection and the 
power of poetic truth; art would be a practice for its own sake alone (l’art 
pour l’art) that does not deal with matters of ultimate concern or at any 
point becomes self-reflective of the role it has to play. Second, one could 
think of art, religion and philosophy as ultimately concentrated with one 
unit in this triad only. Generally, this has meant that art and religion were 
subsumed in a philosophical project. Very overtly, we see this in how, on 
the one hand, Kant subsumes religion and art in the project of practical 
philosophy and, on the other hand, Hegel dialectically sublates the iden-
tity of art and religion as part of the philosophical project of spirit.
To treat properly of art, religion and philosophy is not only a matter of 
fairness, but also one of truthfulness. Truthfulness is the capacity to keep 
an openness to the revelation of excess that disrupts or even traumatizes 
the way we have accustomed ourselves to think. Truthfulness means to 
deal with things both in their own identity as well as in their relationality. 
This has always been the task of philosophy, but it is a task that can never 
be complete. Philosophy must be a searching always, following its own 
directions and desires (eros), while remaining attentive to what is given 
and exceeds its immanent frame (agape).
Even though metaxology requires us to think of the community 
between art, religion and philosophy, the pragmatics of life must give way 
to a more compartmentalized approach. The chapters in this book are 
divided into five parts, which deal respectively with metaphysical issues of 
knowing and being; philosophical-theological questions of absolute being; 
moral matters of autonomy and porosity; Desmond’s view of Hegel, 
wholeness and pantheism; and the embodiment and beauty of created 
being. While attempts were made to keep these different topics more or 
less self-confined, due to the nature of the matter, they tended to spill over 
into other domains. The volume opens with a contribution by John 
Milbank, who reflects on the modern attempts to rethink mathematics in 
terms of logics. In his view, a revision of this could support the ‘third way’ 
of a theistic metaphysics, which must, after Erich Przywara and William 
Desmond, be a metaphysics of the analogy of being or metaxology. Next 
to holding a chair at KU Leuven, Desmond has been a professor of phi-
losophy at the University of Villanova. In his contribution, D.C. Schindler 
reminds us that the motto of Villanova consists of three terms: Unitas, 
Caritas and Veritas. Postmodern philosophy is keen to malign good 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

9
Veritas as an exercise in oppression, something which must be avoided if 
we truly want to reach universal care and unity. In opposition to this trend, 
Schindler illustrates how Desmond’s philosophy is capable of giving truth 
its dues against the assaults of Vattimo and others, but also and more 
importantly that truth serves as foundational for unity and care. Building 
from Desmond’s Intimate Universal, Schindler illustrates how care and 
unity need an ontological grounding in truth in order to be more than 
merely superficial. Daniel Minch gives a theological dimension to this 
issue, placing the importance of Desmond’s philosophy within twentieth-­
century Catholic theology. Such theology recognized the impoverished 
states of a thinking about the created versus the creator in dualistic terms. 
Building on Schillebeeckx’s hermeneutic interpretation of Christian faith, 
he stages new ways—building, in turn, on Desmond’s fourfold sense of 
being—of thinking the relationship between immanent nature and tran-
scendence beyond modernity’s postulatory finitism. In her chapter, Sandra 
Lehmann continues on this point of the ontological grounding of truth by 
comparing Desmond’s metaxology to the revival of metaphysics in the 
New Realism of Quentin Meillassoux. While noting the superficial simi-
larities between these philosophical projects, Lehmann clarifies that metax-
ology provides a more robust alternative to the anti-metaphysical 
philosophies of finitude of the twentieth century. Particularly prominent 
in her argument is that Meillassoux’s discussion of the ground of being 
does not allow him to escape the shadow of Heidegger’s critique of meta-
physics, which is something more ably accomplished by metaxology.
Questions of being and the ground of being have traditionally invited 
speculation about absolute being or God. Metaphysics is the life-blood of 
theology, and metaxology has been a spectacular instrument for contem-
porary theologians to escape the clutches of deconstructive and other anti-­
metaphysical ways of thinking (see, also, Simpson and Sammon 2017). In 
that spirit, reflection on this aspect of metaxology opens with a contribu-
tion by Brendan Sammon, who points out the similarities between 
Desmond’s philosophical theology and the Divine Name tradition of 
Dionysius the Areopagite. These names have a tendency to name and un-­
name at the same time, appreciating the constitutive difference between 
God and creation. Continuing on this task of thinking God, Mark Novak 
advances the idea that the approaches by William Desmond and his long-­
standing travelling companion Richard Kearney are closely intertwined. 
Both are interested in thinking, not only about God but also on doing so 
from the between, a middle space of porosity that does not settle in 
  INTRODUCTION 

10
advance on eros or agape, existence or possibility. While differences in 
emphasis emerge in discussion between them, Desmond and Kearney are 
largely of one mind on how to proceed, and Novak points out that both 
are involved in a process of theopoetics, namely the imaginative and poeti-
cal representation of God. Finally, Patrick Cooper offers a sustained reflec-
tion on the Augustinian adage that one ought to move from the exterior 
inwards and the inferior to the superior. Desmond had signalled early on 
that this is a central metaphor for metaxology, and Cooper traces its 
importance throughout mystics such as Pierre Scheuer, Joseph Maréchal 
and Jan van Ruusbroec.
To think of being inclines metaxological philosophy to ponder the 
goodness of being. In his contribution, Cyril O’Regan engages the various 
notes on evil throughout metaxological philosophy. His argument is that 
Desmond’s view of evil comes close to Ricoeur in The Symbolism of Evil, 
where symbols of evil give philosophy to think about the excessive nature 
of evil. Such moral questions are obviously not uniquely abstract, but must 
be applied in the world. What does the metaxological rethinking of the 
community and goodness imply for discussions in bioethics? Roberto 
Dell’Oro argues that contemporary bioethics would benefit from a metax-
ological re-appreciation of the goodness of being, and especially the value 
of givenness. Continuing on the value of givenness, Dennis Vanden 
Auweele argues that a modern project for absolutized autonomy cannot 
do but dread silence, which signals a hiccup or momentary lapse in the 
project of logos. And yet, Vanden Auweele shows that silence can be a con-
valescence that renders human beings receptive to something in excess of 
finite determination, which can in turn inspire self-determination to new 
heights. In his contribution, Philip Gonzales stages a dialogue between 
two seemingly antithetical thinkers, Desmond and Agamben. Gonzales 
argues that Desmond provides a reconstructed Christian metaphysics 
against the profaning thought of Agamben. Agamben is incapable of 
thinking the Sabbath or rest of God beyond the terms of retreat while 
metaxology provides the resources to think the Sabbath of God as part of 
the creatureliness of human beings.
Metaxology proposes its own, unique sense of theism (for lack of a bet-
ter term), seeking to avoid the pitfalls of, on the one hand, a pantheism 
that confuses the created and the creator and, on the other hand, a deism 
that radically disjoints God from creation. In this, Desmond has repeat-
edly expressed hesitations with regard to the way Hegel conceives of the 
relationship between God, religion and world. In his contribution, Sander 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

11
Griffioen traces these reservations throughout Desmond’s oeuvre, from 
Hegel’s God to The Intimate Universal. He helpfully distinguishes between 
three different uses of the term ‘counterfeit’, and the way these relate to 
‘perplexity’, in order to get to the bottom of Desmond’s discomfort with 
Hegel. Discussions on this topic of relating God to the world have been a 
mainstay in philosophical theology, for instance between the Russian 
authors Shestov and Solov’ëv. In discussion with Desmond’s discussion of 
these authors in Is there a Sabbath for Thought? Josephien van Kessel pro-
poses that there is far greater similarity between the Sophiology of Solov’ëv 
(and Bulgakov) and Desmond’s metaxology. Philip Gottschalk carries this 
discussion one step further, engaging similar authors, but adding the 
dimension of Desmond’s ‘clash’ with other, slightly more pious, Hegelians.
The final set of chapters discusses the contribution of metaxology to 
philosophizing about embodied, aesthetic being. Continuing his long-­
term voyage with Desmond, Richard Kearney takes up a number of para-
graphs from Desmond’s work so as to show how creation can be thought 
of in more dynamic, embodied and lively terms than as mere abstraction. 
Renée Kohler-Ryan, in turn, uses metaxology to understand better the 
failure of soliloquy in Shakespeare’s Macbeth, and its success in Augustine. 
A conversation with our own, embodied self, which is in communication 
with other selves but also with itself, must always happen with a third ele-
ment, a capitalized Other. In the last contribution, Alexandra Romanyshyn 
discusses the deprivation of value from the natural environment and traces 
through metaxology some of its sources. She suggests that metaxology 
can provide more holistic and moral perspective with regard to dealing 
with nature as other than the predominant instrumentalizing ways of 
modern thought. The volume ends with a short response by William 
Desmond to all individual contributions.
Bibliography
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor. 1918. Notes from the Underground. In White Nights, and 
Other Stories. Trans. Constance Garnett. New York: Macmillan.
Griffioen, Sander. 2010. Towards a Philosophy of God: A Study in William 
Desmond’s Thought. Philosophia Reformata 75: 117–140.
Kelly, Thomas, ed. 2007. Between System and Poetics: William Desmond and 
Philosophy After Dialectic. Aldershot: Ashgate Press.
Nietzsche, F.W. 2006. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Trans. Adrian Del Caro and Robert 
Pippin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
  INTRODUCTION 

12
Schelling, F.W.J. 2000. The Ages of the World. Trans. Jason Wirth. New  York: 
SUNY Press.
Simpson, Chris. 2009. Religion, Metaphysics, and the Postmodern: William 
Desmond and John D. Caputo. Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Simpson, Chris, and Brendan Sammon, eds. 2017. William Desmond and 
Contemporary Theology. Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.
Vanden Auweele, Dennis. 2013a. Metaxological ‘Yes’ and Existential ‘No’: William 
Desmond and Atheism. Sophia: International Journal of Philosophy and 
Traditions 52: 637–655.
———. 2013b. The Poverty of Philosophy: Desmond’s Hyperbolic Gifts and 
Caputo’s Events. American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 87: 411–432.
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

PART I
Being, Knowing and Intimacy

15
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_2
CHAPTER 2
Number and the Between
John Milbank
One could argue that there are three tendencies at work within current 
philosophy. There is still, and overwhelmingly, the dominance of post-­
Kantian ‘critical’ epistemology, whether this takes the form of phenome-
nology or of analysis. Then there is a sometimes explicitly anti-Kantian 
turn back to metaphysics, which often takes anti-humanist and nihilistic 
forms. In the third place, there is a revival of a theistic metaphysics, in vari-
ous guises. William Desmond’s work is here pre-eminently outstanding.
It pivots, above all, upon a reworking of analogy (see, especially, EB). 
Ontologized, analogy can appropriately be dubbed by Desmond the 
Platonic metaxu, or ‘the between’. If the ultimate ingredients of reality are 
univocal and identical, then they are, in a way, self-explanatory. We may 
wonder, but the impulse to know does not compel us to look any further. 
If, on the other hand, they are endlessly heterogeneous, then ultimate 
reality may consist in a random, vital, though not holistic, heterogeneous 
flux. Alternatively, again, it may consist in a dialectical oscillation between 
a static sameness and a dynamic difference—whether this be governed by 
determinate negation after Hegel or a positive tensional assertion and 
counter-assertion after Schelling and his many postmodern avatars.
J. Milbank (*) 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
e-mail: John.Milbank@nottingham.ac.uk

16
In all three cases, the immanent all is self-explanatory, even if we cannot 
quite reach its meaning, or there is no ‘meaning’ in quite our sense to be 
reached. However, if diverse things are not altogether diverse and not 
altogether the same, then they exhibit an ineffable resemblance. This 
noetic affinity can reasonably be regarded as at one with their real con-
nectedness, with what actually holds them together: an occult glue of 
which, if we read them unswervingly, the Neoplatonists expounded, 
Aristotle anticipated and Aquinas more cautiously upheld.
It is hard to account for this hermetic convenientia, as the medievals, 
including Aquinas, described it. What is more, it does not seem to be an 
absolute, self-sustaining principle, like univocity, which is a thing being 
itself and not its opposite, nor the equivocal creativity of flux which is its 
own wild, natural divinity, nor that variant upon the same which is modern 
dialectics. To discern the immanent ultimacy of the between is rather to 
discern the ultimacy of a positive, sophianic gap that remains nonetheless 
an obscure interval. If its mediation is indeed such, it cannot itself be 
erected into an absolute driving initiative: rather, it holds in true balance 
the same and the different. And not through the Schellingian game of 
their polar conflict, which renders agon the gnostic immanent reality. 
Instead, if this balance is positive, nutritive and congenial (and fallen dis-
tortion of this only contingent), nothing finite is after all ultimate: not the 
fixed nor the moving, not substance nor process, rather their interplay, 
which cannot be reduced to a rule standing over against the play and its 
poles—neither to warfare, nor to eros if this be understood as an imper-
sonal all-consuming magnetism. Rather, we glimpse in the real a proto-­
personalism—the I and the thou and the complex linkage and birthing 
through linkage of rock and star and crystal, of seed and flower, field and 
forest, animal and humanity, man and woman, human and human, locality 
and nation, home and abroad (see, again, EB).
Everything here is fragment, though connected—and the mere con-
nection is not the absolute. In this way, Desmond shows, with a unique 
perspicacity, how horizontal connectedness or analogy suggests also a ver-
tical analogy. Since nothing is ultimate here below—not firm items, nor 
variable process, nor their agonistic or erotic linkage—then all is suspended 
from above. If anything rules here below at all, it is agapeic love, however 
constantly interrupted and contaminated. But love is not an earthly sway, 
it is not a covert domination. It only governs by obscure indication, by 
pointing away from itself, by revealing itself to be a mere indication of a 
transcendent plenitude just as much as all the partial things and dynamics 
which it, here, connects and constitutes.
 
J. MILBANK

17
Counting the Between
A question can then arise as to whether the analogical or the metaxological 
must also be regarded as strongly paradoxical, if it hovers always between 
identity and difference and is not partly one and partly the other, but 
somehow simultaneously both at once, which surely implies their (non-­
dialectical coincidence)?
This question can be linked to the rebuttal of the dominantly univocal 
or equivocal, whose alternative rationalism is, as Desmond and others have 
shown, strongly linked to the reign of the mathematical and the quantita-
tive in the modern epoch (BB 47–130). The new questioning of the 
Kantian and anthropocentric in our own day has thrown this circumstance 
once more into relief. Kant is accused of actually subverting the real 
Copernican turn which situates man within nature, as Schelling already 
alleged against him, and of trying to hide from the disconcerting realist 
naturalism which this opens to view (Schelling 2004; see: Grant 2008). 
This allegation, from the Romantic period to our own day, goes along 
with a linkage of nature to number, with the latter being often regarded as 
the main route of access to a disclosure of nature’s secrets (see Rosenstock 
2017, pp. 1–41).
What is more, ever since Cusa and Bruno’s nature has been infinitized, 
in a way that threatens to immanentize the divine. But here also mathe-
matics has kept pace, by newly claiming to be able, in various ways (as with 
the Calculus itself) to calculate even the infinite. In the face of this new, 
double reckoning with the infinite, the Kantian claim to be holding knowl-
edge within critical ‘finite’ bounds looks but debatably modern after all. If 
it is modern, then it represents only an alternative answer to a modern, 
post-theological dilemma: whether to consecrate human limits on the one 
hand or the limit of the whole of immanent natural reality on the other.
Nevertheless, as was realized by F.H. Jacobi, these two tendencies are 
still in collusion. In some hidden sense, Spinoza and Kant say the same 
thing (Jacobi 1994, pp. 173–251 and 339–378). The former thinks that 
human geometrized reasoning within its own bounds can reach the infi-
nite ultimate, which is of itself ‘nothing’. The latter thinks that human 
reasoning within anthropocentric, transcendental and ‘non-mathematical’ 
bounds must stop short of the nullity of a theoretically unknowable real.
It is for this reason that Kant was readily reversible into ‘Spinoza’ after 
his death. To get rid of the Kantian epistemological nullity, all one needs to 
do is to hypostasize and ontologize the boundaries of human knowledge, 
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

18
asserting that their very limits can either register as real resistance (Fichte)1 
or dialectically encompass the unlimited, even if this reasoning requires a 
long historical development, as for Schelling and Hegel. Then human 
beings can grasp the ultimate and infinite ontological nullity, however 
divinized, from which all else is taken to arise.
Indeed, this story looks clearer if we focus on Naturphilosophie, from 
which arguably later ‘idealism’ beyond Fichte was an offshoot. In seeking 
to show how all derived from nothing, Lorenz Oken and others tried to 
derive energy and life mathematically. In anticipation of Alain Badiou in 
our own day (and indeed like a kind of fusion of Badiou with Gilles 
Deleuze), Oken saw positive things as combinations and settings of nul-
lity, rendering them like secondary nullities, whose positivity was an 
imposture, concealing the more primary nothingness which always even-
tually prevails as decay, destruction and warfare, which Oken regarded as 
darkly equivalent to the deepest human understanding (Rosenstock, loc.
cit; Grant 2012, pp. 287–321).
Is the alternative then to Kantian humanism this sort of gnostic nihil-
ism, to which Desmond accurately sees Hegelian dialectics as ultimately 
approximating (see HG)? The example of Oken, and the way it has in 
effect been taken up again in our own day, suggests that the question of 
number is not at all a marginal one for modern philosophy. For there is a 
modern mathematical prehistory to the kind of ontology of zero that 
Oken erected, which I shall invoke later. This prehistory itself endeavours 
to have a clear univocal and finite grasp of number and the infinite, in 
abandonment of the more perennial Western mathematical tradition.
It is surely right to be suspicious, like Schelling, of Kant’s failure to give 
any account of how human mind lies within nature. It is also right to take 
account of modern scientific and mathematical discoveries. But is the 
modern mode of construal of quantity, and not just the modern bias 
towards quantity, altogether metaphysically and theologically neutral? Or 
is it itself already committed (as with Descartes) to a Faustian elevation of 
the finite human grasp as able univocally to sound the infinite depths? 
Does the third theistic metaphysical alternative in our own day have to 
ignore or fly in the face of a mathematized physics? Or is it possible to 
1 This is why Fichte’s doctrine, with his notion of the positing mind’s confrontation with a 
limiting anstoss could be readily inverted into realism by Novalis and Friedrich Schlegel. By 
comparison, the incorporation of the objective as a moment within dialectical, or else ‘artis-
tic’ reasoning, by Hegel and Schelling is, paradoxically, more purely idealist.
 
J. MILBANK

19
understand mathematics and its relation to material being itself in a differ-
ent way which already requires attention to the metaxological?
Moreover, as Nicolas of Cusa already averred, may it not be the case 
that if one returns analogy to what was after all (for the Pythagoreans and 
the Platonists) its original mathematical home, one sees there most starkly 
that the analogical is also the paradoxical (see Milbank 2017a, 
pp. 143–169). If the qualitative reminds the quantitative that something 
like sheer analogical resemblance appears even within the quantitative in 
terms of (for older mathematical tradition) the irreducible difference of 
the geometric and the arithmetic, and the mysteriously singular propor-
tionate properties of every number that seems to transcend their mere 
aggregation (Rosenstock 2017, p. 53), then the quantitative reminds the 
qualitative that at the borders of ultimate individuation (only allowed by 
quantified, ‘designated’ matter according to Aquinas), analogy is shown 
to partake of the stark mystery of the paradoxical and the dialectic. This 
linkage of number to the metaphysics of the between that I try to establish 
in what follows.
Plato, Thing and Number
What is the difference between logic and mathematics? Western logic 
effectively began with Aristotle as a theory about the predication of words 
in terms of the consistent implications of ascriptions of identity and non-­
identity. That gave us the theory of the syllogism, which always belonged 
to philosophy. Only in the nineteenth century, with the work of the self-­
educated Lincolnshire man George Boole, did logic get transferred from 
words to algebraic signs through his invention of logical symbols, and so 
from philosophy to mathematics (Boole 1847). Once this had happened, 
an ironic consequence ensued: people tried to make logic the foundation 
of mathematics, and so, in a way, to verbalize number, or at any rate to 
algebraicize it, in the long-term wake of François Vieta and René Descartes 
(Vieta 1992, pp. 315–335; Klein 1992, pp. 150–224; Descartes 2003; 
Lachtermann 2009, pp. 124–205).
But mathematics is not about the predication of identity and non-­
identity: the basic operation of addition is not affirmation, just as the oper-
ation of subtraction is not denial. Rather, it is confusingly both a construction 
of an organized and self-consistent abstract spatial and temporal reality, and 
an intuition of this reality as existing, although normally invisible. One 
makes what one measures and measures what one makes. Thus ‘the true is 
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

20
the made’: the old medieval and Thomist transcendental verum is also the 
new transcendental factum, as first Nicholas of Cusa and later Giambattista 
Vico put it, initially in the context of the latter’s philosophy of mathemat-
ics, before he applied this principle to human history. (The notion that all 
knowing is creating and all creating is knowing may be ultimately derived 
from John Scotus Eriugena; for all three thinkers, this is grounded in a 
Trinitarian logic—the Father knows in generating the Son/Logos.) These 
two conjoined characteristics, of measuring and making, invoke a solid and 
substantial, yet in some sense constructed, world that is intuitively quite 
different from the world of logic: it seems, by comparison, to partake both 
of ‘art’ and of external reality (Vico 2010, Cap I [14–28], pp. 12–29).
It is for this reason that mathematics, all the way from Pythagoras to 
Quine, has often presented itself as a more plausible candidate for ontolo-
gization than has logic, although such ontologization, as in the case of 
Quine, is intimately bound up with the natural pragmatism of mathemati-
cal activity. Even in the case of Plato, there was already a certain link 
between the theoretical certainty and the evident practicability of mathe-
matics—a link later emphasized by the theurgist Neoplatonist Proclus. As 
with all the ancient Greeks, as Jacob Klein pointed out, number or arith-
mos was, for Plato, the measure of a collection of ‘somethings’, and never 
exists in pure abstraction (Klein 1992, pp. 46–99). It therefore follows 
that Plato himself was not ‘a mathematical Platonist’ in the debased sense 
in which that term is used today. However, if number is considered reflex-
ively (as opposed to abstractly), then, considering the pragmatic reality of 
all arithmoi, it followed for Plato that if numbers themselves can be num-
bered (as seems to be strikingly the case) that they themselves constitute a 
‘corporeal’ collection of real ‘thingy’ entities, existing on their own ele-
vated psychic plane—yet not outside this plane of awareness—to which 
only souls have access.
Nevertheless, the air at this height is very thin and rarefied because it 
does not reach up to the real glorious heaven of the ‘intellectual’ divinities 
which is thickly populated with the plenitudinous eidē or ‘forms’—the 
super-numbers—which are the archetypes of real physical entities. But as 
with the forms, so also with arithmoi, Plato’s belief in their eternal charac-
ter is not to do with a hypostatization of abstraction or empty universality 
but the very opposite: a broad ontological latitude that insists on the con-
crete character also of the ideal and of the eternal reality of the concretely 
manifest and identifiable content of all appearing entities. Just because of 
his conjoined realism and pragmatism concerning numbers, yet his sense 
 
J. MILBANK

21
of their abiding truth as disclosed by their perfect reflexivity, Plato arrived 
at his own authentic ‘Platonism’, for which number—and more particu-
larly geometric shape—was the key to entering the philosophical academy, 
though it did not provide the whole content of the doctrine that one 
learnt within its portals.
For once inside them, one had to consider the shape of the key as a clue 
rather than a directly effective instrument: it pointed towards the abiding 
forms, but their fuller disclosure was less apodeictic than mathematical 
procedure, and involved the endless detours of both negative dialectical 
refutations of falsity and the positively poetic, rhetorical, mythical and 
ritual confirmations of truth through the reading of temporal, physical 
and cultural signs.
The richer truth of the forms in balmy celestial climes was nonetheless 
less evident than the bare but complete truth of number, directly accessi-
ble on the alpine heights by a purely alpine climb, since in the mathemati-
cal field ontological content and gnoseological method are purely at one. 
The fact that this is not the case for the higher and completer truth of the 
eidē, in whose truth even the truth of number merely participates (as the 
ineliminable mathematical aporiae tend to reveal) and constitutes what has 
well been called ‘the ancient dilemma’, whereby the further off and less 
accessible is truer, but the more completely at hand is deceptively clearer 
and more apparent (see Trimpi 1962, pp. 87–129).
One should not therefore take the immediacy, integrity and entirety of 
number for the final and complete truth, evading the need for a herme-
neutic of obscure signs that always point away from themselves in lack of 
a completely realized integrity. But on the other hand, it is just because the 
forms do not, like numbers, offer themselves to an immediate vision and 
constitution, that this path of conjoined dialectical and grammatical 
method has to be trodden, and the guiding thread of this path remains 
that of number, since it leads the self-negation of the sign away from itself 
towards the super-integrity of the forms. It is just this logic that informed 
the medieval educational ascent by way of the ‘liberal arts’ from the triv-
ium of the sign-disciplines through the quadrivium of the number disci-
plines (including music and astronomy) to the heights of philosophy 
(metaphysics, ethics and rational theology) and revealed theology 
­concerned with the pure formal-intellectual existences of God and the 
angels, besides the hybrid formality of the created material world which 
participates in and is governed by the celestial realm (see McLuhan 2005; 
Lafleur 1994, pp. 45–65; Milbank 2017b, pp. 46–73).
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

22
If Ludwig Wittgenstein had been aware of all this, then surely he would 
have realized that his own intriguing anxiety concerning the modern ‘for-
getting’ of simple mathematical processes of counting and so forth was a 
Platonic anxiety after all. This anxiety is, for example, expressed in his 
statement, with regard to Georg Cantor’s diagonalisation proof, that “the 
concept ‘real number’”, that is, all the numbers on a modern number line, 
including fractions and irrationals, may have “much less real analogy with 
the concept ‘cardinal number’ than we, being misled by certain analogies, 
are inclined to believe” (Wittgenstein 1981, II § 22). I shall eventually 
revert to his attitude in this respect.
From Platonic to Modern Mathematics
For the moment, in relation to his remark, it should be noted here that 
traditional, Pythagorean and Platonic-influenced mathematics did not 
allow that fractions, decimal and negative numbers had the full status of 
arithmos, while zero quantity was not seen as a number at all, but rather as 
its specific absence. Many, like Jacob Klein, have supposed that this ren-
dered ancient mathematics incapable of resolving the aporiae posed by 
irrationals, and so of approaching the modern ‘solutions’ proposed by 
calculus and other modes of probability theory, which depend upon the 
admission to full ontological status of all so-called real numbers (Klein 
1992, pp.  117–224). But the Warwick University mathematician 
D.H. Fowler has shown that it is perfectly coherent to argue, after Plato, 
that any division is more primarily a multiplication, such that, for example, 
a divided loaf can only be perceived as such because, with phenomenologi-
cal priority, division has resulted in the new appearance of two pieces of 
bread (Fowler 1987, pp. 108–117). With equal coherence, one can add, 
subtraction is more primarily, for Plato, an addition: there is only a remain-
der of three if you take two from five because you are still glimpsing the 
actuality of the banished two out of the corner of your eye, even if your 
action pretends otherwise.
In this way, on a Platonic view, the cumulative number series—1,2,3,4,5,6 
and so on—holds logically and ontologically a pre-eminence, while the 
possibility of variant arithmetic operations of subtraction, division, 
­multiplication and so forth has to do with the fact that the number one is 
not exactly a mere arithmos, but a reality transcendent to the entire arith-
metic field, which allows it to exist at all. The tension between any ordi-
nary arithmos and the number one, or the fact that, for example, the 
 
J. MILBANK

23
number five must be a complete unity in order to be ‘five’ and yet is not a 
pure single unity after all, is exactly what permits the methodical permuta-
tions on addition. Thus the number five, because it both is and is not a 
unity, can be further multiplied, removed from and divided. By contrast, 
these processes cannot, strictly speaking, be applied to the number one at 
all. When they are applied, for example, to the number five, it does not 
cease to be a unified five, since this starting point is the required presup-
position for the operation of the processes. But when they are applied to 
the number one, then it has already ceased to be the number one and has 
become many, such that progress can only be here made by belying the 
reality of the starting point, that is, by cancelling its presupposition. 
Arithmetic is then primarily constructive, yet the possibility of this process 
rests transcendentally on a deconstructed ultimate foundation in unicity.
It is because these basic arithmetical situations and operations are 
already for Plato aporetic, involving a problematic diminution of thinly 
unified reality, on a psychic plane already less than the replete noetic reality 
of the forms, that he does not really have a problem with the aporias posed 
by the existence of incommensurability and irrational quantities (such as 
Pi).2 For Plato, in The Sophist, and according to the record of his oral 
teaching, the Dyad was co-primary with the One, if of lower status. 
Accordingly (in line with the aporetic logic just described), the inherently 
indeterminate Two, problematically in conflict with the very unity that it 
also expresses, was ingredient in the ultimate reality known to us (see 
Kramer 1990).
By comparison, the early modern invention of ‘the number line’, or the 
acceptance of the full numerical reality of negatives, fractions, decimals, 
irrationals and zero, can be regarded as an attempt to evade the really non-­
avoidable aporiae consequent upon the problematic inter-involvement of 
the one with the many and of the indeterminate asymptotic approach to 
indeterminate quantities—which implies, in modern mathematical 
thought, a bizarrely measurable excess of a specifically indeterminate point 
over a specified indeterminate sequence. For now, the primary integral 
reality of the integers has been denied, along with the overarching 
­transcendental character of numerical unity for the numerical field of pure 
multiples—abandoned by specifically Greek-hating Calvinists like Vieta in 
favour of an ultimately Hindu and Islamic-derived transcendentality of a 
blank Zero, which was now elevated beyond convenience (the Arabic 
2 In disagreement here with Heller-Roazen (2011).
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

24
numerals including the zero sign having been in Latin usage since around 
1200), to be regarded not just as a fully fledged number, but as the very 
principle of number, replacing ‘one’ in this respect but with the very dif-
ferent transcendental implication of ‘flattening’ every other number to 
univocal equality with itself (Klein 1992, pp. 150–185). The new status of 
Zero as a proper number also implied a levelling of affirmation with nega-
tion and an insinuation of dubious conventions, such that the sum of two 
multiplied negations is a positive, as absolute and supposedly provable 
classroom truths.
In consequence of the epochal seventeenth-century shift, the number 
line approaches the condition of a continuum, or of a quasi-geometric 
indefinitely stretched, thread-like magnitude. In this way, after Franҫois 
Vieta and René Descartes, the difference between the arithmetic counting 
of a multitude of discrete items (reflexively the arithmoi themselves) and 
the geometric drawing of discrete magnitudes—which can, unlike arith-
metic entities, be of any size, since their integrity is rather defined by their 
shape—is algebraically denied. Not only, as the esotericist René Guenon 
pointed out, does modern thought thereby undergo a quantification, it 
also loses a qualitative difference within the quantitative sphere itself 
(Guénon 2000, pp. 7–69).
Only recently has this suppression finally leaked through to ordinary 
linguistic usage itself; thus, the adjectival qualifier ‘less’ now serves to 
cover also ‘fewer’, to the screaming-point despair of people of my genera-
tion. But a serious metaphysical point lurks here: this suppression collapses 
both number and shape into, bizarrely, a quasi-linguistic because algebraic 
blur; just as inversely and tellingly, Vieta’s Huguenot friend Pierre Ramus, 
who shared his hostility to the entire Greek legacy—to the extent of imag-
ining a Biblical affinity to a conjectured truer, near-Eastern ancient sci-
ence—collapses the linguistic sign into an exact measurable position on a 
grid of mathesis (see Pickstock 1998, pp. 49–57). In this way number and 
sign blend into each other, and thereby quantity and quality. In a really 
peculiar way, the quantification, which Guénon saw as the crucial mark of 
modernity, involves more deeply an unnatural qualifying of quantity, 
besides the quantification of quality. It is just this confusion which 
­undergirds the modern claim, as with the calculus, to handle exactly the 
inexact.
For now the continuum can be divided ad libitum, and aporetic leaps 
can be putatively plastered over in terms of a precisely measurable consis-
tent ratio of degrees of asymptotic approach to a transition that cannot 
 
J. MILBANK

25
really be made in any finitely specifiable series of steps. But the projected 
consistency of measure is supposed to be able to convey you safely and 
rationally over every quantitative abyss. One can note here that 
Wittgenstein’s disquiet with non-finite number extended also to a certain 
unease even about the calculus of infinitesimals, precisely because he 
thought that, in a simple ‘abacus’ sense, “Mathematics is always a machine, 
a calculus. The calculus does not describe anything” (Wittgenstein 1979, 
p. 106).
One can claim that this modern geometrized and algebraicized arith-
metic perspective suppresses aporiae since they would be an embarrass-
ment for its finitized rationalism, whereas the older Platonic approach can 
readily confess them, within its hierarchy of metaphysical sense, which 
takes number as a guiding clue to the plenitude of the rational, the logikos, 
but not as its full actuality. And it is not, as Klein thought, inhibited from 
grasping ‘solutions’ like those of the differential calculus to the problem of 
the infinite ‘fluxional’ approach of the curve to the straight line because of 
its inability to see that fractions have the status of fully fledged numbers. 
For, as Fowler has shown, the mathematics of the Academy dealt with 
both fractions and asymptotic approaches in terms of anthyphairesis, which 
involves repeated positive process, whereby fractions can be reduced to 
the endless multiplicatory emergence of new whole numbers: so instead of 
one-half, two from one and so forth.3
This same approach, rather than claiming to isolate ever-new ‘real’ 
numbers, instead supplements strictly ‘arithmetic’ additive processes, 
whether pursued up or down the scale, with what the Greeks understood 
to be those of logistike, or of the ratios between numbers as exposed to a 
3 Fowler (1987, pp. 25–27, 31–66, 191–192 and 364–371). Anthyphairesis, a procedure 
also found in Euclid, literally means ‘reciprocal subtraction’ because the resultant remainder 
was then further reduced ad infinitum—again by multiplying fragmentation of a unity—by 
measure of the difference between the first remainder and the initially given unit. Repeated 
application of this process is also carried out by modern mathematics but in terms of pure 
division and divisors. But already Aristotle, in denying Plato’s ‘great’ as well as ‘small’ infi-
nite—arguing that in progress upwards we always transit by definite steps and do not encoun-
ter an infinitesimal interval that never arrives at nothing—removed the homology between 
infinite subtraction or division on the one hand and infinite addition on the other, and so 
opened the way for denying that the former can be ‘reciprocally’ conceived in a full sense as 
also a positive asymptotic progress. See Aristotle, Physics, III,6, 206b 3–206b 35. The riposte 
to Aristotle here would be to decide to treat the upwards infinite limit as an actuality of which 
zero (whose unattainable full stop Aristotle cannot deny) was but the echo. In the end, 
Aristotle himself has only decided against this outlook, not decisively argued against it.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

26
more reflective consideration, such as is already involved for subtraction, 
multiplication and division. For a logistical perspective, it appears that the 
unity of three, for example, is really to do not just with the unproblematic 
counting of digits, but also with the mysteriously problematic proportion 
between ‘three’ and ‘one’, whereby the unity of three can nevertheless be 
recursively applied again to its threeness, to give three ‘twice’, and then 
indefinitely many other times. The other operations of subtraction, divi-
sion and so forth can similarly be derived from this not exhaustively fath-
omable and tensional ratio (Klein 1992, pp. 17–25).4
Such a logistical approach to more complex arithmetic operations in 
terms of a consideration of proportions or ratios (or ‘analogies’) also 
implies a certain geometric dimension to arithmetic, since the repeated 
application of a ratio implies an indifference to exact multiple content, 
more characteristic of the geometric concern with integral magnitudes 
that can be of any size. Thus, in logistic, the operation of a rule of ratio 
involves the imagination of a certain quasi-spatial proportion rather than a 
completely specifiable quantity graspable by pure intellect as a series of 
cumulative temporal moments.
For this reason, as Klein showed, logistic tended to migrate in 
Neoplatonic thought, somewhat under the influence of the Pythagorean 
priority of arithmetic over geometry, to the side of mere pragmatic appli-
cation of mathematical principles. But in the case of Plato himself, there 
remained a strict logistikē theoretikē, and this fact can be connected with 
both his privileging of geometry over arithmetic and his exaltation of the 
metaphysical dyad to near parity with the metaphysical monad. Logistic, in 
this way, formed a kind of hinterland between arithmetic and geometry, 
without ever losing the integral difference of the two processes (see 
Lachtermann 2009, pp. 124–205; Dimitri Nikulin 2002, pp. 63–68 and 
210–260). This loss rather occurred in modern times, with Descartes and 
others, as we have just seen.
The invocation in Platonism and Neoplatonism of the principle of 
repeated application of proportionate operation allows that one might 
approach an inexpressible quantity in a consistently ordered way without 
abolishing the aporia of this advance, or invoking a kind of phantom exact 
quantity after the manner of Leibnizian or Newtonian calculus—a quan-
4 The primacy of the actual and the positive in premodern western mathematics shows us 
how naturally Christian theological theses such as the privative theory of evil could be grafted 
onto what the student would have learnt in the quadrivium.
 
J. MILBANK

27
tity virtually present and entertained as a ghostly (non)possibility that is 
taken to command our conception of the mathematically actual.
Repeatability raises the issue of the infinite, but only with Plotinus and 
some of the Church Fathers did the unbounded as qualitative and simple, 
because beyond all quantitative bounds, emphatically become an attribute 
of the absolute, in a climate influenced by the general late antique exalta-
tion of initiatory darkness and mystery.5 It was this metaphysical develop-
ment that made actual infinity respectable, and slowly it began to creep 
into the immanent sphere also.
The latter development was therefore plainly not, contra some accounts, 
at first a secularizing one. Thus, several of the scholastics already intimated 
the reality of transfinites because they observed, for example, that the infi-
nite series of even numbers is equal in length to the infinite series of odd 
numbers, although the latter must be simultaneously of a seemingly 
greater size. Robert Grosseteste, the twelfth-century Bishop of Lincoln 
and Statesman, even constructed an ontology of light which construed it 
as mediating in a series of transfinite descents between the infinite God 
and finite creation (Grosseteste 1996, pp. 25–33). Nicholas of Cusa (fol-
lowed later by Blaise Pascal) finally embraced the infinity of the universe, 
holding, with Giordano Bruno soon after, that it, too, was “an infinite 
sphere whose centre is everywhere and circumference nowhere”.6 But in 
the former case there was no blasphemy because Nicholas effectively saw 
this infinity as transfinite: it is extended or ‘explicated’ and not ‘simple’ or 
‘complicated’, meaning ‘infolded’ in Cusan terminology.7 There are, 
moreover, for him different degrees of infinity in, respectively, the intel-
5 Plotinus, Enneads V.5.10: “[the Good’s] being is not limited; what is there to set bounds 
to it? … All its infinitude resides in its power: it does not change and will not fail; and in it all 
that is unfailing finds its duration”; V.5.11: “It is infinite also by right of being a pure unity 
with nothing towards which to direct any partial content”; VI, 9, 6: “We must … take the 
Unity as infinite not in measureless extension or numerable quantity but in fathomless depths 
of power”. [Stephen Mackenna’s translation.]
6 See Jorge Luis Borges, ‘The Fearful Sphere of Pascal’ in Labyrinths (London: Penguin, 
1971), 189–192. But for a corrective of Borges, see Harries (1975, pp.  5–15). Harries 
rightly says that Cusa preceded Bruno—that early modern cosmology altered in the wake of 
this transference of metaphorical application rather than the reverse, and that the shift itself 
is not a secularizing cosmic appropriation of a divine attribute but rather a following through 
of the full cosmological implications of this attribute of an infinite creative God. As with 
Grosseteste, if God is infinite, then his productions, though finite, cannot themselves be 
finitely bounded. The closed universe was pagan, not uninflectedly religious.
7 Nicholas of Cusa, De Docta Ignorantia, I, 12.33; 23; De Visione Dei, 13–15.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

28
lectual, the psychic and the material spheres. In this way, we can see that 
the positive consideration of the actual infinite in Bruno and Spinoza is a 
post-Christian development.
But Bruno and Spinoza still left actual infinity as the presence of an 
immanent deity; it had not yet consistently invaded the domain of human 
mathematics as something that might be unproblematically dealt with. 
That began to happen after Descartes had algebraicized geometry, and 
Leibniz and Newton were then able to algebraicize and numerize in their 
‘Calculus’ the ‘fluxions’ of curves as tending to straight lines or perfect 
circles, even though they do so by infinitesimal degrees.
We need however to note here that the link between the downgrading 
of geometric construction and the algebraic invocation of abstract infinity is 
not so obvious as some historians think. For in the case of Proclus, so influ-
ential on Cusa, the Neoplatonic gloss on Euclid held the abyssal mysteries 
and paradoxes of the metaphysical to be reflected in the imagined arithme-
tic one and the drawn point, line and circle, and in this fashion had already 
intimated the phenomena of continuum and calculus—as many Renaissance 
thinkers realized—yet still in entirely mystagogic, aporetic terms (Proclus 
1992).8 Even in early Enlightenment Naples, Giambattista Vico and Paulo 
Mattia Doria continued to be able to give Proclean renderings of the new 
incorporations of the infinite while defending the primacy of geometry over 
algebra and the primarily synthetic and physically constructed character of 
the former (Vico 2010, pp. 57–71; see Lachtermann 1985, pp. 47–97; 
Miner 2004, pp. 96–125). The genuine Platonic tradition in mathematics, 
because it believes, after Plato, that perceived mathematical realities only 
invoke the forms through dim ­recollection of a forgotten spiritual realm 
(not an a priori interior grasp) and therefore require the use of the senses, 
sustains the role both of intellectual intuition of numerical essence and 
ratio, or theoremata, and of concrete imaginary or physical construction, or 
problemata. This approximately accords with the way that there was, as we 
have seen, originally for Plato, but still more radically than for Neoplatonism, 
a ‘theoretical logistic’ or a reflexively operational ‘theoretical application’ 
to the material of arithmoi themselves.
8 For the ontological role of problema in Proclus, see Part One, §§ 201, 243–244. His 
insistence on the essential initial role of problematic in producing the geometric field can be 
seen as consonant with his overall ‘theurgic’ perspective which, in contrast to Plotinus, 
stressed the full descent of the human soul into the human body and consequently the need 
for sensory and material mediation and the merciful descent of the gods to our realm, drawn 
down through and as myriad modes of ritual attraction.
 
J. MILBANK

29
The Cantorian Counter-Revolution
Partly because of the tension between a Cartesian formalist and pragmatic 
attitude to the calculus, and this more realist, ultimately Platonic meta-
physical interpretation, there were heated debates in the eighteenth cen-
tury about the ‘infinitesimal’ or an infinitely small number that is still more 
than zero (see Alexander 2015). These also correspond to the inevitable 
modern hesitation between the seeming opposites of mathematical con-
ventionalism on the one hand, and a newly literal physicalization of math-
ematical truth consequent upon Descartes’ attempted identification of 
arithmeticized geometric space with physical space itself, on the other. The 
formalist view was that the infinitesimal was a convenient fiction; the real-
ist view was that the infinitesimals really exist. That view would effectively 
provide us with other examples of transfinites. This same spectre hovered 
over the new application of infinitesimal calculus to number theory in the 
nineteenth century by Bernhard Riemann and others (see Kaplan 2000, 
pp. 144–174; Seife 2000, pp. 131–156; Cajori 1919, pp. 367–447).
Riemann, much influenced by Naturphilosophie, also reconceived 
geometry in such a way as to think of manifest spatial relations as the pro-
ductions of hidden forces, manifested by infinitesimal calculus as tensional 
and dynamic ‘fluxions’, which generated interrelated and co-varying func-
tions constituting a particular determined ‘manifold’ (Mannigfaltigkeit), 
including, as but one example, three-dimensional space, which thereby 
loses its ontological or transcendental (Kant) normativity.9 In an ­equivalent 
way, the equally post-Romantic Cantor saw any system of number as 
brought about by a ‘generative principle’ that constituted a manifold 
(which we now call a ‘set’) of items that can all be counted as of the same 
kind and so can be ‘included’ (Rosenstock 2017, pp. 45–47). In this way, 
the ontological or transcendental primacy of the finite ordinal number 
series was questioned. Cantor broke with the intuitive primacy of ordinal 
numbering in time by making spatial cardinality central: not the series 1, 
2, 3 … but, for example, the number ‘three’ standing alone and indicating 
in itself the single ‘set’ of all things (real or imagined) that contain three 
countable items (Cantor 1955).
9 For this reason, he thought that binding gravity might be an intrinsic feature of three 
dimensionality, rendering space itself a vital force field. This seems to recover the Stoic con-
ception of geometry as ‘phoronomic’ or more primarily concerned with moving than with 
static figures. Of course, it was his conception of the manifold that allowed him to think 
non-Euclidean geometries and to conjecture that our three dimensionality could itself be but 
the ‘surface’ of a concealed, more multidimensional ‘sphericity’.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

30
This new move has proved incredibly ambivalent. Was it about ending 
or rekindling mystery? It might seem to awaken certain Platonic and real-
ist echoes, reinvoking the unique integrity of every arithmos.10 But, con-
versely, the set can be construed, not as a reversion to eidos but rather as 
inviting a subordination of mathematics to a nominalistic logic, such that 
number becomes a sheerly conventional grouping of random singularities, 
brought together by a spatializing gesture to produce ‘every three’, ‘every 
four’ and so forth, according to a ‘count as one’, rather than being con-
ceived as the unique result in due order of an inexorable process of addi-
tion. In that case, it is rather ordinality that would stand Platonic sentinel 
over the integrity of each unique linguistic arrival. By contrast, a nominal-
ist conception of cardinality points to a formalism that encourages us to 
stop thinking of numbers as either artful construct or strange intuition of 
psychic essences, or else both at once.
Yet, on the other hand, Ludwig Wittgenstein complained in his note-
books that Cantor had invented sets precisely because he was a mystery-­
monger, in love with the pseudo-religious (as Wittgenstein debatably saw 
it) consolation of paradox.11 How can this accusation be half-plausible? 
How can sets favour mystery as much as series? Or mystery lurk in space 
as much as time? How can sets prove to be just as primitive and indefinite 
and resistant to our conventional control as serial ordinals?
These strange circumstances arise because Cantor discovered three key 
contradictions. First, the set of all subsets contained within a set, the so-­
called power-set, is bigger than the original set. All the fractions of three 
are more than three; all the complexities of a seed exceed its visible ­oneness. 
We have already seen how the Platonic primacy of multiplication over divi-
sion would, however, interpret this circumstance in terms of the aporetic 
relationship between the real transcendent numerical One and any purely 
finite unity. Cantor accepted this traditional solution because he cleaved to 
a Catholic sense of a true, absolute, simple infinite, though he newly linked 
this to the mystical resolution of emergent mathematical contradictions. 
He applied it also to the mystery of transfinite numbers, which he under-
stood to be fully instantiated in reality.
For his second innovation was a new proof of transfinitude. If there 
exists a subset of all the numbers which do not count the number of the 
numbers in a series—as the final 4 counts the numbers in the series 
10 See Fowler (1987, p. 14): “A much more faithful impression of the very concrete sense 
of the Greek arithmoi is given by the sequence: duet, trio, quartet, quintet”.
11 For example, Wittgenstein (1981, II, §§ 18–38).
 
J. MILBANK

31
1,2,3,4—then a contradiction arises. How many numbers are there in this 
subset? If the number of these numbers is itself a member of the set, then 
it cannot be, since this number is now a number that counts all the num-
bers in the subset and so should be excluded. But if it is not a member of 
the subset, then by that very token it should be included within it after all. 
Therefore this aberrant number does not belong within the set of all natu-
ral, finite numbers. As unplaceable within their series, we have to consider 
it to be “transfinite” (Rosenstock 2017, p. 71n).
If there is a transfinite number 1, then it follows that there is an indefi-
nite sequence of such numbers. However, at this level also, the perplexity 
of the power-set must intrude, in the form of the so-called Burali-Forti 
paradox (ibid., p. 70n and 71n). Once again, we have the problem that 
the ingredients of a supposed totality are greater than that totality. A num-
ber bigger than the totality must still belong to the series of ordinals, and 
yet it cannot do so, if it exceeds them all in size. In the case of the ‘diago-
nalising out’ of the power-set of the transfinites from their inclusive set, we 
seem to have to do with an impossible trans-transfinite. Once again, and 
indeed here especially, Cantor appealed, rather like Cusa, to the absolute 
infinity of God as lying beyond and yet ‘including’ all finite and finite/
transfinite contradictions. God, for Cantor upheld without reduction, is 
the mystery of an ineffable and incomprehensible middle or ‘between’ 
that is somehow ingredient to all created being.
In the third place, Cantor vastly exacerbated the medieval examples of 
transfinitude by arguing that one transfinite can really be bigger than 
another. At least the series of all even and the series of all prime numbers 
are ‘denumerable’ in the sense that we can draw a series of ‘bijecting’ lines 
between each step of the two advancing series: 2,4,6,8,10,12 ad infinitum 
can be made in this way equivalent to 2,3,5,7,11,13 ad infintium, as we 
saw was observed by Grosseteste. So in one sense they are the same size 
after all, for they remain always strictly proportionate to each other.
But Cantor now showed that, in the case of infinite sets of real, deci-
malized numbers, all the endlessly diminishing or advancing horizontal 
series which we can display in a square diagram and which should be 
exhaustive, are always ‘exceeded’, since a diagonal series drawn across 
them will exhibit an alternatively ordered series to that of every instance of 
the horizontals by the simple device of changing in turn by one position 
the decimal place of the first number on the first line, then the second on 
the second line and so forth, a procedure which can go on indefinitely 
because decimal fractions are infinitely divisible. And this means that the 
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

32
infinite sum of all real numbers is greater than the infinite sum of all ratio-
nal numbers, which can be exhaustively specified, even in the instance of 
their infinity, by the set contained in the square of their exhaustive succes-
sion.12 Such a ‘diagonal’ excess can be equally seen as the excess of the 
power-set of the transfinites over the original one, or else indeed the ‘tran-
scendental’ excess of that set itself over any possible subsettings—such that 
something always diagonally escapes any attempt as exhaustive 
sub-classification.
‘Diagonalisation’ is a geometric metaphor, and perhaps irreducibly so, 
to the point of real analogy. Such a geometrization of Cantor would be a 
Platonic, Proclean or Cusan move, as it would imply that his mathematical 
mystery is ‘logistically’ traversed within the real but contradictory struc-
tures of the geometric realm as finitely, physically embodied. By this same 
token, it would contend that his proof can after all also be performed with 
the infinitized positive multiples of prime numbers, omitting the initial 
decimal point, but now perhaps arranged in random, not regular, series, 
since regular series could not be modified. This presentation would be in 
accordance with the linked Platonic principles of the primacy of the posi-
tive and multiple over the negative and divisory, and of the determination 
of the infinite as equally ‘great’ and ‘small’. But in that case the excess of 
the real over the rational infinite in the case of decimals is qualified: for it 
is only, after all, an instance of an excess pertaining also in the case of infi-
nite primes, but with the additional Cantorian discovery—beyond 
Grosseteste—that this excess is no longer one of mere quantity, but also of 
measurable, denumerable ratio.
Alternatively, one could no doubt devise (or a computer could no 
doubt devise) a procedure whereby, even given regular horizontal series of 
whole numbers, the diagonal operator continuously altered the rule of 
succession for each line, giving an alternative logic to the succession 
achieved so far, since, in principle, this always remains possible: for exam-
ple, 2, 2, 2, 2 might be completed by 4 if the rule has now become not 
‘repeat’ but ‘double at the fifth stage’, while at the tenth it might be ‘dou-
ble’ or it might be ‘quadruple’ and so on. It is always possible alternatively 
to complete a series by shifting the rule of composition and yet maintain-
ing consistency.
12 For a clear and simple summary of Cantor’s diagonalisation proof and its immediate 
intellectual aftermath, see Seife (2000, pp. 147–153).
 
J. MILBANK

33
The obvious objection here is that these examples no longer sustain a 
single ordering principle throughout the series or only do so retrospec-
tively and so can no longer be totalized. But precisely, if one adopts 
Cantor’s mathematical realism, then one can allow that totalization is 
achieved by infinite actualization rather than by the indefinitely potential 
application of a rule. Hence, the transfinite series constructed through ran-
dom or rule-varying sequence is still a totality and is still non-­denumerable 
through bijection against other such series. But even were one to sustain 
that objection, one could still perform the proof with ‘clumps’ of integers 
within brackets, varying them in the same way as Cantor’s decimals.
Whether in Cantor’s terms, or these revised ‘Platonic’ ones, while one 
can indeed say that there is always ‘one more’ possible non-denumerable 
transfinite number outside the totalizing square, one might equally say (as 
perhaps Cantor did not indicate) that every time a ‘further’ denumeration 
lies ahead. Since the power-set not only is but also cannot be greater than 
the initial all-inclusive set, the excess over denumeration and so the sense 
in which one transfinite can be greater than another has surely to be inde-
terminable? There are and there are not differences in transfinite size, just 
as the infinite set of odd and the infinite set of even, or the infinite set of 
rabbits and of hares, both are and are not different from each other. In this 
sense, Cantor is not so far beyond Grosseteste after all.
In the case of the ‘Platonic’ version of Cantor’s diagonal proof, an 
incommensurate and utterly paradoxical excess of infinite integers over the 
entire set of infinite integers is no longer simply an incommensurate excess 
of the real over the rational numbers, but rather of infinite natural num-
bers or integers over themselves. And since all calculations with real num-
bers can only use conventional permutations of the integers, one can argue 
that the instance of excess of the infinitesimals over the set of all rational 
numbers is secondary and parasitic. Looked at in this revised way, Cantor’s 
discovery much more emphatically points, as he desired, to the actuality 
of transfinitude and the paradoxicality of the real limits of the world. 
Cantor might not have been averse to this development, precisely because 
as a devout Catholic he wished to read his transfinites as signs of the par-
ticipation of the finite in the real, absolute simple infinite of God, enfold-
ing all transfinites together in his ideas (see Dauben 1979; Perkert 2013; 
Newstead 2009, pp. 533–555).
Neither Wittgenstein nor Cantor would then turn out to be wholly 
right: the former’s semi-finitism would have failed to allow for this new 
incommensurability (or even to admit Grosseteste’s medieval paradox), 
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

34
but the latter would have apparently failed to see the primacy of the 
instance of the diagonal paradox in the series of mere infinite integers, 
given the imaginative, and so arguably transcendental primacy, of the ordi-
nary countable number series, which Wittgenstein, curiously like the 
Platonic tradition, so much insisted upon. In that case, Cantor’s argument 
assumes a much more immediately realist complexion. In saying that real 
numbers are only analogous to cardinal numbers, thereby affirming in 
some sense the latter’s cognitive primacy, Wittgenstein was precisely ges-
turing towards realism in a Platonic fashion in a way that he did not, of 
course, suspect. However, he failed to allow that, even given such a pri-
macy, Cantor’s claim can still hold good, since it does not, once ‘Platonically’ 
revised, really depend upon the equally numerical character of infinitesi-
mal fractions and decimals (along with zero and irrationals) along the 
modern ‘real’ number line.
Cantor and Wittgenstein
But do we really need to take Cantor seriously? Some of the intuitionists 
and constructivists, who favoured time, series and ordinality, thought not. 
These included Brouwer, Poincaré and Bergson, but also Wittgenstein, 
who heard Brouwer lecture, with approval (Marion 1998, pp.  18–19, 
38–40, 84–85, 162–168 and 202–205). Wittgenstein, however, in order 
to reject the realism of Cantor and of Kurt Gödel, went to very extreme 
lengths. There is, for him, in the strong ontological sense, no potential 
infinite for mathematics, never mind any actual one (Wittgenstein 1981, 
II § 45; v § 14; Bosanquet et al. 1976, p. 255; Marion 1998, pp. 26–7, 
181–188, 200–201).13 Nor, once a theorem is constructed, is there any-
13 Marion wrongly equates Wittgenstein’s reduction of the potential infinite to the logical 
or grammatical rule to ‘carry on’, making it “the property of a law, not of its extension” 
(King and Lee 1980, p. 13) with Aristotle’s denial that potential infinity would ever be actu-
ally realized, in the way that a potential statue can eventually come about [Physics, III, 6, 
206a 18–20]. But for Aristotle, potential infinity still clearly denotes an indefinite power that 
is extensionally ‘out there’ in the world, something that can be ever further actualized, 
though never completed in its full actuality, which for him is impossible. Thus, time and 
human generation are both actually without limit, although this lack of limit “is not (like the 
statue potentialities of the bronze) all actualised at once but is in course of transit as long as 
it lasts” [Physics III, 6, 206a 22–24]. The same applies to division of a magnitude, except that 
in this case, the discarded parts remain to rebuke in their persisting actuality the infinitely 
destructive ambition of the divider and do not vanish down the abyss of the more successful 
destroyer, time [III, 6, 206a 30–206b 2]. Marion equally fails to see that for Aristotle apeiron 
is ontological chaos and not just heuristic instruction.
 
J. MILBANK

35
thing ‘lurking’ within the theorem waiting to be discovered, never mind 
the idea that the theorem itself was ‘lurking’ in the first place. This ultra 
anti-Platonism in the conventional modern sense—which rejects even ‘a 
Platonism of the second phase’ (or the fated logical implication of an arbi-
trarily willed foundation, as with Descartes) demands that 2 plus 1 = 3 in 
no way follows consistently from 1 plus 1 = 2, except by adopting the same 
merely conventionally transcendental rule of ‘count one’, which one has 
to keep reiterating at various stages of the counting process because every 
rule admits to some degree of ambiguity. Though we happen to build 2 
plus 1 = 3, upon 1 plus 1 = 2, we might build something else incompatible 
with 2 plus 1 = 3 under another schoolmaster who might even keep chang-
ing the rule at every step.14
One can see why Alain Badiou today regards Wittgenstein as a soph-
ist.15 For surely, the integral content 1 plus 1 = 2 is already itself the pat-
terned rule that leads next to 3, since 1 remains 1 as a transcendental 
reality in the older medieval sense with every arrival at a new unity. There 
is no duality of number and function, such as Wittgenstein appears to 
imply. Otherwise, we could not envisage ‘2’ or ‘3’ at all. Simply to make/
envisage the number ‘1’ is already to envisage that 1 plus 1 makes 2, 2 plus 
1 makes 3 and so on. The endless sequences simply require an elaborative 
‘unfolding’, and endlessly recursive reiteration, not just of a rule but of the 
logic of numerical unity, which is also, and uniquely, an ontologic.
14 Waissmann (1979, p. 63): “In mathematics it is just as impossible to discover anything 
as it is in grammar” and p. 34: “What we find in books on mathematics is not a description of 
something, but the thing itself. We make mathematics”. However, the real Platonic tradition 
concerning mathematics, which culminated in Cusa and Vico’s Christian Trinitarian radicali-
sation, was able to regard making as also a seeing, also a describing. Wittgenstein is too 
conservative to be able to question this alternative. See also Wittgenstein (1981, § 5): “The 
Proposition: ‘It is true that this follows from that’ means simply ‘this follows from that’”. 
Here, the redundancy of the word ‘true’ redounds to the benefit of a convention that must 
be forever reiterated if it is to remain in force. In addition, see Wittgenstein (1978, § 185), 
where Wittgenstein argues that the instruction to ‘add 2’ to 1000 will not necessarily pro-
duce 1002, either according to rule-following or continuing to follow the rule in the same 
way. In either case, there remains a margin of interpretation which only brute imposition of 
the standard mode of reiteration can prevent. Finally, see Marion (1998, pp. 1–20) and on 
p.  22: “[Wittgenstein] insists that we never discover facts about structures that we have 
already set up: any new theorem is in fact a new extension of mathematics”; see also Klenk 
(1976, pp. 8–18).
15 Badiou (2011, p.  75) and passim. The sophistic label is not meant to be entirely 
negative.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

36
It is this same arbitrary transcendentalism (in a Kantian sense, now 
anarchized) about rules which disqualifies Wittgenstein’s argument against 
a strong realist understanding of set-theory in general as, for example, it 
was espoused by Frank Ramsey, who defended the real instances of contra-
dictory or ‘impredicable’ sets and the actual extension even of their infi-
nite instances, with some anticipation of the contemporary dialetheism of 
Graham Priest (Wittgenstein 1981, II, §§ 21–22; Marion 1998, pp. 6, 187 
and 200–201; Priest 1995). Wittgenstein thought that both Cantor and 
Ramsey had confused the deliberate ‘intension’ or meaning-input involved 
in constructing a set (as when one puts only recyclable items in the eco-
green rather than the grey bin), with ad hoc extension (as when 101 ran-
dom items go in the any-old grey bin in order to form the set that, without 
female supervision, might be our weekly unsorted planetarily-­irresponsible 
male human rubbish). This, he considered, was to confuse a set made by 
the rule of (‘arithmetic’) intension with a set composed by (‘geometric’) 
extension which could then contain unknown infinite things which we 
have not really selected (Wittgenstein 1981, II, § 132; Marion 1998, 
pp. 12–13, 63–64, 181–189 and 200–201). The numbers in a set are only 
there for Wittgenstein because of the ‘rule’ of inclusion:
A picture is conjured up which appears to fix the sense unambiguously. The 
actual use, compared with that suggested by the picture, seems somewhat 
muddied. Here again we get the same thing as in set theory. In the actual 
use of expressions we make detours, we go by sideroads. We see the straight 
highway before us, but of course we cannot use it, because it is permanently 
closed. (Wittgenstein 1978, § 426)
Wittgenstein here wishes to contrast what he takes to be a vicious dualism 
of set-theory between unambiguous meaning and impossibly infinite 
application with a pragmatist use of ad hoc initial definitions ceaselessly 
governed, yet ceaselessly qualified, by realistic rules that take us down the 
‘forking paths’ which we can possibly take, while the ‘dead end’ which we 
cannot take is oxymoronically construed as sublime absolute openness.
Yet one could argue, just to the contrary, that while pragmatism still has 
a duality of rules such as ‘go there’ against the rhetorically anticipated, and 
then presently pictured content of ‘where you can really, finitely get to’, 
that set-theory—with a greater allegiance to the inherited ontology of 
number, for which content and rule, essence and method coincide—in its 
fully realist version implies no such duality. This is partly because the 
 
J. MILBANK

37
invoked or mentioned ‘picture’ is no less ambiguous and indeterminate 
than a rule for usage, as the paradoxes resultant from apparently clear defi-
nitions of numerical entities always expose. Some of these paradoxes result 
from recursion and not from infinitude, and so it is not manifestly the case 
that the problem is always the projection of a delimited sense upon an 
unlimited referent whose meaningful scope one can therefore never deter-
mine. To the contrary, the problem is often that one cannot readily fix the 
intensional sense, and that this cannot be done at all without (‘geometri-
cally and problematically’) trying to determine its extent of referential rel-
evance. A projected construction is inseparable, as for authentic Platonism, 
from an always obscurely (and so rhetorically or persuasively) envisaged 
end result.
In fact, set-theory does not really tolerate the duality of intension and 
extension that Wittgenstein imposes on it. Despite its initial logicist aspira-
tions, it confirms that a number is more than a sign of a number, given 
that a sign is always a rule, like a signpost, that points away from itself to 
another content. For a number is rather itself a content that constitutes a 
rule: the number one, for example, has cardinal content, but also com-
mands us ordinally to ‘count one’ in subtraction from the numerical plu-
riverse. Thus it is the very extension of number as a ‘picture’ which 
exposes—as for Neoplatonic, Cusan and Vichian geometry—the prospect 
of extension to the infinite, not the illegitimate breaking of the bounds of 
an arbitrary transcendental rule, as Wittgenstein in a Kantian lineage sup-
posed. If, for example ‘1’ denotes a single set of all unities, then this can 
legitimately be a set of an infinite number, while an ordinal series—for 
example, a series comprised by constant doubling—of itself must invoke 
infinity, and therefore point to the fact that the ‘temporal’ series is also an 
open-ended ‘spatial’ set. Otherwise it is not a series—defined for example 
by doubling, not by any limit of the items to be doubled—and there is no 
rule which derives from the setted content of seriality.16
So, while not all the paradoxes of number arise from the contagion of 
the infinite, it is nonetheless true that it is the very nature of numbers, not 
hubristic overreaching, that incites this contagion. Only quantification 
leads us to the unquantifiable, and without this approach we would not be 
16 As Jacques Lacan showed, even the sign-operation, in order to avoid anarchy, has to 
occur within certain loosely ‘setted’ parameters. In this way, number interferes with the field 
of sign, ensuring that it concerns always ‘numbers of things’ just as, in the case of number, 
sign and reality coincide, though in ontologically thin air. See Milbank (2009, pp. 118–120).
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

38
able to envisage the unconstrained power to quantify. We take the marked 
turnings one by one because we forever proceed up the open road. 
Moreover, the attempt to treat set-theory merely intensionally, as with 
Frege and Russell’s use of logical quantifiers (Boole’s ‘or’, ‘and’ and ‘if’, 
plus Frege’s own ‘for every’ and ‘there is a’) lamentably failed to banish 
paradox, because it turned out that the ambitions of a neo-Leibnizian 
mathesis universalis (explicitly envisaged by Russell, as equally by Husserl 
with his ‘phenomenology’) which tries to extend logic into existential 
adjudication, cannot even deal comprehensively with the most abstract 
level of objective reality, which is the mathematical.
It is for this reason that, after Ernst Zermelo, set-theory has been 
ordered more randomly within the grey bins of extension according to ad 
hoc rules of empirical limitation designed to head-off paradox. Yet this, as 
Graham Priest argues, would appear to surrender both logical and math-
ematical consistency in the name of avoiding the inconsistencies that this 
very consistency tends to generate (Priest 1995).17
It is in fact most of all mathematics itself that should suggest to us (for 
reasons that we have already seen) that there is no warrant for any absolute 
intension/extension duality any more than there is for the almost identical 
dualities of sense and reference and mention and use, since here what we 
intend by making so exactly coincides with the ontological truth that we 
‘see’. In keeping with this mathematical paradigm of verum-factum (after 
Hobbes and Vico), one can suggest, indeed, after all, in concurrence with 
much of Wittgenstein’s thinking, that we can only refer to what has a locat-
ably different sense for us (Miner 2004, pp. 78–125). On the other hand, 
and also with Wittgenstein for much of the time, one can inversely and 
additionally suggest that the specific meanings of things out there in the 
world only disclose themselves to us in endlessly different aspects of real 
extension. The senses of ‘evening-star’ and ‘morning-star’ alone locate the 
referent Venus, but it is Venus herself, along with the entire cosmic order, 
who shows herself to us as the sense-referents ‘evening-star’ and ‘morning 
-star’ equally, though in diurnal perspectival oscillation (see Mulhall 1993).
However, it would seem that Wittgenstein did not entirely subordinate 
his account of ‘rule’ to his crucial account of ‘aspects’ (as rightly adver-
tised by Stephen Mulhall), thereby risking an absolute, transcendentalist 
divide between rule and content. Herein is heard still an echo of the 
17 I am grateful to discussions with my son, Sebastian Milbank, on Priest and the ontologi-
cal reality of paradox.
 
J. MILBANK

39
sense/reference divide which sustains the Fregean programme of logicist 
determination of the existential, genealogically derived in the long term 
(as with the Husserlian notion of what is ‘intended’) from the Scotist and 
neoscholastic isolation of a known ‘object’ (which may equally be possible 
or actual and eventually, for later Spanish Jesuit thought, equally a nullity 
as a reality) between the cognising subject and reality, independent of the 
act of judgement, in contrast to the Thomistic view that what we know is 
the known reality in a transmuted, ontologically ‘intellectual’ guise and 
that this reality as truth in the full sense is only ontologically present for 
judging and living mind (see Milbank 2013, pp. 31–34). The more they 
invoke knowledge as knowledge of ‘aspects’ of the real, the more both 
Husserl and Wittgenstein veer towards a kind of more relativistic and per-
spectival yet authentic construal of an Aristotelian-Thomist theory of 
understanding, but the more they qualify ‘aspects’ as tied to controlled, 
fully surveyable intention (Husserl) or as subordinate to an imposed tran-
scendental rule (Wittgenstein), the more a neoscholastic perspective—
ultimately traceable to the eighteenth-century Iberian peninsula via Austria 
and Bolzano, as Jacob Schmutz has now shown—remains to the fore 
(Schmutz 2010, pp. 603–615).
It is in terms of this latter perspective that, in his philosophy of mathe-
matics, Wittgenstein exhibits a lingering Fregean and positivist conserva-
tism en dépit de tout. For all his apparently drastic refusal of all mathematical 
formalization, and so all reduction of maths to logic, the retained inten-
sion/extension duality remains allied to such a programme. It is because 
of this retention, I would argue, that Wittgenstein erroneously tried to 
contradict Gödel’s (perhaps authentically) Platonizing demonstration of 
mathematical incompleteness.18 For this retention led him to deny in gen-
eral (indeed in a disappointingly Anglo-Saxon-Lockean fashion) that there 
are any real ontological conundra, or openings for unavoidable specula-
tion, as if ordinary language is after all well policed, and we must realize 
that there is no evading the ineluctable and so transcendental bounds of 
‘language games’ and ‘forms of life’.
For even if his ‘rules’ for language games other than those of mathe-
matics are by no means so ‘fixed’ in distinction from the content, they 
govern, they still, as Conor Cunningham has argued, close themselves 
against speculation in a way that suggests an immanently controlling or 
18 The fact that Gödel did not see his demonstration of the undecidability of the contin-
uum hypothesis as problematic for his Platonism might suggest its genuine character.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

40
regulative boundary which, could it be identified, as Wittgenstein explic-
itly realizes, would thereby have been transgressed (Cunningham 1999, 
pp. 64–90). Yet, since Wittgenstein rightly insists that it cannot be finally 
or rigorously identified (precisely because ‘knowing how to carry on’ is 
given by prudential practice, not pre-given regulation), his nonetheless 
persisting supposition of a finite boundary to which we might appeal 
against illegitimately speculative, metaphysical and infinitizing uses of 
both sign and number remains itself speculative, and implausibly so, given 
the mathematical paradigm.
It then follows that Wittgenstein’s entire tendency (early and late) to 
exile matters of ethics and religion to the sublime margins is questionable. 
For this assumes both that the infinite is non-mediable and that the apo-
retic involvement of the finite in the infinite can be evaded (Wittgenstein 
1979, 1998). Yet, this involvement rather ensures that in fact there is no 
non-speculative human discourse, thereby rendering metaphysics a natural 
extension of ordinary language which has always been taking festive holi-
day time-off in order to do its job at all.
The paradoxical mysteries of mathematics are not then the preserve of 
pseudo-religion. Instead, Wittgenstein’s failure to conjure them away at 
the very beginning and core of all his reflection on number, whose appar-
ent surety he, as much as Plato, sees as the gateway to philosophy, reveals 
the spuriousness of trying to divide the existential mysteries of human life 
from the mysteries of reason and human practice from the speculative 
work of thought which fundamentally insists that, in order to engage with 
the real, we perforce have to try approximately to grasp its nature.
Conclusion
In trying to neutralize the mathematical and modern claims to reckon 
with the infinite, Wittgenstein returns us in a different way to Kant. But in 
consequence we are back with the prospect of an anthropomorphic scepti-
cism, up against the absolutely null unknown which is only tempered by 
transcendental ethical gestures of an unhelpfully formal character.
Yet, the speculatively nihilistic alternative to this, of Badiou and others, 
does not merely recover ‘Spinoza’ in defiance of Kant. To the contrary, it 
remains within than Spinozan-Kantian collusion that Jacobi identified. 
For its conservative refusal to embrace with Cantor, the reality of paradox 
still really assumes the ultimacy of our human epistemological grasp. 
Rather than remain consistent with logic to the point of the breakdown of 
 
J. MILBANK

41
the law of identity, it prefers (as Graham Priest has argued) to stick with 
epistemological certainty through cobbled-together devices to ward off 
mathematical contradictions, like Russell’s theory of types or the Zermelo-­
Fraenkel conventions concerning the ‘well-made’ set immune to paradox-
ical breakage. It is on only the basis of the latter, and not on the basis of 
Cantor, that it can be claimed that modern mathematics reveals the non-­
reality and impossibility of ‘the all’. Thus the bias in Badiou runs arbi-
trarily in the direction of diagonalising escape, thereby supposedly 
revealing the ‘originally’ empty set as a substitute, pseudo-totality foster-
ing anarchy throughout the secondary field of manifold, or setted being, 
whose every attempted sub-all must always be subject to illusion and futil-
ity. But if one sustains the paradoxical balance between escapage and non-­
escapage from transfinite totality, then one can allow for an ineffable 
inclusion beyond inclusion, outside the bounds of non-contradiction, as 
once proposed by Cusanus and so the existence of an immanent all, but 
only now (in the wake of Cantor) because it is supported by a transcen-
dent absolute. Of course, this may be envisaged in more ‘Hindu’ terms as 
by Graham Priest, or in more Christian (or Jewish or Islamic) ones, but 
the latter would seem more clearly to escape the lure of the zero towards 
an original pole of plenitude.
In this way, even an alternative and revised classical mathematics and 
then a mathematicized physics also so conceived (and not here elaborated) 
could support the ‘third way’ of a theistic metaphysics, which must, after 
Erich Przywara and William Desmond, be a metaphysics of the analogy of 
being or of a metaxological reality. But the latter, beyond any orthodox 
Thomism, has to be construed as strongly paradoxical if it is to make any 
rigorously metacritical sense. Not only does the admission of such logical 
mystery beyond logic alone now permit us again to think the thought of 
God, it also permits us to salvage the appearances of ordinary, finite con-
nectedness which we constantly intuit, rescuing them from the cognitive 
gulf into which they must otherwise inevitably tumble.
Bibliography
Alexander, Amir. 2015. Infinitesimal: How a Dangerous Mathematical Idea Shaped 
the Modern World. London: Oneworld.
Badiou, Alain. 2011. Wittgenstein’s Antiphilosophy. Trans. Bruno Bosteels. 
London: Verso.
Boole, George. 1847. The Mathematical Analysis of Logic: Being an Essay Towards 
a Calculus of Deductive Reasoning. London: Macmillan, Barclay and Macmillan.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

42
Borges, Jorge Luis. 1971. The Fearful Sphere of Pascal. In Labyrinths. London: 
Penguin.
Bosanquet, R., et  al. 1976. Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of 
Mathematics, Cambridge, 1939. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Cajori, Florian. 1919. A History of Mathematics. New York: Macmillan.
Cantor, Georg. 1955. Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfinite 
Numbers. Trans. Philip E.B. Jourdain. New York: Dover.
Cunningham, Conor. 1999. Wittgenstein After Theology. In Radical Orthodoxy: 
A New Theology, ed. John Milbank, Catherine Pickstock, and Graham Ward. 
London: Routledge.
Dauben, Warren. 1979. Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the 
Infinite. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Descartes, René. 2003. Geometry. New York: Dover.
Fowler, D.H. 1987. The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy: A New Reconstruction. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Grant, Iain Hamilton. 2008. Philosophies of Nature After Schelling. London: 
Continuum.
———. 2012. Being and Slime: the Mathematics of Protoplasm in Lorenz Oken’s 
“Physio-Philosophy”. In Collapse, vol. IV, 287–321. Falmouth: Urbanomic.
Grosseteste, Robert. 1996. De Luce. Trans. Julian Lock in Iain M. Mackenzie, The 
‘Obscurism’ of Light. Norwich: The Canterbury Press.
Guénon, René. 2000. The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times. New Delhi: 
Mushiram.
Harries, Karsten. 1975. The Infinite Sphere: Comments on the History of a 
Metaphor. Journal of the History of Philosophy 13: 5–15.
Heller-Roazen, Daniel. 2011. The Fifth Hammer: Pythagoras and the Disharmony 
of the World. New York: Zone.
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich. 1994. Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza in Letters 
to Herr Moses Mendelssohn (1787) and (1789). In The Main Philosophical 
Writings. Trans. George di Giovanni, 173–251, 339–378. Montreal/Kingston: 
McGill-Queens University Press.
Kaplan, Robert. 2000. The Nothing That Is: A Natural History of Zero. London: 
Penguin.
King, John, and Desmond Lee. 1980. Wittgenstein’s Lectures, Cambridge 1930–32. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Klein, Jacob. 1992. Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origins of Algebra. 
New York: Dover.
Klenk, Virginia H. 1976. Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Kramer, Hans-Joachim. 1990. Plato and the Foundations of Metaphysics. Trans. 
John R. Catan. New York: SUNY.
 
J. MILBANK

43
Lachtermann, David Rapport. 1985. Mathematics and Nominalism in Vico’s Liber 
Metaphysicus in Sachkommentar zu Giambattisa Vico’s Liber Metaphysicus. Eds. 
S. Otto and H. Viechtbauer. Munich: Fink.
———. 2009. The Ethics of Geometry. London: Routledge.
Lafleur, Claude. 1994. Scientia et ars dans les introductions à la philosophie des 
maîtres dès arts de l’Université de Paris au XIIIe siècle. In Scientia und ars im 
Hoch- und Spätmittelalter, ed. Ingrid Craemer-Ruegenberg and Andreas Speer, 
45–65. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Marion, Matthieu. 1998. Wittgenstein, Finitism and the Foundations of 
Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McLuhan, Marshall. 2005. The Classical Trivium: The Place of Thomas Nashe in the 
Learning of His Time. Corte Madera, CA: Gingko.
Milbank, John. 2009. The Double Glory, or Paradox Versus Dialectics. In The 
Monstrosity of Christ, ed. Slavoj Žižek and John Milbank. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
———. 2013. Beyond Secular Order. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 2017a. From Mathesis to Mathexis: Nicholas of Cusa’s Post-Nominalist 
Realism. In Participation et vision de Dieu chez Nicolas de Cues, ed. Isabelle 
Moulin, 143–169. Paris: Vrin.
———. 2017b. Writing and the Order of Learning. Philosophy, Theology and the 
Sciences 4: 46–73.
Miner, Robert. 2004. Truth in the Making: Creative Knowledge in Theology and 
Philosophy. London: Routledge.
Mulhall, Stephen. 1993. On Being in the World: Wittgenstein and Heidegger on 
Seeing Aspects. London: Routledge.
Newstead, Anne. 2009. Cantor on Infinity in Nature, Number and the Divine 
Mind. American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 83: 533–555.
Nikulin, Dimitri. 2002. Matter, Imagination and Geometry: Ontology, Natural 
Philosophy and Mathematics in Plotinus, Proclus and Descartes. Aldershot, 
Hants: Ashgate.
Perkert, Walter. 2013. Georg Cantor 1845–1918. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Pickstock, Catherine. 1998. After Writing. Oxford: Blackwell.
Priest, Graham. 1995. Beyond the Limits of Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Proclus. 1992. A Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements. Trans. Glenn 
R. Morrow. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rosenstock, Bruce. 2017. Transfinite Life: Oskar Goldberg and the Vitalist 
Imagination. Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Schelling, F.W.J. 2004. First Outline of a System of the Philosophy of Nature. 
New York: SUNY.
  NUMBER AND THE BETWEEN 

44
Schmutz, Jacob. 2010. Die Einfluss der böhomischen Jesuitphilosophie auf 
Bernard Bolzanos Wissenshaftlehre. In Bohemia Jesuitica, 1556–2006, ed. 
Petronilla Cemus et al. Würzburg: Echter.
Seife, Charles. 2000. Zero: The Biography of a Dangerous Idea. London: Souvenir.
Trimpi, Wesley. 1962. Ben Jonson’s Poems: A Study in the Plain Style. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Vico, Giambattista. 2010. On the Most Ancient Wisdom of the Italians. Transl. 
Jason Taylor. New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.
Vieta, François. 1992. Introduction to the Analytic Art. In Greek Mathematical 
Thought and the Origins of Algebra, ed. Jacob Klein, 315–335. New  York: 
Dover.
Waissmann, Friedrich. 1979. Ludwig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle. Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1978. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 1979. On Certainty. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
———. 1981. Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. Oxford: Blackwell.
———. 1998. Culture and Value. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
 
J. MILBANK

45
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_3
CHAPTER 3
True Being and Being True: Metaxology 
and the Retrieval of Metaphysics
D. C. Schindler
William Desmond has held the David R. Cook Visiting Chair in Philosophy 
since 2005 at Villanova University, which was founded in 1842, exactly 
175  years ago when this contribution was written. One of the only 
Augustinian universities in the world, Villanova chose as its motto a con-
figuration of three themes, each of which plays a significant role in the 
thought of St. Augustine: Veritas, Unitas, Caritas. The juxtaposition of 
these words is powerful, since it suggests that there could be some pro-
found connections between them, though what the connections might be 
is not immediately obvious, or at least not equally obvious in every age. Of 
the three words displayed on the motto, there is one that, in our current 
age, cannot pass our lips without a certain embarrassment, which we 
attempt to relieve by introducing a qualifier to neutralize it or by taking an 
ironic distance through scare quotes or a shrug of the eyebrows. We say 
‘unitas’ with warmth, signaling the generosity of our hospitality, and ‘cari-
tas’, with an even greater zeal to show effective kindness to those who may 
be otherwise left outside, without care. But ‘veritas’? Truth? As Nietzsche 
might have said, the word has come to represent something indecent. It has 
D. C. Schindler (*) 
The John Paul II Institute, The Catholic University of America,  
Washington, DC, USA

46
become like the word ‘mother’ in Huxley’s Brave New World, something 
that cannot be uttered in public without a snicker and a hot blush. Who in 
the twenty-first century has the stomach for such a thing as ‘Truth’, with a 
capital ‘T’? Is it not—indeed, has it not always been—a thing indigestible, 
a rock that stands athwart the cultural streams of change? A rock presents 
an obstacle to our projects for improvement, or even more worryingly, a 
weapon to crush the heads of those we call our foes.
The anxiety regarding truth can go so far as to affirm not just a tension 
between it and the other two words on the motto, but an outright opposi-
tion. To insist on truth, it is commonly thought today, is to be exclusive, 
and thus to leave out all those who do not think as we do. Hence, veritas 
undermines unitas, or community. To insist on truth is likewise to prefer 
judgment to mercy; hence, veritas also threatens caritas. The Italian 
philosopher-­politician Gianni Vattimo offers a sophisticated and literate 
expression of an extreme position on this score, but we may nevertheless 
take him simply to be spelling out more clearly and more boldly the impli-
cations of the general spirit of our postmodern age: Love, Vattimo argues, 
demands a relinquishing of truth claims (Vattimo 2007; Vattimo 2004). 
We need to withhold judgment in order to be able to affirm the other, and 
make a space for the other in our community: “Friendship can become the 
principle and factor of truth only if thought leaves behind any claim to an 
objective, universal, and apodictic foundation” (Vattimo 2007, p. 111). A 
desire for friendship, or caritas, requires that we reverse the traditional 
order of things, and so reconceive the very nature of truth: The Gospel’s 
proclamation that “the truth shall make you free” ought to be interpreted 
as saying “only that which sets you free is truth, and thus, above all else, 
the ‘discovery’ that there are no ultimate foundations before which our 
freedom must come to a halt” (Vattimo 2004, p. xxv). It is not possible, 
of course, to empty our minds of fundamental beliefs, he admits, but a 
commitment to charity enables us more and more, as we train ourselves in 
this concern for others, to attain an ironic distance from our fundamental 
beliefs. What St. Paul said about marriage and property, Vattimo says 
about fundamental truth claims: We should make these claims as if we 
were not making them; our grasp should be an open-handed one, ready, 
the moment the need arises, to take hold of something else, something 
that may be altogether opposed to our initial beliefs (though of course to 
do so always with a similar reluctance to commit ourselves). While this 
irony might seem like a radical proposal, Vattimo claims it is nothing but 
the very essence of Christianity come to fruition: The highest act of char-
ity, according to this ancient faith, is the death of the Logos, the Word or 
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

47
Reason, that is, the crossing out of truth: “Conflict really escalates only 
when that dose of irony toward ourselves and our own claims to truth that 
Nietzsche described … is missing. Perhaps, after all, this was just 
Nietzsche’s ‘secularized’ way of expressing something far removed from 
any idea of will to power: what the Christian tradition taught us to call 
‘charity’” (ibid., p. 59). If Logos were to cling to itself as true, there would 
be no charity; the total self-emptying of Logos, to the point of its self-­
annihilation, is finally the supreme charity that can reach across any and all 
differences. The self-elimination of veritas thus creates the necessary con-
ditions for the flourishing of unitas and caritas. Perhaps, if Vattimo is 
right, after 175 years, it is high time for Villanova to consider a change in 
the motto.
Now, it is not very difficult to show that the opposition between veritas 
and caritas that one finds in the work of Vattimo, but also in the popular 
imagination more generally, is self-undermining, and that the evacuation 
of truth will inevitably also imply the evacuation of charity, the transforma-
tion of charity into the most superficial of all sentiments, since it is accom-
panied by an absence of conviction (who wants to be loved ironically?), a 
mere feeling that quite literally does no one any genuine good. A tradi-
tional response to Vattimo would calmly point out that one needs to have 
a non-ironic, indeed, a non-negotiable conviction about the truth of love, 
the truth of human dignity, the truth of the ultimate goodness of reality 
and the claims that goodness implies, and indeed all such fundamental 
truths, if there is to be any genuine affirmation of the other and hospitable 
respect.1 But it is reasonable to suggest that the traditional response needs 
to be deepened, or else it runs the risk of recreating and reinforcing the 
conditions that prompted Vattimo’s reaction: What is it about truth, or at 
least the claims made about it, that might lead one to think that it is essen-
tially oppressive, inimical to the respect we owe to the other, and at odds 
with the calling to love?
It seems to me that there is scarcely a philosopher alive today who could 
provide the resources to engage fruitfully with this particular problem of 
1 To be sure, Vattimo constantly cautions us not to allow the liberating ‘death of God’ to 
harden into a new ‘truth’ we can use to inflict violence on our enemies. Respect for everyone, 
according to him, requires, not a foundation, but a commitment to avoid violence. Much 
more would need to be said, here, to show the impotence of this commitment without a 
foundation (for a sustained discussion of this problem, see Schindler 2008, Chapter 1), but 
our concern here is not Vattimo himself, but the more general cultural drift he brings to 
expression.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

48
truth and contemporary culture but William Desmond. At the heart of 
Desmond’s philosophical project, as I have come to understand it, is a 
conception of reality that would resist falling into the either-or that frames 
the dilemma I have briefly presented: Either we affirm truth and compro-
mise our ability to love, or we affirm love as the sole ‘unconditional’, and 
thereby sacrifice any serious devotion to truth. The resources for outwit-
ting this dilemma become especially apparent in his most recent book, The 
Intimate Universal, which offers a profound and beautiful exposition of a 
notion that one frequently encounters in his work. There is no space in the 
present context to attempt to do justice to the subtle and rich argumenta-
tion of the book as a whole—and this is particularly regrettable in the 
present case since ‘doing justice’ is itself one of the many interesting 
themes of Desmond’s book. But I hope in any event in the brief reflec-
tions offered here simply to indicate one of the themes, which I believe has 
special importance in relation to the problem posed by Vattimo. That 
theme is the book’s recovery of the ontological, or better, the genuinely 
‘metaphysical’, dimension of truth. In what follows, I offer a sketch of 
Desmond’s notion of the ‘intimate universal’, explain how this notion 
transforms our understanding of truth, show how its foundations cannot 
but lie in the reality of being and, finally, suggest how a genuinely meta-
physical conception of truth, such as Desmond has developed in his work, 
is essential for overcoming any putative opposition between truth and 
love.
To get at this, let us first consider what Desmond means by the ‘inti-
mate universal’, the central and organizing notion of his book. We can 
enter into that notion by means of a simple question: Do we necessarily 
move away from ourselves, the closer we come to the other, and others, 
who lie in some sense beyond ourselves? Authentically religious thinking 
has generally recognized that this is not the case at least in the most origi-
nal instance: The universal God is nevertheless more interior to me than I 
am to myself. Desmond might be interpreted as sounding out all the dis-
tinctly philosophical dimensions of this religious insight (in the broadest 
sense of philosophy). He thus brings us immediately beyond the impover-
ished thinking of our age, which swings between the equally unsatisfying 
alternatives of a hyper-rationalism that would allow the universal simply to 
eclipse the particularities of what is individual, and the nominalism that 
would take the universal to be essentially nothing—nothing but a flatus 
vocis, a sound that we take to be a name to be imposed on things that are 
irreducibly different in order to make our world intelligible. Given such a 
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

49
dualistic opposition, it is clear why an insistence on truth would seem to 
threaten with violence. If universal ideas do not reveal the meaning of the 
concrete things around us in the world, but are in fact merely imposed 
from the outside, taking such abstract ideals as a measure implies a neglect 
or abandonment of what things really are in themselves. Efforts have been 
made in the past to overcome this oppressive dualism, perhaps most nota-
bly Hegel’s thought of the ‘concrete universal’, which intends to affirm a 
reciprocal dependence between the conceptual universal and the concrete 
particular in history, but Desmond argues convincingly that Hegel’s 
notion is in the end neither concrete nor universal: It does not acknowl-
edge the genuine transcendence of the universal, but binds it too closely 
to the immanent movements of history, and it fails to do justice to the 
genuine mystery of the concrete, which has an intimate life of its own 
beyond its function of realizing its governing concept (see IU 4–5). 
Desmond’s intimate universal is an effort to do justice in a non-reductive 
way to all of these dimensions, from the interior mystery of the idiotic to 
the incarnate manifestness of the aesthetic, with all of the complexities of 
the love therein revealed as erotically agapeic and agapeically erotic.2 His 
description of this complex reality offers a new way to think about an 
ancient question: What is Truth?
It seems to me that one of the things that allows him to hold together 
the extraordinarily rich array of features and dimensions in a unity that is 
and remains a unity even in the irreducible complexity, is his rooting of 
both unity and difference in being. Being itself is an expression, or indeed 
the expression, of intimate universality: “We love being in our being”, he 
writes deep in the book, “and indeed in all being when we love. This is not 
neutral being—it is being as an intimate universal” (IU 401). Desmond’s 
description of being here as an ‘intimate universal’ is reminiscent of 
Thomas Aquinas’s characterization of being as simultaneously what is 
most intimate and most universal,3 and his reflections on the implications 
of forgetting being under this aspect in the broad streams of modern and 
postmodern philosophical thought might be read as a contemporary 
retelling of Etienne Gilson’s The Unity of Philosophical Experience, in a 
2 It is important to note that Desmond does not posit eros and agape as two separate kinds 
of love, but rather as different dimensions of one love, dimensions that always tend to share 
in themselves aspects of the other. In a similar way, the inwardness of the idiotic and the 
outward, expressiveness of the aesthetic are by no means opposed to each other.
3 Aquinas, 1932, 3.7: “Ipsum enim esse est communissimus effectus primus et intimior omni-
bus aliis effectibus”.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

50
strikingly different idiom and with a broader reach into the cultural 
sphere.4 Comparing Desmond’s book to that of Gilson, one of the great 
defenders of metaphysics in the twentieth century, might initially provoke 
some protest. Until quite recently (and even now there are serious ques-
tions5), the word ‘metaphysics’ was also on the list of indecencies in polite 
philosophical conversation. William Desmond is nevertheless recognized 
as a thinker for his unabashed affirmation of metaphysics, even if he inter-
prets the term with somewhat more finesse than one typically associates 
with the traditional technical sense, emphasizing instead the doubleness of 
the prefix ‘meta’ (which can mean both ‘beyond’ and ‘in the midst of’).6 
This affirmation of metaphysics, I wish to suggest, is the sine qua non of 
Desmond’s outwitting of our dilemma. One might think, at first, that 
‘doing justice’ to both truth and love, both the universal and the particular,7 
is finally just a matter of effecting the proper subjective disposition: Instead 
of condemning the other or holding a kind of hostile reserve toward him, 
we ‘ought’ to be kind, gentle, open, hospitable, gracious and generous. To 
be sure, as qualities of our disposition toward the other, all of these are to 
be recommended. But, what Desmond’s book makes clear is that, if there 
is no ontological foundation for these qualities, if—let us use the word 
here—they are not grounded in truth, not only will they turn out to be 
superficial, they will also inevitably ‘lock in’ the very dualism they seek to 
overcome. Violence will thus not be eliminated, but simply rendered hid-
den, driven underground, where it can cause profound damage in secret, 
‘passive-aggressive’ sorts of ways, and then explode onto the surface with 
4 Gilson (1999). Through a survey of monumental thinkers in the medieval and modern 
eras, Gilson shows the implications of the forgetting of the philosophy of being and its 
replacement by something else (e.g., theology or logic). Desmond engages more profoundly 
with late modern and postmodern thinkers, and explores the implications in concrete cul-
tural realms such as the family, the experience of art, the shape of politics and so forth.
5 The term ‘metaphysics’ has returned in contemporary philosophy, in particular, in the 
schools of ‘speculative realism’, ‘object-oriented philosophy’ and the like, but these move-
ments are quite different from the traditional (and basically human-centered) sense of meta-
physics as the study of being qua being.
6 See ‘Is there Metaphysics After Critique?’, and ‘Metaxological Metaphysics and the 
Equivocity of the Everyday’, in ISB 89–119 and 155–184. Of course, this simply recovers 
the traditional sense. It is only in the modern period that metaphysics comes to mean 
‘beyond’ in a straightforwardly dualistic way.
7 This is not meant to imply a simple correlation between truth and universality, on the one 
hand, and love and the particular, on the other. Truth is of course also a matter of the particu-
lar, and love of course also has an essentially universal dimension.
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

51
a ferocity that is undiminished because the opposition at its source has 
continued silently to feed it.8
The point is subtle, but quite important: Vattimo does not have a sense 
of the intimately universal mystery of being that would unite the self and 
the other beyond but not in opposition to whatever it is that might dif-
ferentiate them from one another. Because there is not some reality pres-
ent that we can ‘adhere to’ in a positive way, we have to enact the essentially 
negative maneuver of ironic detachment from ourselves. To use Desmond’s 
term, this is a ‘counterfeit double’ of transcendence. The problem with 
this negative maneuver is that it does not transform the terms, but tends 
to replace one problem with another, which turns out to be a reflection of 
the first. The dethronement of the rational sovereign ego widely advo-
cated in postmodern thought, Desmond tells us, insofar as it only 
dethrones, inevitably enthrones some other power, equally sovereign:
Postmodern thinking will perhaps deny a certain sovereignty, but one is 
tempted to think that it really is another form of erotic sovereignty, now in 
a frenzy of fragmentation or self-laceration, now in the orgy of a generalized 
libido dominandi that prefers to think of itself as a new libido, how bitter, 
now truculent, about the failure of its previous big ideas or grand narratives. 
(EB 343)
In the ironic detachment that Vattimo describes, the natural impulse of the 
mind to know and affirm has to be deliberately frustrated, which makes 
our relation to the other essentially mindless. But mindless means soulless 
and heartless; mindlessness is inevitably violent because it is essentially 
empty in its form. Desmond, by contrast, urges us always to be mind-full, 
which means among other things to act toward the other with intelligence 
intact. It is not an accident that the word ‘mindful’, beyond its literal 
sense, connotes for us a loving attention, a positive attitude of active recep-
tivity. Desmond helpfully describes Vattimo’s “weak thought” ­(pensiero 
debole) as a “debilitated mindfulness in the wake of the great foundational-
isms of modern philosophy: deflationary finitism after a period of inflation-
ary self-infinitizing thought” (IST 132n). This attempt at deflation 
presupposes 
a 
modern 
rationalistic 
and 
objectivistic—ultimately, 
Cartesian—sense of foundation, as if this were the only sort possible. But 
8 We might consider, in this regard, Vattimo’s somewhat notorious support for the vio-
lence of Hamas.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

52
there are deeper resources to draw on in response to modern rationalism, 
which do not allow modernity to set the terms.
To unfold these resources, let us explore a bit further what the mind is 
‘full’ of, in the mindfulness Desmond both argues for and enacts in his 
own mode of thinking. What is the positive reality that carries us beyond 
opposition without compromising genuine and good difference? 
Overcoming the opposition between truth and love requires a recovery of 
the mystery of being, what Desmond refers elsewhere to as its ‘intimate 
strangeness’:
The community of being as good comes to indeterminate mindfulness in 
the innerness of selving that is the mysterious coming to self in primal self-­
awakening to the ‘to be’—a coming that is of the essence to singular self-
hood and yet irreducibly communal, at once a relation to itself and a relation 
to what is other. It includes a relation to self given to itself, not by itself, but 
by the agape of the origin; and given to itself, not solely for itself, but in 
relation to all that is other. (ISB 171)
We note first of all that this ‘fullness’ of mind is not a wealth, a self-satisfied 
possessiveness, that would lord it over the needy. Because of the very 
nature of the good being that fills the mind, a being that does not belong 
to the ego as its exclusive property, an object under its sovereign control, 
this wealth is perfectly coincident with a radical poverty.9 In this case, the 
more securely it is possessed, the more the self is genuinely open to what 
is other than the self, and in communion in principle with that other. The 
proper subjective disposition of ‘being true’, with all of the virtues of kind-
ness and hospitality this disposition entails, thus ‘arrives’ as a response to 
the prior truth of being. Arguably, as a result of the forgetfulness of being, 
the sense of ‘being true’ has tended to survive in the modern era in the 
‘subjectivized’, and thus impoverished, form that Rousseau granted it and 
Nietzsche celebrated: Truth as sincerity, a refusal to shift away from one’s 
personal convictions: ‘To thine own self be true’! Such a being true is 
ultimately indistinguishable from mere self-assertion, and Vattimo is right 
to want to overcome this one-sidedness. But without the truth of being, 
the only alternative to self-assertion is a kind of self-contempt. Freedom 
with respect to one’s convictions can in this respect only be the negative 
9 For a fuller development of this particular sense of poverty in philosophy, see the essay 
entitled “Religion and the Poverty of Philosophy” in IST 105–133.
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

53
form, ‘freedom from’ my convictions, and indeed freedom from the 
truth’s possession of me that takes place in those convictions. For 
Desmond, by contrast, there is a positive freedom that results from a 
deeper truth. His recovery of the mystery of being opens up a different 
sense of ‘being true’. For him, it means a con-fidence, a fidelity that is 
responsive to a presence that precedes it.10 As Desmond explains, “if faith 
is a confidence, something is confided to thought, and out of this confid-
ing, thinking has confidence that its being is to be in relation to being as 
true” (IST 202). This confidence is a fidelity to myself, but contrary to the 
assumptions that drive nearly all the discussions in modern and postmod-
ern thought, the recognition of the mystery of being reveals that my very 
own self is a participation in something greater than my self; the self-­
exceeds its own borders, and this excess is constitutive of its very being, its 
identity. I exist only as always-already a member of a community, originally 
from within the embrace of man and woman and the natural difference 
between them, as part of the community of a family, a neighborhood, a 
polis and so forth. I cannot be true to myself, understood in the light of 
the first truth of being, without simultaneously being true in all of these 
other ways. There is no opposition between self and other; they are rather 
reciprocally joined in the gift of being.
Heidegger has famously criticized the notion of truth as correctness, 
showing that correctness is possible only given a prior truth of being, 
which he interprets as an openness, a ‘clearing’, that enables a correspon-
dence between the mind and particular things in any given instance. 
Desmond offers something similar, though his account does not eclipse 
the solidity, the certainty, of our coming to knowledge in the way that 
Heidegger’s account arguably does. For Desmond, it is indeed the case 
that we can pose the ‘what is’ question and trust that we will be able to 
receive an answer to this question in any given case, indeed a clear answer 
that we can formulate in propositions. Whereas Heidegger tends to speak 
in a dark and largely negative language, Desmond is altogether affirmative, 
and this seems to be true because of the intimate universality of the truth 
that belongs to being. This truth, according to Desmond, comes first; it is 
prior, it is always already there before us. Its priority makes a claim on us, 
but it is a claim that liberates. In the conventional perspective (which we 
have been suggesting Vattimo concedes, perhaps in spite of himself), truth 
is nothing more than an attribute of our knowledge, and so of our claims. 
10 See ‘The Confidence of Thought’ in ISB 202–230.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

54
To assert the truth of a proposition, in this case, is to grant a kind of abso-
luteness to the particular grasp that I, as an autonomous agent, have man-
aged to achieve. As Vattimo explains, to make a truth claim is to isolate a 
single perspective from the infinity of possible perspectives and to accord 
that perspective a privilege that is denied to all the others.11 This cannot 
but appear unjust, and indeed uncharitable. But this interpretation takes 
for granted that there is nothing beyond the infinity of perspectives, which 
is to say that truth is an adjective that can apply only to a subjective appro-
priation of a thing. It takes for granted that there is no truth of being as 
such.
The perspective changes radically, so to speak, when we recognize truth 
in its properly ontological or metaphysical sense. For William Desmond, 
to assert the truth of a proposition is to move in the opposite direction 
from what we described earlier—or better, to move in two directions at 
once. The lover of truth makes a claim, to be sure, but this claim is expres-
sive of a more fundamental claim on me, a claim that enables my own 
claim. In confidently asserting the truth of a proposition, I am trusting not 
just myself, but myself only because I place my trust in something greater 
than myself. I am entrusting myself when I make a truth claim. Our auton-
omy as agents is not denied, but it is integrated in the more fundamental 
presence of the truth of being. As Desmond puts it, quite beautifully:
there is a heteronomy at work here but it is no squashing otherness. It is 
releasing and enabling of the very search for truth, and this prior enabling is 
not determinate thought, nor determined through ourselves alone, hence it 
cannot be defined in the logic of autonomy. This prior enabling is just what 
allows us to be relatively autonomous at all. We would not be autonomous 
were not autonomy enabled by something prior to and other to autonomy. 
Self-determining thinking is released into its own freedom to think for itself 
by an enabling resource that is not itself, a source not to be captured in 
terms of this or that determinate thought, or by thought’s determination by 
and for itself. There is more that allows thinking to be itself more than itself. 
(ISB 217)
To describe the radical shifting of perspective that occurs here, Desmond 
coins a phrase, inspired by a Wordsworth poem, a phrase that turns out 
11 Hence, the connection he draws between his version of hermeneutics, as opening up an 
infinity of interpretations, and (modern) democracy: see Chapter 8 of Vattimo (2004, 
pp. 90–101).
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

55
perspective, so to speak, around on itself: He speaks of a “beholding 
from”, an admiring gaze that is not an intentional act that originates in a 
subject and terminates in an object. Instead, it is a beholding that origi-
nates from an already given unity, we might say, between the subject and 
object, so that my act of beholding sources beyond my act, and thus takes 
on the character of a participation in a beholding that is greater than just 
me alone. Desmond associates this “beholding from” with what he calls 
“astonishment”.12
It is right here that we meet up with what I believe is one of Desmond’s 
most powerful insights, and I would suggest that it is precisely this insight, 
even more perhaps than the notion of the ‘between’ that is most often 
associated with him, that gives his thought its most distinctive color and 
depth. This insight is what Desmond calls the ‘passio essendi’, the ‘patience 
of being’, which he reveals to be the more original root of the ‘conatus 
essendi’, so fundamental to the thought of Spinoza, and therefore to the 
whole modern world. For Spinoza, the conatus is a striving after self-­
preservation. But for Desmond, this striving is not what is most basic—to 
think that it is, is to miss the most fundamental meaning of being. To exist 
at all is to have been given being: “We do not first choose our being or 
freedom; both are first given to us; and being given, we begin to give our-
selves to ourselves” (EB 368). This givenness of our being or our freedom 
is not simply an inert starting point, which we regrettably have no control 
over but which allows us, once we accept it, to have control over every-
thing else. Instead, givenness abides as a genuine point of origin: “There is 
an ontological patience in our being received into being of which we 
always continue to be the recipients. Its mindful counterpart is astonish-
ment and marvel at being at all, and marvel at the good of being” (IU 
402). This grateful reception of what is given is the anchor, we might say, 
of truth: “There is a deeper level of fidelity and ‘doing justice’” than simply 
being sure to carry out our theory in practice, Desmond explains: “This is 
the more primordial level of the patience of being, patience in being in 
true” (IU 144). Desmond makes clear that a recognition of this dimension 
eventually requires an openness to religion, or more specifically an open-
ness to the God who is already gift in himself—which would explain why 
the dilemma we have been discussing would coincide with a marginalizing 
of religion, and why neither Vattimo’s death of the Logos nor Heidegger’s 
radically ‘a-theistic’ thinking suffices in the end to carry us beyond the 
dilemma. But this givenness is also necessarily mediated in and through the 
12 ‘Ways of Wondering: Beyond the Barbarism of Reflection’ in ISB 260–300, here: 266.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

56
very concrete relationships with others that constitute our existence: By 
virtue of the intimate strangeness, the intimate universality, of being, we 
relate already to ourselves as other, but then of course to the others that 
constitute our family, the other members of our various communities and 
so forth. If Spinoza interprets the conatus essendi as an essentially non-
analogous drive to self-preservation,13 then Desmond, who reads this 
conatus as rooted in the prior passio essendi, is able, for his part, to bring 
out its etymological sense, echoing an insight from the French poet Paul 
Claudel14: conatus is a being-born-with, it is the self’s discovery of itself as 
always-already intertwined in and with the other as a co-participant in the 
great mystery of being: “There is something in self-­affirmation that relativ-
izes self-affirmation. There is something in its self-­affirmation communi-
cating of its being given to be at all, something making it porous relative to 
what is other than itself, and porous not just as servile passivity” (IU 136).
What does all of this imply for the relation between truth and love? To 
reject metaphysics is to render inescapable an opposition between the two. 
In this case, we may wish to affirm love, but it cannot be a faithful love, 
cannot be true, and cannot do justice to the truth of love. The absolute 
self-sacrifice of such a love will turn out to be the flip side of an intractable 
narcissism because an unattainable other can make no real claim on me 
beyond what my sovereign ego wishes, ad libitum, to take upon itself. But 
the intimate universal reveals both that this claim cannot finally be reduced 
to a project of my own making, some form of idol or means of mere self-­
gratification or self-glorification, and at the same time that the claim of the 
other nevertheless moves me already from within, it remains a claim to 
what I have already begun to respond before any deliberate consent, as it 
were. This is why the response takes the form of fidelity, being true, doing 
justice, to what is already given. Being true is a response to a claim that 
both comes to me from without and addresses me from within, and so 
bears the same paradoxes of inwardness and self-transcendence that are 
inescapably a part of love. Because the claim arises from a place deeper 
than the self, whether mine or the other’s, I am able in my response to 
draw on resources that exceed my inevitably all-too-narrow intentions, 
and able to touch the other intimately, to communicate in a profoundly 
effective way a goodness greater than myself. In this way, devotion to 
13 Robert Spaemann has shown the profound implications of Spinoza’s removal of analogy 
from his interpretation of nature’s tendency to self-preservation: See, for example, ‘Nature’ 
in Spaemann (2015, pp. 27–29) and ‘Bourgeois Ethics and Non-Teleological Ontology’ in 
Spaemann (2015, pp. 48–50).
14 IU 135. Claudel develops his notion of ‘co-naissance’, ‘being born with’, in Claudel 
(1957, p. 1060 ff).
 
D. C. SCHINDLER

57
truth entails, not an oppressive imposition of my own ideas on the other, 
but a mysterious intertwining of the two of us, an intertwining that is 
captured with exquisite beauty in St. Augustine’s description of the genu-
ine act of teaching: In such an act, he says:
the feeling of compassion [compatientis affectus] is so strong that, when our 
listeners are touched by us as we speak and we are touched by them as they 
learn, each of us comes to dwell in the other; and so they speak in us what 
they hear, while we in some way learn in them what we teach.15
In the place of autonomous agents acting on each other from the outside, 
forcing into the center their own inevitably partial conceptions of things, we 
have co-inhering actors, who dwell in each other because each arises from an 
intimate presence that transcends them both. William Desmond’s intimate 
universal reveals, in a word, that veritas and caritas are not at odds but 
belong essentially together in a unitas, which is ultimately the unity of being.
Bibliography
Aquinas, Thomas. 1932. Quaestiones disputatae De potentia dei. Trans. English 
Dominicans. Westminster, MD: The Newman Press.
Augustine. 2017. De catechizandis rudibus. Unpublished Trans. Michael Camacho.
Claudel, Paul. 1957. L’art poétique. In Oeuvre Poétique. Paris: Gallimard.
Gilson, Etienne. 1999. The Unity of Philosophical Experience: The Medieval 
Experiment, the Cartesian Experiment, the Modern Experiment. San Francisco: 
Ignatius Press.
Schindler, D.C. 2008. Plato’s Critique of Impure Reason: On Goodness and Truth 
in the Republic. Washington, DC: CUA Press.
Spaemann, Robert. 2015. The Robert Spaemann Reader. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Vattimo, Gianni. 2004. Nihilism and Emancipation: Ethics, Politics, and Law. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
———. 2007. After Christianity. New York: Columbia University Press.
15 Augustine (2017, 12.17). I am grateful to Michael Camacho for pointing this passage 
out to me; the translation is Michael’s. I would also like more generally to acknowledge help-
ful suggestions by Dennis Vanden Auweele in preparing this chapter.
  TRUE BEING AND BEING TRUE: METAXOLOGY AND THE RETRIEVAL… 

59
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_4
CHAPTER 4
Hermeneutical Selving as Metaxological 
Selving: Bridging the Perceived Gap Between 
Theological Hermeneutics and Metaphysics
Daniel Minch
One major impetus behind William Desmond’s work has been crafting a 
suitable response to what he perceives to be problems, contradictions, and 
aporiai that have arisen in Western thought, and in post-Hegelian philoso-
phy particularly. The reduction of the cosmos from a rich interplay of 
transcendent and immanent dimensions, to an objective immanent ‘there-
ness’, is a multifaceted historical phenomenon that goes by many names: 
the disenchantment of the world, secularization, demythologization, and, 
in Desmond’s terms, ‘postulatory finitism’. The philosophical trend of 
‘postulatory finitism’ begins with the proposition that finite immanence is 
the whole of reality, and that there is no transcendence, at least not in the 
way that previous eras had spoken about such a concept in terms of a high-
est principle, ground of Being, or a creator-God. Desmond has referred to 
this ultimate form of transcendence as a power that is “original, creative 
possibilizing beyond determinate possibility, and ‘real’ beyond all 
D. Minch (*) 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: daniel.minchjr@kuleuven.be

60
­determinate realization, beyond all self-determining self-realization”.1 As 
such, it is essentially a “hyperbolic sense of transcendence, bringing to mind 
the question of God beyond the immanence of transcendence in nature 
and human being” (GB 23).
Postulatory finitism precludes the possibility of an ‘outside’ or a beyond 
for humanity to reach for, and it is meant, at least in some cases, to redirect 
our focus to the historical reality in which humanity finds itself and to 
shape that in a better, more reasonable, or more humane way. It has other 
effects, however, including the reorientation of our view of the cosmos 
around a fundamentally anthropocentric model—one which ignores or 
re-narrates the struggles that humanity has always had with finitude. The 
enigma of finitude always lies in the unstable collision of the finite and the 
infinite and the concrete experience of being a historical being whose pur-
pose in the universe is unclear. Desmond contends that philosophers of 
finitude, those who insist that immanent finitude is ‘all there is’, neither 
accurately understand nor describe finitude.2 Instead, the “turn to our-
selves, and to ourselves only”, risks merely creating ‘counterfeit doubles’ 
of finitude (IST 43). The rejection of transcendence, and turn to imma-
nentism, therefore leads to a misunderstanding of finitude, as well as a 
kind of forced silence in philosophy about God and of transcendence’s 
nature and possibility.
When viewed historically, however, this contemporary silence about 
God and transcendence is “the anomaly rather than the rule” (Desmond 
2010, p. 101).3 Desmond’s work presents a rehabilitation of the ideas 
of metaphysics and God in a way that takes the recent history of philo-
sophical skepticism quite seriously; however, he does not shy away from 
contextualizing the critics of theistic metaphysics or from showing how 
isolated they are in the Western philosophical tradition. The problems 
with traditional metaphysics and transcendence have not been confined 
to philosophy alone. Theology has also had to contend with an ongoing 
‘crisis of metaphysics’, caused in part by a problematic understanding of 
finitude inherited from neoscholasticism. In what follows, I examine 
1 Desmond terms this ‘Third Transcendence’, alongside the ‘First Transcendence’ (being 
as exterior other) and ‘Second Transcendence’ (being as self-transcendence) (HG 2–7 and 
GB 22).
2 He ascribes this position to Nietzsche, Heidegger, Sartre, and the ‘anti-metaphysical’ 
traditions of the twentieth century. See Desmond (2011, pp. 130–133).
3 See also DDO 11 where Desmond (rightly) regards ‘ontotheology’ as a bogeyman “con-
jured up to frighten philosophical thought away from origins.”
 
D. MINCH

61
the theological ‘turn to experience’ that occurred in Catholic theology 
following the Second Vatican Council as a way of correcting the theo-
logical and philosophical accounts of finitude in relation to transcen-
dence. In particular, I draw upon the thought of the Flemish theologian 
Edward Schillebeeckx, whose work in the area of theological hermeneu-
tics has proven particularly important and influential. Schillebeeckx rec-
ognized human experience as the precondition for religious faith, and so 
he applied hermeneutical principles to the experience of faith in the mod-
ern world. I then attempt to bridge the gap between hermeneutics and 
metaphysics by showing how Schillebeeckx’s theological-anthropologi-
cal structure corresponds to the process of human ‘selving’ as elaborated 
by William Desmond, especially in his programmatic volume Being and 
the Between. In that section, I also apply the fourfold sense of being as it 
corresponds to human experience. Essentially, a hermeneutics of experi-
ence presents the interplay between transcendence and immanence in a 
theological and metaphysical way without explicitly setting out to ‘do 
metaphysics’. A hermeneutics of experience allows us to see the relation 
of the finite to the infinite in its different modes, opening up paths for 
dialogue between philosophy and theology in their respective modes of 
thought about God and humanity. By way of a conclusion, I point to the 
importance of hermeneutics for reconceiving ‘metaphysics’ as an empow-
ering and dynamic structure rather than as a static and hierarchical order.
The Crisis of Metaphysics in Theology
The ‘crisis of metaphysics’ was, and remains, a slow-burning issue in 
Catholic theology that is intimately connected to the rise of postulatory 
finitism. It is a problem with thought and paradigms, but it is also a prob-
lem of order. This includes the difficulties that arose alongside seculariza-
tion and industrialization, particularly in the heavily Hegelian tradition of 
German Liberal Protestantism. However, the issue is rooted further back 
than the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Both Edward Schillebeeckx 
and Henri de Lubac have traced the rise of secularization to the thirteenth 
century and the postulation of a ‘natural law’ between human conscience 
and the divine law (de Lubac 1998, pp. 32–52; Schillebeeckx 2014d, 
pp. 33–34 [56–58]).4 Eventually, this led to the development of the theory 
4 All citations from Schillebeeckx’s Collected Works series also include the pagination of the 
original English editions in square brackets.
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

62
of ‘pure nature’ such that humanity has both a natural and a supernatural 
end, effectively separating the realms of the divine from the worldly and 
thereby leading to a situation in which the world is understood as anthro-
pocentric, or even anthropomorphic, and can be forced to conform to 
humanity’s needs and wishes. The postulation of a ‘gap’ between God, as 
creator, and the creation that is given to itself to become itself is a develop-
ment from the Augustinian ‘vertical’ ordering of the cosmos along a hier-
archy of being (Schillebeeckx 2014d, pp. 33–35 [55–60]). The problem 
was that the theological postulate of a ‘horizontal’, immanent realm tended 
to be developed in two directions: either God was banished from the realm 
of immanence altogether, or God continued to remain a part of it as the 
highest rational principle, collapsing the infinite into the finite. God was 
gradually ‘naturalized’, and the latter model merged into the former in 
some cases. Enlightenment thinkers increasingly identified God with per-
fect reason, transmuting the creator into the universal substance of the 
cosmos, the idealized ‘book of nature’, or even the World-Spirit working 
out its own self-determination in history.
It may come as a surprise that, in Catholic theology, the ‘modern’ natu-
ralizing tendency was carried to an extreme at the First Vatican Council, in 
which an anathema was proclaimed against anyone who denied that God 
could be known purely through created things or in the light of natural 
reason.5 Here, the medieval vertical dimension had been fused closely with 
the horizontal: the cosmos was ordered hierarchically by divine fiat, and as 
a part of that hierarchy, human social relations needed to conform to spe-
cific medieval patterns in order to reflect the rational, objective reality of 
God’s truth. The revival of the scholastic method in the nineteenth century 
was partly a theological reaction against the modern world, prompted in no 
small part by the spread of democratic reforms across Europe, as well as by 
the loss of the Papacy’s temporal power and authority (Schoof 2008, 
pp. 30–32). The emergent neoscholastic synthesis was a departure from the 
historical and sacramental work of the Tübingen School and John Henry 
Newman, as well as a capitulation to the spirit of the age. As a method, it 
sought to be an analytic, objective, and an “apparently mathematical way of 
5 See (Pius IX 1870, Canon II.2) “Si quis dixerit, Deum unum et verum, Creatorem et 
Dominum nostrum, per ea, quae facta sunt, naturali rationis humanae lumine certo cognosci 
non posse; anathema sit”. We must now interpret the truth of  this doctrine apart from 
the hierarchical metaphysical structure that produced it. See also Schoof (2008, pp. 178–179).
 
D. MINCH

63
dealing with an ever increasing number of more and more precisely defined 
concepts” (Schoof 2008, p.  34). It emphasized the intellectual and 
supremely rational aspect of faith and revelation, adopting the terminology 
of rational certainty from the historical and physical sciences of the time. 
This separated the experiential dimensions of human life in the world from 
the supernatural realm, which could be reached through reason and appeals 
to authority. In the short term, this provided the church with a rational 
defense against its perceived enemies, but in the long term, it helped to 
precipitate the crisis of metaphysics once the foundations of neoscholasti-
cism were undermined by social change and by rigorous study of the 
sources of ‘tradition’ itself.
Liberal Protestantism also tended to identify revelation with social 
order, but with that of the modern nation state and its political ambitions, 
rather than with the Ancien Régime. Metaphysics, in both senses, was 
about order. Both of these visions came grinding to a halt when they col-
lided with the reality of the First World War (Hall 1999). The Catholic 
synthesis emerged less badly damaged from the war, thanks in part to strict 
methodological limitations on theological inquiry. Eventually, however, 
theologians working within this framework began to return to the writings 
of medieval and patristic authors themselves rather than to the narrowly 
constructed manuals of doctrine and commentaries on those sources. It 
was, therefore, from within the neoscholastic school that the most signifi-
cant cracks began to appear. This Ressourcement movement, coupled with 
the early successes of Catholic Action, the worker priest movement, and 
the massive social changes that occurred after the Second World War, fur-
ther widened those cracks in the socio-metaphysical worldview (Schelkens 
et al. 2013, pp. 101–126). The situation only came to a head in 1962 with 
the opening of the Second Vatican Council, when the bishops and theolo-
gians gathered in Rome to find a new way forward and a renewed under-
standing of finite humanity’s relation to God and to the world.
The Unfinished Humanum and the ‘Secular’ World
New approaches introduced in Catholic theology in the wake of Vatican II 
helped to break up the older, static models of natural philosophy and the 
reified structures of nature and grace which were closely associated with 
metaphysical ‘order’ (de Lubac 1998, pp. 32–36; Schillebeeckx 2014d, 
pp. 33–34 [56–58]). One of the most important factors was the Pastoral 
Constitution on the Church in the Modern World, Gaudium et Spes, 
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

64
which was finally approved after a lengthy and controversial debate at the 
Council’s final session (O’Malley 2008, pp.  204–205 and 258–268). 
Edward Schillebeeckx had, in an unofficial capacity, influenced the forma-
tion of the document, and he was in turn influenced by it once it was 
officially promulgated (Bauer 2012; Borgman 2003, pp.  334–337 and 
350–351; Minch 2018b). Schillebeeckx’s early anthropological reflections 
on Gaudium et Spes set much of the tone for his later work. He recognized 
that humanity’s self-understanding influences and reciprocally shapes 
human understanding of both God and the world.
Whether or not we consider the world to be a meaningless thereness, a 
preordained divine order, or a given realm of situated and historical free-
dom matters for what humanity is and becomes in the world. Gaudium et 
Spes affirms that the world is a humanized world, one which can be shaped 
to fit humanity’s needs (Schillebeeckx 1973, p. 56). The ‘natural’ state of 
the world, as we find it, is not a preordained order that cannot be disturbed, 
just as human social relations are not divinely instituted. Furthermore, for 
Schillebeeckx, the human creation of a more livable world is itself ‘natural’ 
in the sense that it is an intrinsic ability of a humanity that experiences itself 
as “a being who makes history” (Schillebeeckx 1973, p. 81). This ability 
can and has been abused, but the fundamental image of humanity and 
world is now “basically a project for the future. Man’s [sic] aim is to build 
a new world” (Schillebeeckx 1973, p. 81). From this it follows that the 
“definition of human existence is not a preexistent datum”, as a historical 
being oriented toward the future (Schillebeeckx 1978a, p. 28). There are 
two reasons for this, from the perspective of a Christian anthropology: first, 
the human is “a being caught up in history”, and as historical is fundamen-
tally unfinished—an admixture of potentiality and actuality, partially deter-
mined by context and partially self-­determining; second, the expectation of 
meaning and the process of self-realization is an eschatological reality 
(Schillebeeckx 1978a, p. 30). The meaning of the whole of reality is par-
tially present, but is also hidden in the salvific future that is yet to come.
Humanity, therefore, is fundamentally unfinished in the sense of both 
the unfinished humanum as a whole and historical individuals who coexist 
in societies. There is no a priori normative definition of human nature, of 
what is humanly desirable, or what counts as ‘salvation’. What we have 
instead are multiple historical images and descriptions that are often com-
plementary, but are also, just as often, fragmentary and even contradictory 
(Schillebeeckx 2014e, p. 58 [65]). In the 1970s, Schillebeeckx articulated 
a set of seven ‘anthropological constants’ that provide a “kind of system of 
 
D. MINCH

65
coordinates which focus on the human person-identify within social cul-
ture” (Schillebeeckx 1978a, p.  31). Elsewhere, I have worked out the 
importance of these constants in excavating the transcendental foundation 
upon which they have been built (Minch 2017). I argue that the phenom-
enological constants—such as embodiment, existence as co-existence, the 
space-time dimension of human life, the irreducible synthesis of all coor-
dinates, and the resulting necessary pluralism of creation—all rely upon a 
more fundamental ontological point. Here, I more fully elaborate on this 
‘ontological constant’ in order to connect it to Desmond’s metaphysics of 
‘the between’. Schillebeeckx continues to be an important thinker in part 
because of his commitment to hermeneutics and his deep understanding 
and integration of Hans-Georg Gadamer’s insistence that ‘hermeneutics’ 
is “not proposing a method; [it is] describing what is the case” (Gadamer 
2004a, p. 512). In other words, the hermeneutical worldview taken over 
by Schillebeeckx from Gadamer and Heidegger, does not merely judge 
between competing interpretations of the world. It is a thoroughgoing 
examination of the very foundations of being itself, and therefore is an 
attempt to present an ontological position.
The most fundamental point from which Schillebeeckx works is what, 
in one of his last major works, he names ‘the absolute limit’ (absolute 
grens). This ‘limit’ does not describe limit situations, such as being unable 
to run very fast, or to read without one’s glasses. It is rather, “an experi-
ence of an absolute limit in the constant experience of all our relative 
limits” (Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 76 [78]). It is the experience of radical 
contingency or finitude that is present in all types of experience, through 
which we come to realize that we “are neither lords nor masters of our-
selves, far less of nature and history” (Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 76 [78]). 
The absolute limit is not a proof for God’s existence, and is in fact recog-
nized by atheistic philosophers as a fundamental element of human experi-
ence. The facticity of human finitude is not, however, an essential flaw that 
has to be overcome through technology, or a secularized eschatology of 
social acceleration—the realization of all human possibilities in one life-
time (see Rosa 2003). In fact, it could be argued that many of the prob-
lems that humanity has caused stem from the denial of this limit or from 
the hubristic assumption of a place of judgment and manipulation—acting 
as if we were in fact the lords and masters of ourselves and of history. The 
rejection of the absolute limit is in fact one interpretation of it. As 
Schillebeeckx recognized, the “real fact of this limit also compels us to 
interpret it” (Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 77 [79]). This throws us back to the 
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

66
hermeneutical nature of human existence: the human subject as a whole 
comes up against its own existential limit in experience, which it is com-
pelled to interpret. Experiences make up the various ‘parts’ of the larger 
whole of the self, and the subject becomes different in each experiential 
moment, both quantitatively (more experience) and qualitatively (differ-
ently experienced). Simply by existing in the world, the human subject is 
caught up in the interpretive movement between ‘part’ and ‘whole’ that 
constitutes all of experience. The subject experiences with a horizon of 
past experiences and stands in the stream of multiple traditions—these 
provide the subject the raw material of being: language. People are given 
language, and “no one is sovereign over his or her own speech. As a begin-
ning, we can say that the speaker appeals to a language which he or she did 
not invent, but which was already given to the speaker” (Schillebeeckx 
1983, p. 8).
Freedom in being, because it is historical, is not merely ‘given’—it must 
be realized through active participation in the world in which we find 
ourselves; this involves using, exercising, and changing our language and 
self-understanding (Schillebeeckx 2014c, pp. 22–23 [24–25]). The real-
ization of freedom and the process of becoming are therefore hermeneuti-
cal. In experience, which is an encounter with an other, human narratives 
can change. This occurs both with regard to the (re-)interpretation of the 
past and in the anticipation of the future. The type of historicity possessed 
by the finite human subject is essentially a narrative historicity. What 
allows for the back-and-forth movement of the self in experience, from the 
inside to the outside and back again, is the fact that it is finite to begin 
with. The absolute limit constitutes the border between self and other. It 
gives a point for us to ‘make contact’ with an other and it provides a basis 
for thinking the subject in terms of an original unity capable of being 
affected and capable of experience. The finitude of the human being is the 
ontological constant that grounds and makes possible all attempts at 
determining what it is to be a human being in the world. Because humans 
are finite, they can conceive of a whole ‘self’ while also recognizing 
­otherness as that which is not the self.6 Gadamer’s understanding of a 
fore-­conception of completeness is also the projection of the wholeness of 
beings in time and space: we hermeneutically perceive and complete par-
tial perceptions as meaningful ‘wholes’ that are then open to possible revi-
sion, based on how they appear in experience (Gadamer 2004b, p. 364). 
6 Here, we have the interplay between Desmond’s Transcendence 1 and 2. See GB 23–24.
 
D. MINCH

67
This preconceived wholeness conditions the hermeneutical movement: 
the whole is expected and known from its parts, while the parts are rein-
terpreted in light of the whole (Schillebeeckx 1978b, p.  393). Hence, 
humanity is essentially unfinished—it is still becoming what it will be in 
history based on its own self-understanding and interpretation of the 
world in which it exists. The humanum as the eschatological manifestation 
of a collective humanity in its universal resurrected form is, in our continu-
ing history, always partially hidden and obscured by our finite existence. It 
is also given shape and form at the absolute limit of human finitude 
(Schillebeeckx 2014a, pp. 830–834 [835–839]).
The Metaphysical Bridge and the Construction 
of the Self
Hermeneutics, as proposed by Schillebeeckx, runs with the essential 
insight that limitation and historicity are features of being, not flaws. It is 
what makes the movement of beings possible. Following Gadamer, 
Schillebeeckx is not really proposing a method, although it was that as 
well, he is describing how beings are and become themselves. There is a 
metaphysical structure at work here, although it is something he would 
not have named as metaphysics, partially in order to distance himself from 
the neoscholastic framework of deduction from absolute principles, and 
wandering speculations about heaven, hell, purgatory, and the nature of 
the soul. In order to draw out what is really at stake here, I try to create a 
metaphysical ‘bridge’ from Schillebeeckx’s hermeneutical ontology to 
William Desmond’s explication and understanding of ‘selving’. This 
includes the fourfold sense of being: the univocal, equivocal, dialectical, 
and the metaxological. Each of these plays a role in the overall construc-
tion of human subjects in being.
For Schillebeeckx, experience is far from the simple interaction of acci-
dentally and extrinsically related objects. Beings are not merely ­self-­enclosed 
by the absolute limit like monadic atoms where relations between them 
are nonessential to their own composition. This would portray beings as 
eternal and unchangeable essences instead of hermeneutical subjects. 
Rather, in the encounter with the unexpected—the ‘revelatory’—and the 
other in experience, we encounter “what we ourselves had never thought 
of and never produced [which] occurs to us as a gift” (Schillebeeckx 
2014b, p. 21 [22]). Because language is the medium and mediator of 
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

68
being, human subjects are all mutually implicated in one another’s inter-
pretative horizons at various levels. In Desmond’s terminology, the human 
subject as finite is not self-grounding, pointing to both an asymmetry 
between finite being and its absolute ground, as well as allowing for the 
experience of otherness and ‘genuine plurality’ (DDO 200). In being 
itself, the subject comes up against that which is other in experience, and 
by encountering its own limit it is forced to recognize an ‘outside’ to the 
horizon of experience and interpretation possessed by the subject that had 
constituted its self-understanding and the source of its identity. This leads 
to “a new reinterpretation of our own identity”, essentially a ‘disintegra-
tion’ and then a new “reintegration with a different orientation” 
(Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 22 [22]).
What occurs in experience is essential to the active process of ‘selving’ 
as described by Desmond—becoming a determinate human subject. In 
coming up against the ‘otherness’ found in lived experience, the self as a 
determinate identity experiences an ecstatic motion away from itself, plac-
ing itself in a position of risk; the encounter with an other, at the absolute 
limit of finitude, always risks the disintegration of identity (see EB 327). 
But this movement, in a second, examined moment, shows that the deter-
minate self is not only itself as a univocally determined element. Here I 
begin to use Desmond’s language about the ‘fourfold sense of being’ to 
describe this movement. The encounter with the other in lived experience 
is always essentially contrastive: the self-same subject meets what is not 
itself and recoils back into itself to re-form with a new and different hori-
zon of expectation and interpretation. There is a spectrum of experiences: 
this is barely noticeable in mundane experience, but in larger more ‘reve-
latory’ experiences, the contrastive nature becomes more exaggerated. 
From the subject’s side, the self is revealed to itself as plural—what was a 
‘one’ is doubled back on itself when it comes up against physical, mental, 
and phenomenological relative limits in the world which bring with them 
the imperative to interpret what occurs at the absolute limit. This equivo-
cal moment of disintegration of determinate identity is both a 
­hermeneutical moment and a movement: “the moment of understanding 
is the moment of interpretation is the moment of application” (Godzieba 
2013, p. 92). The doubled self shows us that we are not yet ourselves, but 
we cannot seek ourselves without first being a self in some respect (BB 
110–111). The self as self-transcending is doubled from within its own 
structure, and it is intrinsically linked with the other beings around it by 
provoking and mediating this movement. In other words, things are not 
 
D. MINCH

69
only themselves because of themselves, but because of their relations with 
others, or their mutual relativity (BB 150).
The subject begins, therefore, in the univocal mode, centered in its 
own identity, but it is immediately de-centered through the mediation of 
itself in experience. There is no pure univocal or equivocal moment, 
because both are elements of an essentially dialectical movement between 
self and other, both ad intra and ad extra, and between the part and the 
whole. The structure of dialectic is rhythmic—it is immediately itself (uni-
vocal), but its self-relatedness reveals another depth dimension (equivo-
cal), and other-relatedness returns it to itself, both changing and 
confirming the being as itself (dialectic). The self can give itself, but only 
because it is already given to itself to become itself (BB 153). Throughout 
this process, the identity of the subject remains. Barring some traumatic 
psychological or physical violence, the disintegration of the self in herme-
neutical experience is always essentially constructive, and “self opposition 
serves the purpose of fuller self-becoming” (BB 286). Equivocal being is 
mediated through self-becoming into a more determinate self. What we 
do not yet have, however, is the metaxological sense of being. This move-
ment could close in on itself and end with the dialectical as pure self-
mediation. The ways in which Schillebeeckx and Desmond avoid this 
outcome approach the problem from different starting points, but they 
are essentially complementary.
While Desmond takes what might be called a ‘transcendental-­
philosophical’ approach, Schillebeeckx begins from the historical situated-
ness of humanity: human existence is always co-existence and, therefore, is 
also intrinsically related to historically contingent social and instructional 
structures (Schillebeeckx 1978a, pp.  34–35). That is not to say that 
Desmond disregards lived experience altogether, but it is neither his focus 
nor is it his primary starting point for reflection. Desmond’s work is ‘tran-
scendental’ in the sense that it begins from a reflection on at least quasi-­
universal structures that make up the conditions of possibility for 
experience. As he himself states, philosophical approaches are “always 
mediated to some degree by our historical situation” (DDO 11). In con-
trast to the contemporary anthropological model that is dominated by 
‘economic’ relations between rational agents—homo economicus—
Schillebeeckx observes that the “social dimension is not something that is 
added to our person-identity, it is a dimension of this very identity” 
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

70
(Schillebeeckx 1978a, pp. 34–35).7 The ‘historical between’ is a fact of 
human life and mixture of sense and non-sense, even to the point of absurd 
and inexplicable suffering. Any “pretension to take a stand outside the 
historical action and thought of man [sic] is a threat to real humanity” 
(Schillebeeckx 1978a, p. 36).
There cannot be any full closure of the self in its own dialectical move-
ment, since it is produced from a social otherness; even one’s best attempt 
to shut out the world or to instrumentalize others is still very much a reac-
tion to the intrinsic relation that is already given. Schillebeeckx views the 
historical situatedness of humanity within the wider context of coming 
eschatological salvation. This does not mean that he appeals to an extra-­
historical ideological image of universal salvation; on the contrary, we only 
know something about salvation because of the historical fragments that 
have already been experienced and are passed on through traditions of expe-
rience. Moreover, the experiences of suffering and non-sense that are also an 
unavoidable part of human life, what he terms experiences of ‘negative con-
trast’, indicate to us the unfinished character of history and humanity itself—
the total meaning of reality is present, yet unavailable; it can be glimpsed 
through its reverse-image in our appeals for change and our spontaneous 
resistance to inhumanity and suffering. Desmond has also pointed to this 
type of experience and given it ontological roots: the spontaneous recoil 
from suffering and ugliness as a response to our primordial expectation of 
the good (EB 166–177 and 206–209). Hence, we are beings that become 
ourselves in a hermeneutical between. We are between the beginning and 
the end, both of which are in excess of what can be grasped and transfigured 
into a univocal whole. Desmond’s language about beings as ‘open wholes’ 
is an excellent description of creation and of beings as self-determining 
“without being completely determined in themselves” (BB 182).
The eschatological excess that characterizes the mystery of salvation 
points directly toward the ‘overdetermined’ origin as well. Beings are 
promises: they contain the promise of a surplus and, for Schillebeeckx, this 
is an eschatological surplus given by the God who is the future of human-
ity (BB 241; Schillebeeckx 1973, p. 86) The promise of being sends the 
self beyond itself in the first place, placing the agapeic excess prior to the 
attempt of an individual being to fill a gap in itself. There is a self-giving 
7 For the relation of the anthropological constants to economic anthropology, see Minch 
(2018a).
 
D. MINCH

71
agapeic fullness that grounds and produces the precondition for the ek-­
static movement of the self toward the other beyond itself and gives the 
promise of becoming (BB 260).8 Christianity places this fullness at both 
the beginning and at the end. Creation can only be fulfilled at the end 
because its fullness is also already present both now and in the beginning. 
In Desmond’s words: “The giving of being is in excess of any closed ‘for-­
self,’ for if there were only such closed ‘for-selves,’ there would be no giv-
ing of otherness as other; there would only be a circle of self-giving, which 
is no real giving” (BB 185).
Beings, therefore, have a wholeness as for-themselves, but they are not 
closed in on themselves. The self is an open whole, dialectically mediated 
both interiorly and exteriorly. Open wholes are contained within a wider 
whole that is also open and unfinished. The process, or rhythm, is mir-
rored at a larger level. This is metaxological because what creation becomes 
is not contingent upon the origin, only upon how it becomes—the power 
of self-transcendence imparted to creation as its own particular infinitude, 
or the “open promise of creation even in its finitude” (BB 288–289). 
There is a hermeneutic circle in the movement of subjects that become 
selves, empowered by the potencies of being. The metaxological ‘sense’ of 
being allows and underwrites selving as a hermeneutic process, and it pre-
cludes a closure of beings in on themselves from the outset. The ‘between’ 
must, therefore, be thought of in terms of historicity since it is from his-
tory that we can begin to reflect on both origins and ends.
Conclusion: Metaphysics as Originating Process
The defining characteristic of such a hermeneutical-metaxological meta-
physics is that it does not have to rely on conceptions of ‘metaphysics’ that 
have become implausible or were previously experienced as totalitarian 
and oppressive. Essentially, the stress is on the “forming rather than the 
form, on the structuring rather than on the structure” (BB 149). The 
rhythmic process of becoming yields insights into what is ‘above’ the phys-
ical world, but it does not provide us with recipes or a set of instructions 
for ordering the world in correspondence with the structure of being. The 
metaxological-hermeneutical concept of being is always in motion, as a 
8 Erotic desire and ‘erotic selving’ are predicated on a prior agapeic fullness. There is also a 
parallel here to the ‘self as promise’ that is affirmed by being fulfilled in ‘second ethical selv-
ing’. See EB 256–260.
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

72
founding constitution, pattern, or an empowering process, and through 
this motion it enshrines the necessity of internal difference for beings in 
the world as a constant. Without the differentiating power of being, “the 
thing as identifiable would disappear into the resulting absence of distinc-
tion, and we would have the limiting case of the purely homogeneous—
what in former ages was sometimes called materia prima” (DDO 
102–103). By destroying the internal difference of things, all things end 
up the same. Internal differentiation is necessary to distinguish self from 
self, and ultimately self from other. Without this, reality collapses into 
immediate unity, which is only a step on the way to equivocal dissolution. 
Thus, the hermeneutical movement is necessary to maintain the unity of 
selves, who also have the space to become themselves through an encoun-
ter with otherness at the absolute limit.
The absolute limit that stands at the base of human experience is our 
own facticity: “We ourselves are this limit” (Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 76 
[79]). As Desmond says, “we do not draw this limit; it draws us” (DDO 
154). This is a positive indeterminacy, “this limit is also an unlimit: instead 
of confining us, it fulfills and frees us, frees us to the enjoyment of irreduc-
ible otherness” (DDO 154) Finitude is actually a ‘positive power’, as fini-
tude is not just exhausted by the opposition of subject and object, but the 
finite subject is empowered by the hermeneutical movement of becoming 
to both return to itself and return to the other in new and unexpected 
ways. Hence, the dynamic interaction of beings within such a structure 
gives each being access to a kind of infinite, albeit one still constrained by 
the creaturely and hermeneutical limitations of history. This is an ‘inten-
tional infinitude’, or the interior infinitude of the subject within the ongo-
ing hermeneutic circle of the self in its mediation of itself with others. Of 
course, this is an ‘infinite’ in a highly analogical form—it is inexhaustible 
and yet also finite, historically situated and experiential. Intentional fini-
tude bears an analogical relationship with actual infinitude, or the inex-
haustibility of the originary power of being. Both are intimately related, 
and actual infinitude acts as our sustainer and source. “In other words”, 
Schillebeeckx argues, “if God exists, the boundary between God and the 
finite is not on God’s side, but on the side of the finite” (Schillebeeckx 
2014b, p. 77 [79]).
The limitation of finitude and its structure are not based on a lack of 
being, making beings deficient gradations of the ‘perfect Being’ at the 
head of a hierarchical order. To be finite in the empowering flux of being 
also means being ‘secular’ in the sense that what is secular is “that which 
 
D. MINCH

73
is not godly” (Schillebeeckx 2014b, p. 231 [234]). To conceive of the 
world as fundamentally ‘not-god’ does not necessarily capitulate to postu-
latory finitism, because the autonomy of the world is a gift given from the 
absolute origin. It does, however, necessitate that we conceive of ques-
tions about salvation and the ultimate meaning of history quite differently 
from that of a determinate metaphysical order. As autonomous, the world 
and the human history that occurs within it bears some measure of respon-
sibility for what it will be. At the same time, because we are ‘not-god’ we 
must also acknowledge that the final word on the meaning of history is 
not ours. All efforts at self-liberation have limits, codified in the absolute 
limit and seen in our concrete efforts at freely producing salvation and 
liberation in the world, all of which can only be partial, flawed, and con-
tingent. “The history of freedom remains a history of human suffering”, 
which should bring into sharp relief the nature of existence as both limited 
and an absolute gift (Schillebeeckx 2014a, p. 767 [769–770]).
This shift to ‘movement’ does not eliminate the possibility of ethics, 
or of ethical norms, but it should call our attention to the importance of 
history and context for ethical action. It also highlights the fact that all 
attempts to create meaning or to impose order are provisional and 
incomplete. Even the most emphatic and authoritative truth-statement is 
co-­constituted by the context in which it arises. All teleology must, 
therefore, be de-totalized and relativized to a certain extent. What this 
ontological structure reveals to us is something other than the ancient 
and medieval cosmology that thought of ‘the whole’ of reality as finite 
and ordered or ‘enveloped’ by the divine (DDO 146) The eschatological 
expectation of fulfilled and renewed creation gives us a metaphysical per-
spective on present reality, but it does not absolve us from all responsibil-
ity for it. Schillebeeckx has argued that the eschatological nature of 
Christian ­expectation actually radicalizes Christian commitment to the 
world. The hope that comes from the recognition of a ‘hermeneutical 
between’ is, in fact:
a hope against hope, a hope against all despair that comes from our human 
experience which continues to suggest that all our attempts to build a better 
world are in vain. The radical character of this Christian commitment and of 
the surrender to faith cannot be justified in the light of purely human experi-
ence. It is, of its very nature, a hoping in God (explicitly or implicitly) as the 
future for man [sic]. (Schillebeeckx 1973, p. 87)
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

74
A metaphysical view is necessary as a complement to historically situated 
or experiential-expressivist approaches. We must think the origin and the 
end as good, if what lies in between is also to have the potential to be 
good—there is an ontological basis for value itself in being. The process of 
selving points to the goodness of the origin, via the promise of the future. 
This can only be revealed by passing through the proving ground of pres-
ent and past experience, suggesting to us that ontological, or more prop-
erly, eschatological hermeneutics is essentially metaxological.
Bibliography
Bauer, Christian. 2012. Heiligkeit Des Profanen: Spuren Der “école Chenu-­
Schillebeeckx” (H. de Lubac) Auf Dem Zweiten Vatikanum. In Edward 
Schillebeeckx: Impulse Für Theologien Im 21. Jahrhundert/Impetus Towards 
Theologies in the 21st Century, ed. Thomas Eggensperger, Ulrich Engel, and 
Angel F. Méndez Montoya, 67–83. Ostfildern: Grünewald.
Borgman, Erik. 2003. Edward Schillebeeckx: A Theologian in His History. Trans. 
John Bowden. London/New York: Continuum.
Desmond, William. 2010. On God and the Between. In Between Philosophy and 
Theology: Contemporary Interpretations of Christianity, ed. Lieven Boeve and 
Christophe Brabant, 99–125. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
———. 2011. Between Finitude and Infinity: On Hegel’s Sublationary Infinitism. 
In Hegel & the Infinite: Religion, Politics, and Dialectic, Insurrections, ed. 
Slavoj Žižek, Clayton Crockett, and Creston Davis, 115–140. New  York: 
Columbia University Press.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 2004a. Hermeneutics and Historicism (1965). In Truth 
and Method. Transl Joel Weinsheimer and Donald G.  Marshall, 2nd ed., 
507–545. London/New York: Continuum.
———. 2004b. Truth and Method. Trans. Joel Weinsheimer and Donald 
G. Marshall, 2nd ed. London/New York: Continuum.
Godzieba, Anthony J.  2013. Ut Musica Christianitas: Christian History as a 
History of Performances. In The Shaping of Tradition: Context and Normativity, 
Annua Nuntia Lovaniensia, ed. Colby Dickinson, vol. 70, 91–99. Leuven/
Paris/Walpole, MA: Peeters.
Hall, Douglas John. 1999. ‘The Great War’ and the Theologians. In The Twentieth 
Century: A Theological Overview, ed. Gregory Baum, 3–13. Maryknoll, NY: 
Orbis.
de Lubac, S.J. Henri. 1998. The Mystery of the Supernatural. Trans. Rosemary 
Sheed. New York: Herder and Herder/Crossroad.
 
D. MINCH

75
Minch, Daniel. 2017. Re-Examining Edward Schillebeeckx’s Anthropological 
Constants: An Ontological Perspective. In Salvation in the World: The Crossroads 
of Public Theology, T&T Clark Studies in Edward Schillebeeckx, ed. Stephan 
van Erp, Christopher Cimorelli, and Christiane Alpers, vol. 2, 113–130. 
London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
———. 2018a. Economic Theological Anthropology and Metaphysics of Money: 
The Challenge of Optimism for Active Christian Hope. In Driven by Hope: 
Economics and Theology in Dialogue, Christian Perspectives on Leadership and 
Social Ethics, ed. P. Nullens and S. van den Heuvel, vol. 6, 137–150. Leuven: 
Peeters Press.
———. 2018b. Eschatology and Theology of Hope: The Impact of Gaudium et 
Spes on the Thought of Edward Schillebeeckx: Eschatology and Theology of 
Hope. The Heythrop Journal 59: 273–285.
O’Malley, John. 2008. What Happened at Vatican II. Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press.
Pius IX. 1870. Constitutio dogmatica: Dei Filius. Vatican Website, 24 April. 
https://w2.vatican.va/content/pius-ix/la/documents/constitutio-dogmat-
ica-dei-filius-24-aprilis-1870.html.
Rosa, Hartmut. 2003. Social Acceleration: Ethical and Political Consequences of 
a Desynchronized High-Speed Society. Constellations 10 (1): 1–33.
Schelkens, Karim, John A. Dick, and Jürgen Mettepeningen. 2013. Aggiornamento?: 
Catholicism from Gregory XVI to Benedict XVI, Brill’s Series in Church History. 
Vol. 63. Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. 1973. Christian Faith and Man’s Expectation for the 
Future on Earth. In The Mission of the Church. Trans. N.D.  Smith, 51–89. 
New York: Seabury Press.
———. 1978a. Questions on Christian Salvation of and for Man. In Toward 
Vatican III: The Work That Needs to Be Done, ed. David Tracy, Hans Küng, and 
Johann Baptist Metz, 27–44. New York: Gill and Macmillan.
———. 1978b. Theologie der Erfahrung – Sackgasse oder Weg zum Glauben? 
Herderkorrespondenz 92: 391–397.
———. 1983. The Magisterium and Ideology. In Authority in the Church, Annua 
Nuntia Lovaniensia, ed. Piet F.  Fransen, vol. 26, 5–17. Leuven: Leuven 
University Press.
———. 2014a. Christ: The Christian Experience in the Modern World, Collected 
Works of Edward Schillebeeckx. Trans. John Bowden, vol. 7. London: 
Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
———. 2014b. Church: The Human Story of God. Trans. John Bowden, Collected 
Works of Edward Schillebeeckx 10. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
———. 2014c. Linguistic Criteria. In The Understanding of Faith: Interpretation 
and Criticism, Collected Works of Edward Schillebeeckx. Trans. N.D. Smith, 
vol. 5, 19–40. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
  HERMENEUTICAL SELVING AS METAXOLOGICAL SELVING: BRIDGING… 

76
———. 2014d. Secularization and Christian Belief in God. In God the Future of 
Man, Collected Works of Edward Schillebeeckx. Trans. N.D. Smith, vol. 3, 
31–54. London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
———. 2014e. Theological Criteria. In The Understanding of Faith, Collected 
Works of Edward Schillebeeckx. Trans. N.D. Smith, vol. 5, 41–68. London: 
Bloomsbury T&T Clark.
Schoof, Ted Mark. 2008. A Survey of Catholic Theology, 1800–1970. Trans. 
N.D. Smith. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock.
 
D. MINCH

77
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_5
CHAPTER 5
Metaxology and New Realist Philosophy
Sandra Lehmann
This chapter examines whether there is a relationship between William 
Desmond’s metaxology and what I call new realist thought. By this term, 
I refer to several recent approaches such as speculative realism, Markus 
Gabriel’s neutral realism, and certain types of new materialism such as 
Karen Barad’s agential realism, to name only some of the most prominent 
examples. At first glance, there seems to be considerable agreement 
between Desmond’s metaxology and new realist thinking concerning the 
basic character of theoretical philosophy. There are two main aspects to 
this: First, both lines of thought are critical of the Kantian and post-­
Kantian mainstream of modern philosophy. Second, they both re-establish 
the primacy of ontology over epistemology.
Concerning the first aspect, as Peter Gratton observes, despite all con-
ceptual differences, new realist thinkers “seemingly agree on but one 
thing: that European philosophy since the time of Kant has stopped talk-
ing about reality, since it’s stuck thinking about how we know reality” 
(Gratton 2014, p.  4). From a different perspective (and less bluntly), 
Desmond argues that the alleged overcoming of metaphysics related to 
thinkers such as Heidegger and Derrida appears “to lie along the line of 
[a] deflation of confidence in philosophical reason that we diversely 
S. Lehmann (*) 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
e-mail: sandra.lehmann@univie.ac.at

78
­witnessed since Kant’s critique of pure reason” (ISB xvi). By contrast, 
Desmond is “convinced that there is no overcoming of metaphysics as 
such” (ibid.). Concerning the second aspect, as Ricardo Martinelli cor-
rectly notes, the debate about new realism is not “whether one is realist or 
not about the external world”; rather, it is about “taking a position on 
ontology” (Martinelli 2015, p. 25). In Desmond’s case, the ontological 
concern is more than obvious. Let me just recall that Desmond bases his 
advocacy for metaphysics on mindfulness for “the sourcing powers of ‘to 
be’” (ISB xvi), and that the first volume of his great systematic trilogy on 
metaxology is entitled Being and the Between.
Does this mean that metaxology is new realism avant la lettre? In order 
to propose an answer to this question, in what follows, I discuss certain 
aspects of both metaxology and new realist thinking. At this point, and to 
roughly sketch the situation, it may suffice to note that there is a funda-
mental difference between both ways of thought, and that this is due to 
their different overall design. While Desmond is putting forward a meta-
physical theism, the new realist authors generally emphasize the ground-
less character of the absolute. Nevertheless, there is something like a 
kinship between metaxology and the new realisms, and this kinship is a 
result of their shared ontological concern. As I argue, it is for this reason 
that metaxology can open another path for new realist thinking. Up until 
now, in my view, metaxology has achieved more than the new realists, 
especially in terms of plausibility. This is so because Desmond gives a more 
convincing account of the relation between the human access to, and 
understanding of, Being and Being itself. As we shall see, in identifying the 
dynamic, ever self-transcending character of this relation, metaxology is 
able to do theoretical justice to both poles without preferring one over the 
other in a reductionist way.
In order to examine the relationship between metaxology and new real-
ist thinking, I refer to a chosen example of speculative realism, namely, to 
Quentin Meillassoux’s ‘speculative materialism’, as he himself calls it. I 
make this choice because both programmatically and methodologically, I 
consider Meillassoux’s approach as the key approach of new realist phi-
losophy. In a paradigmatic manner, Meillassoux addresses the theoretical 
objectives of new realist thought, and against what it is directed. 
Furthermore, and to put it somewhat apodictically, he defines the funda-
mental methodological principle of any serious new realist approach. As 
must be added, however, he also exemplifies the shortcomings arising 
 
S. LEHMANN

79
whenever ontological thought too soon abandons the reference to human 
experience.
In short, then, this is how I proceed: I first discuss the three key ele-
ments of Meillassoux’s approach. They serve as a guideline for briefly 
addressing both speculative materialism’s merits and its aporias. Afterward, 
I examine how Desmond’s approach relates to this. In sum, I argue that 
in focusing on the surplus character of Being, Desmond can offer a metax-
ological realism that surpasses both Meillassoux’s main counterpart, 
namely Martin Heidegger’s Seinsdenken, and Meillassoux’s own approach.
Speculative Materialism on Being
Meillassoux’s approach has three key elements that are closely interrelated. 
There is, first, the so-called critique of correlationism; second, the notion 
of “the givenness of a being anterior to givenness” (Meillassoux 2008, 
p. 14), that is, “anterior to every form of human relation to the world” 
(ibid., p. 10); and, third, the basic methodological principle, namely, the 
principle of factiality (le principe de factualité). Allow me to briefly outline 
what these three elements are about.
The critique of correlationism essentially implies a revision of Kant’s 
Copernican or critical turn. As Meillassoux argues convincingly, the criti-
cal turn has defined the basic premise of modern thought, namely, the 
assumption of the inescapable relation of thinking and Being. To quote 
from Meillassoux’s seminal essay After Finitude:
By ‘correlation’ we mean the idea according to which we only ever have 
access to the correlation between thinking and being, and never to either 
term considered apart from the other. We will henceforth call correlationism 
any current of thought which maintains the unsurpassable character of the 
correlation so defined. (ibid., p. 5)
Meillassoux distinguishes a weak and a strong form of correlationism. The 
paradigm of weak correlationism is Kant’s critical philosophy. According 
to it, what is beyond the correlation, the thing-in-itself, “is unknowable”, 
yet “it is thinkable” (ibid., p. 31). The “most rigorous, as well as most 
contemporary” (ibid., p.  31) form of correlationism, however, is the 
strong form. Its “emblematic representatives” (ibid., p. 41) are Heidegger 
as well as Wittgenstein. It “prohibit[s] all relation between thought and 
the absolute”, maintaining “not only that it is illegitimate to claim that we 
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

80
can know the in-it-self, but also that it is illegitimate to claim that we can 
at least think it” (ibid., p. 35). Strong correlationism may also include 
approaches that emphasize the non-rational character of the human access 
to Being, as it is the case with, for example, Merleau-Ponty’s phenomenol-
ogy of corporality or other forms of body philosophy.1
Regarding all forms of correlationism, Meillassoux questions whether it 
is really true that the way in which we access, or disclose, Being defines the 
framework of what we can say about Being. In order to make his point, 
Meillassoux refers to the mathematics-based natural sciences. In this con-
text, the second main element of Meillassoux’s approach comes into play, 
namely, the notion of givenness anterior to givenness. It indicates formally 
what escapes correlational givenness. As Meillassoux argues, the natural 
sciences can provide information about the cosmos long before human 
beings existed, a reality that he calls ‘ancestral’. If we understand givenness 
as the situation in which Being is correlatively given to human beings, 
then the natural sciences provide information about Being before there 
was givenness. There is, in other words, no givenness, and yet this does 
not mean that there is nothing. Rather, there is something given before 
there is correlational givenness.
Note that one must take care to understand the proper meaning of 
anteriority in Meillassoux’s argument from the ancestral. In fact, his entry 
into the discussion is rather unfavorable, suggesting that anteriority had to 
do with the past. It certainly has temporal meaning. However, in this case, 
time is not related to the correlation, that is, for example, it is not a form 
of perception, as for Kant, or it is not related to the temporality of Dasein, 
as for Heidegger. Rather, anteriority indicates time before time, and that 
means that it indicates a time thoroughly independent of correlational 
time. One might wonder, then, what we can possibly say about this time 
anterior to time, or this givenness anterior to givenness, and whether the 
term anteriority only suggests a relation where, in fact, there is none. 
Precisely this constitutes the core of the new realist problem, as it is para-
digmatically unfolded by Meillassoux: How can we arrive at a proper mode 
of thinking Being independent of the human access to Being? In other 
words: How can we reach beyond the correlation? How can we give an 
account of the absolute character of Being?
1 For a thorough discussion of Merleau-Ponty’s correlationism, see Sparrow (2014, 
pp. 43–50).
 
S. LEHMANN

81
We come to the third key element. Meillassoux’s answer to the new 
realist problem is what he calls the ‘principle of factiality’. According to it, 
“it is not the correlation but the facticity of the correlation that constitutes 
the absolute” (ibid., p. 52). According to correlationism, the correlation 
of Being and the human access to Being is inescapable, yet, it is contin-
gent. Therefore, correlationism (whether weak or strong) cannot exclude 
that Being could, or even, has already, come into being differently. It only 
prevents that we can say anything about this being-different. However, as 
Meillassoux argues, correlationism must regard Being’s possibility-­to-be-
different as a real possibility. Otherwise, it would have to grant the correla-
tion absolute status, and that would contradict its own claim that we 
cannot say anything about the beyond of the correlation, including that 
there is no such beyond. If the possibility-to-be-different is real, what 
makes it real?—the answer is: It is facticity, or that-it-is. Facticity is not 
constituted by the correlation; however, it must be presupposed to keep 
correlationism running. This also explains the absolute status of facticity. 
According to Meillassoux’s minimal definition, the absolute is “a being 
whose severance […] and whose separateness from thought is such that it 
presents itself to us as non-relative to us, and hence as capable of existing 
whether we exist or not” (ibid., p. 28). The facticity of the possibility-­to-
be-different, or, as Meillassoux has it, the “capacity-to-be-­other” (ibid., 
p. 34) is, therefore, the absolute, and it also applies to the correlation 
because the correlation does not exist by necessity.
The significance of Meillassoux’s approach lies in the way in which it 
relates the absolute and contingency to one another, establishing, so to 
speak, on the back side of the principle of factiality, the “principle of unrea-
son” (principe d’irraison) (ibid., p. 60). As Meillassoux argues, there is no 
necessary entity, everything is contingent. As an objection (and indicative of 
the profoundly ontological character of this discussion), one might recall 
Thomas Aquinas’ Third Way, that is, the argument for the existence of God 
from possibility and necessity. We can refer to Desmond’s concise summary 
in God and the Between: Under the condition of contingency, “at some 
time, […] the possibility of everything not being will be. If this possibility of 
not being is possible, then nothing could ever come to be; for nothing 
comes from nothing; hence nothing could now exist” (GB p.  132). 
Meillassoux anticipates this objection, however, in pointing out “that the 
facticity of everything cannot be [itself] thought as a fact” (Meillassoux 
2008, p. 79) for then it would lose its absolute status. Therefore, everything 
could also not be, and there is no reason why it should be. However, there 
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

82
will always be facticity, or rather, to “describe the speculative essence of 
facticity”, “factiality” (ibid., p. 79), even if it is the factiality of nothing. In 
other words, Being has no ground, yet as such it exists necessarily.2
Ultimately, however, Meillassoux’s vision of a groundless absolute fails. 
Essentially unresolved, the aporias of total contingency reappear at another 
level, namely at the level of temporality. As noted, according to Meillassoux, 
the time of the absolute, or absolute time, is detached from the time of the 
correlation, or correlative time. This means that it lacks the consistency of 
correlative time. Rather, it is a “time without becoming” (this is also the 
title of a 2008 lecture of Meillassoux; see Meillassoux 2014). That is, “a 
time that would be capable of bringing forth or abolishing everything, 
[…] a time that cannot be conceived as having emerged or as being abol-
ished except in time, which is to say, in itself” (Meillassoux 2008, p. 61). 
And some passages later: “It is a Time [sic] capable of destroying even 
becoming itself by bringing forth, perhaps forever, fixity, stasis, and death” 
(ibid., p. 64). The problem here is that this capacity of self-abolishing also 
affects the past of absolute time. The moment it abolishes itself, it has 
never existed and, therefore, it will never exist again. There might be time-
less factiality, or timeless existence. Yet it has always already swallowed the 
capacity-to-be-other. Contingency will never be able to unfold. In effect, 
this means that totally contingent Being exists only virtually, forever 
encapsulated in pure factiality. In this sense, Meillassoux is correct, at least 
regarding his own approach, when he states that “l’affaire de la philosophie 
n’est pas l’être, mais le peut-être. Philosophy’s main concern is not with 
being but with the may-be” (ibid., p. 27). Only that this passing over of 
being has the consequence that his approach never actually reaches Being; 
that it rather, strangely conflicting with its own realist claims, remains 
restricted to a mere possibilism.
Let me conclude this section in noting that the possibilist failure of 
Meillassoux’s project also indicates that he has never set himself free from 
correlationism or, more precisely, from strong correlationism. Meillassoux 
does not only (as we have seen) develop his argument out of strong cor-
relationism. Rather, he carries with him two of its basic premises: First, 
that the facticity of Being is contingent; second, that there is no ultimate 
ground. All sophisticated reasoning notwithstanding, in the final analysis, 
2 I agree with Meillassoux’s notion of the non-factual character of factiality, even if his 
argument is a petitio principii, arguing for the absolute character of factiality on the basis that 
it is supposed to be absolute.
 
S. LEHMANN

83
his approach boils down to the subtraction of the ‘human factor’ from the 
correlation. He therefore surpasses correlationism only in that he makes 
the correlationist condition absolute. There are contingency and ground-
lessness without a human subject, or any other subject for that matter.
Metaxology and Heidegger’s Strong Correlationism
Let me adopt Meillassoux’s terminology. At first sight, Desmond’s metax-
ology applies a correlational scheme. In fact, there seems to be a kinship 
to one of the declared fathers of strong correlationism, namely to 
Heidegger. Both Desmond’s and Heidegger’s approaches recognize the 
factual character of Being. However, they both connect it with the notion 
of openness, or opening, a notion that has correlationist character because 
it describes the relation between Being and human being. Thus, as 
Desmond tells us in Being and the Between, the ontological starting point 
is human mindfulness to Being. Mindfulness is “the opening to Being” 
(BB 4). Yet it is “given over [to Being] immediately and from the start” 
(BB 4), that is, it is always already involved in Being. There is a clear cor-
respondence between the human opening to Being and the opening of 
Being itself. Heidegger’s thinking of Being (Seinsdenken), for its part, 
reflects on ‘the open’ under different names such as, most prominently, 
alētheia (Unverborgenheit, unconcealment) or the clearing (Lichtung). 
One might think here of the almost classic formulation in the Letter on 
Humanism: “Man in his essence is ek-sistent into the openness of Being, 
into the open region that lights the ‘between’ within which a ‘relation’ of 
subject to object can ‘be’” (Heidegger 1993a, p. 252).
It is crucial, however, to see the fundamental difference between both 
approaches concerning the question of the open, the space of the between. 
In fact, understanding this difference will also help clarify that Desmond is 
not only rather far from Heidegger, even if he acknowledges him as “a 
guardian of astonishment before the ‘that it is’ of all being” (AOO 229). 
What is more, Desmond’s notion of the between will also show that the 
question of the real is only in the second place decided by the question of 
the correlation. Certainly, Meillassoux is correct when criticizing the one-­
sided emphasis on the human access to Being in Kantian and post-Kantian 
thought. It does not follow from this, however, that the human factor 
must be eliminated. As we can learn from Desmond, it suffices to remove 
the human being from the center of Being and to subordinate it to the far 
greater powers of Being itself.
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

84
The decisive point concerning the difference between Desmond and 
Heidegger is how they understand Being in its capacity to give itself over 
to beings in order to let them be. Both Desmond and Heidegger agree on 
the inexhaustibility of Being by beings. Yet, for Heidegger, the inexhaust-
ibility of Being has a negative, even abysmal character. First, Being has a 
twofold structure. While unconcealing itself and letting beings be, it at the 
same time conceals itself. That is, Being is never fully present in beings. 
Even beings as a whole cannot exhaust it. Yet, and second, this conceal-
ment of Being conceals nothing. Being insofar as it gives itself over is the 
act of giving, on the one side (the side of unconcealment), and it is noth-
ing, on the other (the side of concealment). In other words, while Being 
‘is’ the giving of beings, it also ‘is’ the giving of nothing (i.e., of itself). 
According to Heidegger’s notorious 1929 lecture What is Metaphysics?3 
“for human existence, the nothing makes possible the openedness of 
beings as such. The nothing does not merely serve as the counterconcept 
of beings; rather, it originally belongs to their essential unfolding as such. 
In the Being of beings the nihilation of the nothing occurs” (Heidegger 
1993b, p. 104).
There are two reasons why Heidegger puts emphasis on the nothing-
ness of Being. First, he wants to avoid onto-theology. That is, Being can-
not be a being, not even the ens realissimum. Accordingly, if Being gives 
itself over, or if it lets beings be, it cannot be a ‘giving something’, but 
must be ‘no-thing’—nothing. Second, and more importantly, according 
to Heidegger, Being can only be thought in finite terms. We can identify 
this as the correlationist aspect of his thinking. Indeed, one may wonder, 
with Desmond, “if a certain privileging of ‘self’ is never completely purged 
[in Heidegger]” (AOO 222). One would have to discuss in detail why this 
is so. Let me just say at this point that, in my view, the reason is ideologi-
cal. Heidegger has taken the deliberate decision for a philosophy of fini-
tude. This corresponds with some key elements of the phenomenological 
method (especially, the notion of intentionality). Yet, as the approaches of 
authors such as Michel Henry or Jean-Luc Marion show, it is not neces-
sarily demanded by phenomenology.
3 From a rather different, logical-positivist perspective (Desmond would call it univocal), 
Rudolf Carnap, in his 1932 essay Overcoming of Metaphysics through Logical Translation of 
Language, uses the notion of nothing of this lecture as an example for showing that all meta-
physical claims are pseudo-statements.
 
S. LEHMANN

85
For Heidegger, however, it is settled that the giving of Being must be 
structured in accordance with finitude. Therefore, the excessive character 
of Being, its inexhaustibility, is negative. It can only appear according to 
the conditions of finite Dasein, that is, where Dasein experiences both its 
own facticity, or that-it-is, and the limits of its existence, in anxiety, or, 
even more fundamentally, in anticipating the indefinite certainty of death. 
We can find this clearly formulated in What is Metaphysics?: “Being and 
nothing do belong together […] because Being itself is essentially finite 
and reveals itself only in the transcendence of Dasein which is held out 
into the nothing” (Heidegger 1993b, p. 108). Yet also the late Heidegger 
understands the giving-itself-over of Being, that is, the event (Ereignis) of 
Being as “what lets the two matters [the Being of beings and time] belong 
together” (Heidegger 1972, p. 19), while “the sending source keeps itself 
back and, thus, withdraws from unconcealment” (ibid., p. 22).
In a discussion of Heidegger in Art, Origins, Otherness, Desmond notes 
that Heidegger did not distinguish well enough “between ‘coming to be’ 
and ‘becoming’” (AOO 223). We can identify the awareness of this dis-
tinction as what is at the heart of Desmond’s approach. As he continues, 
“the former [that is, coming to be] suggests something more radically 
originative than the latter [that is, becoming], and to which thinking in 
terms of time could not do justice, since the issue is just the coming to be 
of time itself” (AOO 223).
One might say that, for Desmond, the encounter with Being takes 
place within finitude, yet it leads beyond the finite order, or beyond nega-
tivity. While, similar to Heidegger, metaxological ontology starts with the 
awareness of the that-it-is of being “in the midst of beings”, and that we 
have always “already begun” (BB 5), this awareness is “doubly mediated” 
(BB 6). On the one hand, it is characterized by the notion of something 
other than ourselves that we lack, because temporality prevents us from 
coinciding with it, whether it is the otherness of other beings, or the oth-
erness of ourselves (one might recall Rimbaud’s “I am an other”). 
Desmond calls this ‘erotic’. On the other hand, however, there is the 
notion of the plenitude of Being that is prior to the notion of lack and 
that, in a sense, is its condition of possibility: “It is the original power of 
being in us, waking up to itself as mindful, and driven beyond itself to 
mindfulness of being other than itself. This anterior original power is an 
excess to lack” (BB 6). This plenitude Desmond calls ‘agapeic’. It creates 
the “vector of transcendence” that runs through the between of Being 
(BB 5).
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

86
Metaxology traces this vector of transcendence. In order to set in per-
spective how Desmond understands the giving of Being, we need to notice 
that also for Desmond, Being is inexhaustible and, therefore, it is no thing. 
Yet in contrast to Heidegger, the non-objective character of Being is not 
abysmal, a matter of withdrawal into nothingness, but, rather, overdeter-
mined and overflowing. It indicates a “superplus power” (AOO 251). 
Being gives itself in plenitude.
For this power of origination [that is, the giving of beings, S.L.] is not noth-
ing, though it be no thing; it is what makes the being of being be; not only 
possibilizing in the logical sense of formal possibility; but possibilizing in an 
ontological sense in which the creative power of the possible is at work: posse 
as power to bring to be. (AOO 251)
As Desmond underscores, this notion is not to be confused with 
“Heidegger’s dictum that possibility is higher than actuality” (AOO 251). 
For Heidegger, possibility is the way in which Being comes to pass in fini-
tude, and since finitude sets the limit of Being, possibility is the ultimate 
mode of Being. Being is always-ever-becoming in realizing possibilities. By 
contrast, Desmond links posse back to esse. That is, Being is not structured 
by possibility. Rather, possibility is a manifestation of Being. It is the 
giving-­itself-over of Being that, however, and again, cannot exhaust Being. 
The possibilizing power of Being is always excessive. This is what distin-
guishes the coming to be of Being from Being’s mere becoming. While 
coming to be, Being lets finite beings be. Yet, in doing so, it communi-
cates its own abundance to them. It inscribes transcendence, the move-
ment beyond themselves, into them.
The ‘superplus’ or surplus power of Being creates a lasting gap between 
Being and the human access to Being (i.e., mindfulness). In other words, 
it opens the correlation, and it changes its meaning. This is so because, as 
Desmond writes, the correlation, that is, “the between shows itself as a 
coming to be that communicates of its origin as other to the between 
itself” (AOO 249). There is Being, and there is the human access, or rela-
tion, to Being. Moreover, however, there is the possibilizing surplus power 
of Being coming to be, that is, of Being giving itself over in order to 
become the inexhaustible Being of beings. “The sense of the origin of 
both coming to be and what has come to be exceeds the happening of the 
between itself. It is […] hyperbolically other to beings, other to the hap-
pening of finite beings” (AOO 249).
 
S. LEHMANN

87
As surplus power, Being cannot be reduced to what is taking place in 
the between. Rather, what is taking place in the between could not do so 
without the giving of Being. It could not even exist. Accordingly, the 
between as well as what is taking place in it testify to the possibilizing 
power of Being. This relativizes the significance of the correlationist per-
spective, whether correlationism is weak or strong. The human access to 
Being is not at the center of the opening of Being, it does not make Being 
happen. Rather, it is a point of passage that formally (i.e., from the point 
of view of the coming to be of Being) has the same value as the “enigmatic 
thereness of things” (AOO 226). That does not mean, however, that 
according to metaxology, the human is to be regarded as thoroughly 
equivalent to things. It is important to find the right ontological balance 
here. From a material, or content, point of view, the human has singular 
status because of the way in which it delivers the surplus of Being to the 
between. By contrast to other beings, it does so explicitly, by means of the 
reflecting powers of reason. It articulates transcendence by the self-­
transcending of the mind. Again, however, as “articulate selfhood”, the 
human is “an expression of the articulating energy of being” (AOO 224). 
It stands out by the articulating function. Yet, apart from that, it partakes 
in the excessive dynamis of Being just like all beings. The excess of Being 
creates them, and lets them be, and it does so in pointing them beyond 
themselves, in some way or other.
Metaxological Realism
Desmond does not only offer a strong alternative to Heidegger’s philoso-
phy of finitude. He also provides an answer to the new realist question of 
the absolute, or of Being beyond the human access to Being. In fact, his 
approach proves superior to Meillassoux’s speculative materialism, in that 
it alone provides an appropriate interpretation of the absolute character of 
facticity, or that-it-is.
As we have seen, in the final analysis, Meillassoux gains theoretical 
access to the absoluteness of facticity by eliminating the human factor 
from strong correlationism. The result is that the contingency of Being is 
no longer restricted by the human expectation that Being, at least to a 
certain extent, might have consistency, and that we can give an account of 
it. Rather, there is nothing but the capacity-to-be-other. We may also look 
at this from another perspective and say that, while in Heidegger’s strong 
correlationism, the ground of Being is withdrawn, in speculative 
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

88
­materialism, it is thoroughly suspended. There is no reason at all why 
something is what it is.
It cannot be denied that the connection that Meillassoux establishes 
between the absolute and the utter groundlessness of Being is rather bold. 
Yet, ultimately, and as we have also seen, his approach results in aporia. 
Situating himself ‘after finitude’, unlike Heidegger, Meillassoux is aware of 
the difference between coming to be and becoming. Yet, according to 
him, becoming, or finite time, would have to emerge from a time without 
becoming. Time without becoming, however, could never have been. At 
best, it is ever-possible time.
In order to put Desmond’s approach in perspective, it seems advisable, 
at this point, to make a small digression. For admittedly, and as the never-­
ending struggle of metaphysics demonstrates, there can be no final cer-
tainty regarding the ultimate character of Being. Therefore, at first glance, 
it might seem possible that Being is characterized by the groundless 
capacity-­to-be-other, or by absolute contingency. Yet we can argue ex neg-
ativo. First, Meillassoux’s account of the absolute obviously fails. Therefore, 
the dark backside of the principle of factiality, the principle of unreason, 
does not apply. Second, we cannot know whether, at some point in the 
future, Being comes to nothing. However, as already Parmenides observed, 
it does not make sense to speak of what ‘is’ Non-­Being, or nothing. 
Accordingly, Desmond is right when he notes that “the absolute nothing 
[that is, Non-Being] is qualified by the gift of being” (BB 281). Nothing 
always ever appears in the horizon of Being; that means it appears as rela-
tive nothing. There is an overweight of Being over nothing. It implies that 
Being gives itself excessively, perpetually surpassing the negativity of rela-
tive nothingness. This also bears on the problem of time: If there is time, 
there is time beyond finite time. For we can address Being coming to be 
also in temporal terms as the coming to be of the absolute Now. While the 
absolute Now is coming to be in finite being, it is affected by the ruptures 
of finite negativity. Yet, in the course of finite time, the absolute Now cre-
ates a fluid presence, or ephemeral Now, that escapes negativity. As 
Desmond notes, “creation [that is, finite being] as continuing cannot be 
separated from discontinuity” (BB 294). Yet “the discontinuity and pos-
sible nothingness of the creation, as outcome, suggests the continuity of 
creation, as agapeic origination” (BB 270). In other words, to understand 
the genesis of finite time, we must draw on the notion of ever-abundant 
rather than ever-possible time.
 
S. LEHMANN

89
Against this background, we can say that only Desmond fully develops 
the notion that ‘the facticity of the correlation is the absolute’. Desmond 
starts from the surplus character of facticity and applies it to what is taking 
place in the between, that is, to the correlation. He has no need, therefore, 
to eliminate the correlation. Rather, he opens it from within. All beings 
originate in the plenitude of Being giving itself over. That is, they originate 
in “an ‘overdetermined’ whole [that] already is a surplus of being within 
itself” (BB 255). This means that all beings are amidst each other, and yet 
they are beyond each other. Accordingly, the human access cannot exhaust 
them. There can be a human account of beings, yet we must concede that 
beings are beyond our account. If facticity is the absolute, everything is 
inexhaustible.
In closing, let me return one last time to Meillassoux’s key elements. 
We can observe that metaxology breathes real theoretical life into them—
unlike speculative materialism itself. Thus, there is the principle of factial-
ity, given with the mindful awareness that “we do not first produce being, 
or make it be as for us; originally it is given as an excess of otherness which 
arouses our astonishment that it is at all” (Desmond 2000, p. 5). In fact, 
we can identify the “last difference” (AOO 249), that is, the gap between 
Being as surplus power, on the one hand, and the correlation between 
Being and human mindfulness, on the other, as the opening into the abso-
lute that the new realists are searching for. It is the gap of the inner tran-
scendence of beings that results from the abundance of Being.
In addition, there is also givenness anterior to givenness in metaxology. 
For Being coming to be is precisely givenness anterior to givenness; given-
ness in the sense of a giving that continues to have always already taken 
place; givenness that, because of its excessive character cannot have 
resulted from the correlation, but rather originates independently from its 
own having always already being-there.
Consequently, at several points, Desmond alludes to the speculative 
character of his thinking. Most significantly maybe, in God and the Between, 
he refers to his approach as “speculative metaxology” that is not to be 
confused with “speculative dialectic in Hegel’s sense” (GB 159). Both the 
productive distance to Hegel and the hyperbole by which this distance is 
created bear similarity to Meillassoux’s approach, even if the direction of 
Desmond’s hyperbole is diametrically opposed to the one of Meillassoux, 
pointing at the inexhaustible plenitude of Being rather than the empty 
facticity of what is thoroughly contingent.
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

90
Finally, in Desire, Dialectic, and Otherness, Desmond discusses the real-
ist character of his approach, identifying it as “a metaxological ‘realism’ 
beyond idealism” (DDO xxi). This realism is based on the reflective aware-
ness of both the transcendence and the precedence of the other. That 
means that since other beings originate in the surplus power of Being, they 
are neither a matter of identity (or the mental powers of the self) nor of 
difference (or pure multiplicity), nor of dialectical mediation. Rather, they 
are “metaxologically pluralized” (DDO 171).4 That is, since they exist 
through the inner transcendence of Being, they cannot be reduced to the 
self (there is no absolute self). Yet, this does not mean that beings are 
totally other and escape any determination (Meillassoux’s approach, in 
fact, is a radical version of this equivocal approach). Rather, in being 
understood, that is, in being determinate, they at the same time indicate 
that they are beyond determination. Because all beings originate in the 
excessive power of Being, they all equally elude the clutches of 
determination.
At the beginning, we asked whether Desmond’s metaxology was new 
realism avant la lettre. We can now present our answer. If new realist 
thinking is based on the presupposition that the absolute is absolute 
groundless, that becoming, at best, is blind emergence, and that, there-
fore, the order of things is necessarily characterized by inconsistent multi-
plicity, metaxology certainly has very little in common with it. If, however, 
and by contrast, new realist thinking is seriously concerned with the ques-
tion of the real, and if the courage for speculation also means being pre-
pared to follow metaphysical ways (a possibility many new realists 
shortsightedly dismiss), metaxology—metaxological realism has much to 
offer. To begin with, it shows that understanding the real is intrinsically 
linked with understanding the excessive or surplus character of Being. 
Therefore, Being does neither manifest itself as the fateful interlocking of 
‘thrown projection’ (geworfener Entwurf) and being-unto-death, as for 
Heidegger, nor by the reasonless, groundless capacity-to-be-other, as for 
Meillassoux. Rather, it bestows beings with the capacity to be beyond 
themselves amidst other beings.
4 See also the broader discussion of metaxological realism in DDO 169–171. At this point, 
one might also introduce Desmond’s distinction of the univocal, the equivocal, the dialecti-
cal, and the metaxological meaning of Being. However, due to lack of space, I decided to 
focus on what I regard to be the main ontological structure of metaxology, and that is the 
vector of transcendence, originating in the plenitude of Being itself.
 
S. LEHMANN

91
Bibliography
Desmond, William. 2000. Being, Determination, and Dialectic: On the Sources of 
Metaphysical Thinking. In Being and Dialectic: Metaphysics as a Cultural 
Presence, ed. William Desmond and Joseph Grange, 3–36. Albany: State 
University of New York Press.
Gratton, Peter. 2014. Speculative Realism: Problems and Prospects. London: 
Continuum.
Heidegger, Martin. 1972. On Time and Being. Trans. Joan Stambaugh. New York: 
Harper & Row.
———. 1993a. Letter on Humanism. In Basic Writings: From Being and Time 
(1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964), ed. David Farrell Krell, 213–266. 
London: Routledge.
———. 1993b. What Is Metaphysics? In Basic Writings: From Being and Time 
(1927) to The Task of Thinking (1964), ed. David Farrell Krell, 89–110. London: 
Routledge.
Martinelli, Riccardo. 2015. Realism, Ontology, and the Concept of Reality. In 
Moral Realism and Political Decisions: Practical Rationality in Contemporary 
Public Contexts, ed. Gabriele de Anna and Riccardo Martinelli, 19–28. 
Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press.
Meillassoux, Quentin. 2008. After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of 
Contingency. Trans. R. Brassier. London: Continuum.
———. 2014. Time Without Becoming. Ed. Anna Longo. Hythe: Mimesis 
International.
Sparrow, Tom. 2014. The End of Phenomenology: Metaphysics and the New Realism. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
  METAXOLOGY AND NEW REALIST PHILOSOPHY 

PART II
Absolute Being and Talking God

95
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_6
CHAPTER 6
The Metaxology of the Divine Names
Brendan Thomas Sammon
The work of William Desmond is only beginning to receive the attention 
that it more than merits. Since the 1990 publication of Philosophy and Its 
Others, and the 1995 publication of Being and the Between, arguably the 
two works that formally gave birth to the metaxological, there have been 
more than a few dissertations and monographs published on his meta-
physics, most in his own field of philosophy (e.g., Simpson 2009; Shaw 
2012; Kelly 2007), though some in other fields (e.g., Simpson and 
Sammon 2017). However, the work of translating his idiom for broader 
readership remains a challenge for those enthusiasts who are convinced, as 
I am, that his metaphysics not only offers something important but essen-
tial for properly diagnosing and effectively confronting the problems that 
beset human beings today.
A question that continually seems to arise whenever I present Desmond’s 
thought to an audience concerns how a person unfamiliar with the com-
plexities of metaxology might begin to ‘crack his code’ so to speak. To this 
question, there are a few responses. One way is to struggle in the shadow 
cast by the light of Desmond’s work, patiently thinking and rethinking his 
thoughts with him until a moment of clarity offers itself, and some prog-
ress is made. Or one can familiarize oneself with the Western intellectual 
B. T. Sammon (*) 
Saint Joseph’s University, Philadelphia, PA, USA
e-mail: bsammon@sju.edu

96
tradition itself in order to better understand Desmond’s place in this 
esteemed pantheon of thought. Still a third way presents itself: one can 
approach his thought comparatively, seeking to ‘crack his code,’ so to 
speak, by understanding his relation with his others. Such an approach 
follows what might be considered a dimension of the metaxological 
method: coming to knowledge of something by knowing the many and 
various relations that constitute it. This chapter follows this third avenue 
by examining how metaxology relates to the tradition of the divine names.
The thesis at the foundation of this chapter is this: there is a kinship 
between the tradition of the divine names and metaxology such that one 
provides significant resources for understanding the other. This thesis, 
then, moves along three interrelated vectors. The first concerns the par-
ticular content associated with the tradition of the divine names. Those 
already familiar with the various components of this tradition—for exam-
ple, ancient Jewish thought, Platonism, late ancient Christian theology, 
Neoplatonic philosophy, and even scholasticism—may find a helpful ave-
nue for entering more fully into the metaxological idiom, which in turn 
may open new vistas in the divine name tradition as well. The second 
vector concerns those already familiar with Desmond’s thought. It is 
hoped that interest in his thought might also stimulate interest in this 
once esteemed divine name tradition so that one can better recognize in 
Desmond’s thinking a creative retrieval (though no simple reprise) of a 
thought form that has shaped in a number of vital ways various intellectual 
traditions. The third vector concerns those who may have either limited or 
no familiarity with either the divine name tradition or metaxology. This 
third vector, although the most unstable in terms of outcome, is also 
where a heightened sense of both the divine names and metaxology pres-
ent themselves. For not only does this third trajectory inhabit a ‘space’ 
between the first two trajectories, but it is also a trajectory that, free from 
any predetermined ideas of either, allows one to move more freely in the 
‘space between both’ (so to speak). For although familiarity at the begin-
ning of any inquiry provides certain benefits for the inquiry itself, there are 
also benefits that follow from the absence of such familiarity, the most 
important of which is that the inquiry proceeds with minimal risk of reduc-
tion to the familiar.
Bearing all this in mind, this chapter proceeds as follows. First, I present 
a brief account of the tradition of the divine names in somewhat broad 
strokes, with an eye toward two fundamental features that not only bear a 
significant degree of socio-cultural import, but that resonate with 
 
B. T. SAMMON

97
Desmond’s project: transcendence and community. I then examine how 
both the divine names and metaxology provide indelible resources for 
reflection upon and practices of transcendence. I follow this with an exam-
ination of the relationship between transcendence and community and 
argue that Desmond’s project can be read as a creative retrieval of a divine 
name communivocity, that is, the way in which the divine names as metax-
ological phenomena voice themselves so as to help secure authentic 
community.
The Tradition of the Divine Names: A Prototypical 
Metaxology
Since I have done so elsewhere, and since space does not allow, I do not 
reproduce an exhaustive historical account of the tradition of the divine 
names here (see Sammon 2013, pp. 95–120). Rather, I lay out some of 
the more important dimensions of this tradition insofar as it concerns 
present purposes, more particularly the way it articulates a metaxu. This is 
an articulation that concerns the divine names tradition both in terms of 
what it is as a tradition and the content of what it communicates. The 
subtle argument being made here is that Desmond’s metaxology provides 
a hermeneutical key for understanding this mysterious tradition and its 
influence on belief about existence, human nature, society, and the divine.
The metaxology of the divine names—as a tradition—can be discerned 
from two primary perspectives. The first concerns the way that this tradi-
tion emerges out of a ‘middle’ between the Biblical (Jewish and early 
Christian) tradition and Neoplatonism. Although one finds references to a 
divine name tradition in various late ancient sources, it is in the work of 
the enigmatic figure Dionysius the Areopagite where one finds the first 
and most systematic account. In the opening lines of his On the Divine 
Names, the allonymous author indicates that the tradition of the divine 
names precedes his own contribution: “To my fellow Presbyter Timothy, 
Dionysius the Presbyter. What is the purpose of the discourse, and the 
tradition regarding the divine names.”1 Yet the lack of historical treatises 
that might corroborate his claim makes it unclear exactly to what he is 
referring. Given his Neoplatonic pedigree, perhaps Dionysius is referring 
to a tradition of philosophical inquiry into language examined in such 
seminal texts as Plato’s Cratylus, Aristotle’s Topics, or On Interpretation, 
1 Dionysius the Areopagite, On the Divine Names [hereafter = DN] 1, 1 [585A]).
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

98
et al. However, the Areopagite’s own treatise does not contain much in 
terms of a philosophy or theology of language, so even if such texts may 
have influenced his thinking, it seems unlikely that they constitute the 
tradition into which he claims to enter. In fact, overemphasizing the lin-
guistic element that seems obvious in the divine name tradition risks 
anachronistically distorting a tradition that is much more of a metaphysics 
of being than a reflection upon language.
Perhaps the Areopagite’s allegiance to the Biblical tradition indicates 
that his divine name tradition is a reference to the honored Jewish tradi-
tion of naming God. Throughout Jewish classical literature and practice, 
names rather than concepts serve as the primary referential mechanism. 
Although in Judaism, there are a multiplicity and variety of names appro-
priated to God (Leeman 2004, p. 104), it is the Tetragrammaton, the 
Hashem, often represented as YHWH, which occurs most frequently 
throughout Scripture—6828 times to be precise (Leeman 2004, p. 104). 
Many names are used throughout the Old Testament to identify God, but 
only YHWH identifies the personal name of God (Gieschen 2003, p. 121; 
Adler 2009, p.  266). This Biblical sense of naming, as evidenced in 
Exodus, entails a relationship of intimacy, love, and trust—such names are 
trans-discursive events rather than conceptual mechanisms. For this rea-
son, they are best approached and understood through practicing them, 
that is, by pursuing them through repeated actions. Responding to 
Moses’s request for a name to present to the Israelites, the author(s) of 
Exodus present a God who not only identifies himself as being/existence 
(YHWH, and Ehyeh asher Ehyeh), but also as the One who acts in history 
and who will endure into posterity: “Thus you shall say to the Israelites, 
‘HaShem, the God of your ancestors, the God of Abraham, the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you’: This is my name forever, 
and this is my title for all generations” (Ex. 3:15). In this sense, God’s 
name is not a concept to be grasped within the limits of human thought, 
but a plenitude of existence that guides, teaches, and loves in fullness and 
abundance; the capacity ‘to be whatever God wills to be.’ And this is why 
a divine name in the Biblical tradition is a phenomenon that is practiced 
into being, one whose presence is made manifest in human action.
In either case, there does not seem to be enough textual evidence in the 
Dionysian corpus to conclude decisively for either divine name option. 
And although Dionysius himself claims a strict authoritative adherence to 
the Biblical tradition, Dionysian scholarship in the twentieth century has 
demonstrated that Neoplatonism at the very least assumes a grammatical 
 
B. T. SAMMON

99
authority. A metaxological approach encourages one to look between 
every dialectical coupling, which in this case enables one to justifiably 
resist the urge to prioritize either the Biblical or the Neoplatonic tradition 
of divine naming. Rather, a metaxological reading recognizes not only the 
mutual influence of both, but the way that each, insofar as they enter into 
the metaxological event of the divine name tradition, comes to constitute 
the other.
The second perspective that reveals the metaxology of the divine names 
concerns the locus of the treatise On the Divine Names in the overall 
Dionysian corpus. It is a locus that indicates how a divine name occupies 
a metaxological ‘space,’ which in turn communicates the way that a divine 
name identifies a metaxological ‘form.’ In the Dionysian project, the trea-
tise On the Divine Names stands in between two lost treatises. On the one 
hand, The Theological Outlines, a treatise that, in Dionysius’s own words 
“celebrates the principle affirmative expressions respecting God insofar as 
God is both one and three by considering unions and distinctions as they 
are in the divine itself, and which is neither possible to say or to conceive” 
(Dionyius, Mystical Theology, c. 3). On the other hand, On Symbolic 
Theology celebrates God through sensible symbols “transferred from 
objects of sense to things divine” (Dionyius, Mystical Theology, c. 3). So, 
on one end of the spectrum stands the Theological Outlines, a treatise that 
concerns the ineffable, unspeakable names of God, and on the other end 
stands On Symbolic Theology, which treats of those names derived from 
creatures. Situated between the ineffable, unspeakable names and those 
that are creaturely and therefore properly metaphorical are the divine 
names, which bears something of both: they are names sanctioned by 
Biblical revelation but that are also found in the formal constitution of 
creatures, making them thoroughly metaxological.
A divine name, then, can be said to identify a divine perfection that 
proceeds from the divine superessential plenitude to inhabit the formal 
constitution of creatures. Such names include the good, light, beauty, 
love, being, wisdom, and so on. As processions from the divine superes-
sential plenitude, divine names are bearers of the divine substance without 
being identical to that substance. As some recent scholars have articulated 
it, the divine names are the presence of the divine in creaturely constitu-
tions (O’Rourke 2005, p. 9; Jones 2008, pp. 157–162). Insofar as they 
inhabit the formal constitution of creatures, the divine names serve as 
vehicles by which the divine substance becomes available to finite condi-
tions. And insofar as they are bearers of the divine substance, the divine 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

100
names make this substance available to human thought and practice albeit 
in an ‘overdetermined’ way (to borrow Desmond’s terminology). As over-
determined, that is, as bearers of content in excess of, though always hos-
pitable to, finite determination, the divine names release a multiplicity of 
ways to God. But this multiplicity is held together by an always-arriving 
unity, making the divine names communivocal phenomena, or phenom-
ena that require a community of voicings in order to do justice to the 
fullness of their intelligible content.
What the divine names communicate, then, is a prototypical metaxol-
ogy that communivocally intermediates between God and the world. This 
way of configuring the divine names may seem to give them a revelatory 
status, but an important distinction is necessary. Indeed, the divine names 
do reveal the divine substance, but in a way that is perhaps best articulated 
by referring to them as the divine ‘public identity.’ This reference ought 
not be taken in opposition to some divine ‘private identity,’ which would 
not only privilege a certain modern dichotomy of public versus private, 
but also call to mind all sorts of gnostic problems. Rather, God’s ‘public 
identity’ stands in contrast with the ‘intimate,’ or ‘endemic’ identity that 
various faith traditions believe God reveals. In other words, where God’s 
revealed identity gives rise to an endemic and intimate relationship consti-
tuted by specific forms of faith, dogma, liturgical rites, and creedal confes-
sions and practices, the divine names as God’s public self-presentation give 
rise to more general, socio-cultural forms of these.
In this sense, the divine names can be said to communicate a metaxo-
logical form that performs a metaxological service to the broader socio-­
cultural milieu: they serve as a locus of mediation between human and 
divine and so also provide a model for mediation as such. In the history of 
the Christian intellectual tradition, the divine names performed an indeli-
ble role in shaping how divine transcendence, and thus transcendence in 
itself, was understood by those communities that entered into this tradi-
tion. In the following section, I briefly lay out some of the contours of 
such transcendental shaping and gesture toward the ways in which metax-
ology creatively retrieves this shaping capacity.
Transcendence
The eclipse of transcendence in the modern world, as Charles Taylor has 
shown, is not merely a matter of personal preference among a certain elite 
echelon of academics but is constitutive of how a majority of persons today 
 
B. T. SAMMON

101
experiences the world (Taylor 2007, p. 307ff.). So much is this the case 
that one is inclined to agree with Taylor when he diagnoses a certain ‘mal-
aise of immanence’ that has taken hold of the modern mind. Taylor identi-
fies three forms this malaise may take: a fragility to our quest for meaning 
that quickens our urgency for some overarching significance, our shared 
impotence to ritualize those crucial moments of passage in our lives, and 
the ‘flatness’ or emptiness of the ordinary (Taylor 2007, p. 309). To the 
extent that Taylor is correct, a retrieval of an authentic account of tran-
scendence is not only timely but urgent.
What do the divine names provide that might alleviate this ‘malaise of 
the immanent’? What role do the divine names perform in the human 
understanding of transcendence as such, and divine transcendence in par-
ticular? It has already been established that they perform a communivocal 
intermediating role, but what does this role communicate about transcen-
dence? I want to draw attention to three primary dimensions of transcen-
dence that are communicated by the divine names, dimensions that are 
retrieved creatively by Desmond’s metaxology: (1) the plenitude, or over-
determination, of the Origin (God); (2) the necessity of participation; and 
(3) ontologically constitutive otherness.
In the Dionysian Denkform, the divine names are a necessity. This is 
because the God of Dionysius, much like the God of metaxology, is a 
plenitude of substance, the overfull excess of being as such and thus even 
beyond being. Dionysius uses words like ‘superessential’ or ‘supergood’ to 
characterize the hyperbolic, or excessive, nature of the divine especially in 
relation to creatures. Reflecting a Pauline principle, a principle to which 
Dionysius’s allegiance follows from the enigmatic author’s choice of the 
allonym Dionysius the Areopagite (from Acts 17:34), the God of Dionysius 
is ‘the one in whom we live, and move, and have our being.’ In other 
words, because the divine being is never one among other beings, that is, 
never a mere presence in the world, knowledge of the divine being cannot 
occur by means of some detached, neutral observation. Inquiry into the 
divine substance can only happen dialectically, that is to say, founded upon 
a relation. However, in order to do justice to the divine plenitude, this 
relation must manifest itself in plural form, must be voiced communally 
rather than unilaterally, or univocally (cf. PO 6). The divine names are a 
communication of such a communal voicing, in that, even though they 
differ according to how they are understood by the human mind, they are 
all the same in terms of substance (as scholasticism would later emphasize, 
though in differing tones). Dionysius stresses, in other words, that such 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

102
names should not be conceived as partial components of God. Rather, “all 
the God-becoming names of God are celebrated by the Oracles not in 
part, but as applied entirely, wholly, and completely to the full Godhead” 
(DN, 2, 1 [637A]). Dionysius even goes so far as to assert that it is blas-
phemy to consider one of these names as identifying only a part of God.
Insofar as the divine names serve as a communal voicing of the divine 
into our common and shared human practices, by creating a kind of ‘buf-
fer zone’ between God and creation, they also perform the role of safe-
guarding the ineffable and unknowable divine transcendence. A common 
thread tying the Biblical and Neoplatonic traditions together is a shared 
sense of the utter and absolute transcendence of the divine above and 
beyond all. For Dionysius, the divine names point to this mode of divine 
transcendence precisely as images of it. As images of the Godhead, the 
divine names can never be identical with the Godhead, who remains always 
beyond in its ineffability and unknowability. However, as images of the 
Godhead, the divine names communicate the divine substance to God’s 
finite others.
Part of this communication includes the way in which the absolute 
being-beyond of the divine transcendence relates to forms of transcen-
dence in the world. As beyond, divine transcendence does not withhold 
transcendence as such. Rather it communicates transcendence albeit in 
different forms, all of which involve the divine names. Serving in this mid-
dle, the divine names, then, also communicate the way in which transcen-
dence is itself an analogous phenomenon. To borrow a well-known 
Aristotelian phrasing, ‘transcendence is spoken in many ways.’ Such an 
analogy of transcendence is necessary not only to understand its finite 
iterations, but to preserve the unique mode of transcendence that belongs 
to the divine amidst those finite iterations.
In metaxology, the divine names, or at least variations on them, become 
the topics of inquiry both in terms of their being ways in which the 
Overdetermined, Agapeic Origin (God) communicates with the world 
and in terms of their being phenomena present in the natural order (see 
e.g., GB 176–190). Within the metaxological picture of these phenom-
ena, a similar analogy of transcendence comes to light. This analogy of 
transcendence begins with what throughout his work Desmond refers to 
as “vectors of transcendence,” a taxonomy of the diverse ways in which 
transcendence as such presents itself in the world.
Desmond identifies three such vectors of transcendence. Briefly put: 
first transcendence, T1, identifies the exteriority of being as it is present in 
 
B. T. SAMMON

103
the otherness of extra-mental beings, that is, a world that is in becoming 
because it comes to be. It is the transcendence of creation itself as some-
thing given beyond any single self. Second transcendence, or T2, identifies 
the transcendence of self-being, or simply self-transcendence. The empha-
sis in this mode of transcendence is interiority, but an interiority that 
Desmond argues is only fulfilled by what is other to itself. There is in this 
interiority, therefore, an otherness at play in the self, that is, a surplus of 
self that stands other to the ‘becoming self,’ testifying to the self’s reliance 
upon otherness as such. Third transcendence, or T3, identifies transcen-
dence as such, that is, as the superior (rather than exterior or interior) 
other. It is a hyperbolic sense of transcendence serving as the original 
ground for all subsequent determinations (these three vectors appear 
throughout Desmond’s work especially after Philosophy and Its Others). 
The enumeration of these ought not be taken to correspond to three dis-
crete phenomena. Each vector is intertwined with the others, and each is 
a vital way in which being communicates itself. As Desmond explains, in 
tones similar to Dionysius above, “if we think any one of these (vectors of 
transcendence), or the One, we find ourselves also thinking of the others 
… because each is as communicative being, or a communication of being” 
(GB 107). To put it another way, these vectors of transcendence identify 
being in its communicative state, a happening of communication itself 
opening itself to participation. Similar to how the divine names identify 
communications from the superessential divine plenitude intending and 
inviting participation, so too does each vector for Desmond perform a 
similar role.
There is a sense in which Desmond reads these vectors and the onto-
logical conditions they constitute and make possible, from the perspective 
of participation, or even celebration. Even though he at times uses both 
terms, we might look at what he says of the “indirections of transcendence 
in the between” (GB 122–128). For Desmond, being arises from an over-
determined surplus to which the word ‘God’ and others like it (the divine, 
the absolute, etc.) point. Such pointing can only ever be indirect, given 
the overdetermination of that to which they point, and Desmond fore-
grounds four primary forms of such indirection: metaphoric, analogic, 
symbolic, and hyperbolic. God is not a univocally reducible being, which 
makes such indirections vital methods for metaxology.
How are these indirections participatory, or celebratory? As Desmond 
explains, “[i]ndirections that are directions can be (pre)figurations of that 
to which they are directed. They can be figurings in and through the 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

104
­primal ethos of what in the between is intimated as ultimate” (GB 122). 
Indirections in other words involve a porous openness to what is given 
before any consequent act that determines the given, the giver, or the giv-
ing: “In all these figurings,” explains Desmond, “mindfulness is patient to 
a communication of ultimacy we cannot either univocalize or dialectically 
sublate, even as we are in passage towards the hyperbole of the ultimate as 
the agapeic origin” (GB 122–123). These indirections reflect, then, the 
Dionysian senses of participation/celebration, in that they are ways of 
coming to share in the communication of the overdetermined origin inso-
far as they provoke a sharing in the very acts that constitute them.
The metaxological way of configuring transcendence reflects the 
Dionysian notion of divine presence in and with the formal inhabitation of 
creatures by the divine names. As if echoing the dynamic present in 
Dionsyius, Desmond, reflecting on the way that sacred naming relates to 
the hyperboles of being, asks: “How do the One and the many look here? 
There is some intimation of One beyond determination, as well as a sense 
of the indeterminate many … the overdeterminate One and indeterminate 
manyness are more than merely univocal, because charged with the equiv-
ocity of sacred value” (GB 177). It is precisely this equivocity of sacred 
value where the metaxu opens itself as the space between excess and finite 
determination. It is also the between where the divine names inhabit 
human thought as a way to God that is then known and understood in the 
performance of that way. This between is porous to the excess beyond 
itself provoking more definite expressions of the sacred.
For Desmond, as for Dionysius, divine names are given but not given 
simply, or univocally. In both projects, transcendence is conceived as the 
activity first of the overfull, plenitude of being that marks the divine, which 
is why participation becomes vital for each iteration. For Dionysius, the 
divine transcendence is known primarily by virtue of revelation and the 
metaxu of the divine names. These latter communicate the divine sub-
stance through the formal properties of creatures, which means they are 
“bearers” so to speak of divine transcendence (T3), as well as the otherness 
of creaturely transcendence (T1). Participation in them secures human 
self-transcendence (T2). In metaxology, the metaxu of the divine names 
undergoes an even more rigorous treatment, in which is discerned several 
other attributes and elements of this porous middle. “Plurivocal manifes-
tation,” Desmond explains, “has to do with the intertwining of selving 
and othering. Given the intertwining, does our naming the divine also 
show the divine naming itself—naming itself as entering into 
 
B. T. SAMMON

105
­communication with us—endowing the open porosity of community” 
(GB 179)? And it is precisely by virtue of the configuration of transcen-
dence released by this middle that community originates and is sustained 
more effectively.
Community
Can community exist without transcendence? Can anything be gathered 
without some power outside of those gathered things guiding and sustain-
ing the very gathering that constitutes community? Even for the argument 
that there is only the power of immanence that erupts as a communifying 
force, could this eruption, taking plural form since it erupts from diverse 
agents, ever find a commonality without some transcendent force giving 
itself to each eruption as that common and shared condition for unity?
The concern of this final section is not so much directed toward par-
ticular communities, or the way that community arises through social con-
struction. Rather, what is at stake here concerns the underlying givenness 
of community from a primordial, ontological origin. As the source of 
community, this primordial origin must be the fullness of being-as-­
community. This more primordial, ontological sense of community pro-
vides the conditions for the eventual communities that result from social 
construction. But it does not necessitate such construction in a univocal 
way, since the ontological givenness of community is itself a plurivocal 
phenomenon that announces itself and shapes itself with the diversity 
released from this plurivocity. There is, therefore, an urgency involved in 
thinking this primordial, ontological community as authentically as possi-
ble insofar as it will either be ratified or rejected at the level of social con-
struction. The challenge is not to ‘get it right’ since this would wrongly fix 
community in a univocal way. Rather, the challenge is to think properly 
the ontological givenness of community in order to overcome problematic 
interpretations that renege on what is given plurivocally (at times, even a 
reneging on the plurivocity itself as seen in, e.g., regimes of totality and 
tyranny). Is it possible to honor and do justice to that plurality without 
properly thinking the phenomenon of transcendence? The claim here is 
that part of what is at stake in properly thinking the ontologically given 
community concerns the role of transcendence.
For Dionysius, community most effectively takes the form of hierarchy, 
but grounded only upon the recognition that God, the good, transcends 
all things. “It is characteristic of the universal Cause, of this goodness 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

106
beyond all,” writes the Areopagite, “to summon everything to commu-
nion with him.”2 It is on account of the divine transcendence that God is 
able to be present to all things at all times, not as some discrete being in 
competition with other beings, but as the very form of communion that 
Dionysius believes is the divine intention. God is, we might say, the onto-
logical valence at the very foundation of all beings holding them together 
in their integrity and drawing them to each other in community.
For Dionysius, the communion of all creatures in God takes the form 
of a hierarchy, not as a system of unjustifiable superiority, or power main-
tenance (as it is often conceived today), but as a community of unity-in-­
plurality (see, e.g., Dionysius, DN 4, 10 [705 BC], and The Ecclesiastical 
Hierarchy 1, 1 [372B]). His vision, however, is much more than a social 
observation, but exposits a metaphysics of beauty by which all beings share 
their unique, integral ontological constitutions with other beings. In this 
sense, hierarchy is not an expression of a valuation system, but rather a 
dynamic (as opposed to static) intermediation of being and all its various 
modalities (the divine names) in and through the beings that constitute 
the hierarchy.
Given his Neoplatonic pedigree, it is not surprising to see hierarchy 
bound up with the dynamic of emanation. This means that the hierarchical 
community envisioned by Dionysius begins with God, who then emanates 
the divine names as the bonding agents, so to speak, through which beings 
are able to relate to one another. Dionysius provides the most explicit defi-
nition of hierarchy in the third chapter of his Celestial Hierarchy predi-
cated on his notion of symbolism. Symbolism, for Dionysius, identifies a 
mode of being’s power to distill the divine transcendent plenitude into 
more limited, or determined, forms. It therefore provides the foundation 
upon which the hierarchical activity can be understood as a ‘symbolic’ 
appearance, or ‘theophany,’ of the divine in and as the world.
At the very beginning of chapter three in the Celestial Hierarchy, 
Dionysius sets out his explanation of hierarchy by distinguishing it as a 
triad: (1) a sacred ordering, (2) a science or knowledge, and (3) an action/
operation/energy. Given its place at the opening of his account of hierar-
chy, such distinctions suggest that hierarchy ought to be understood for 
the remainder of the text in terms of dynamic activity rather than static 
structure.
2 Dionsyius, The Celestial Hierarchy [hereafter = CH], 4 [177C].
 
B. T. SAMMON

107
The remainder of this opening passage of the Celestial Hierarchy, indi-
cating the purpose and goal, explains that hierarchical activity is “assimi-
lated, as far as attainable, to the likeness of God, and conducted to the 
illuminations granted to it from God, according to its capacity, with a view 
to the Divine imitation” (CH 3, 1 [164D]). Hierarchy is an activity, an 
operation of sacred ordering, whose goal is divine union, and—through 
reception of divine light—divine imitation. For Dionysius, the cosmic 
order is designed in such a way that each created thing, expressing its 
unique relationship to its divine origin, bears its own inherent limitations 
(CH 3, 2 [165AB]). The hierarchical activity is designed so as to allow 
every participant to learn these limitations—limitations which, because 
they are hierarchically constituted, become more and more liberated by 
being’s hierarchical activity. That is to say, they are limitations that do not 
remain stagnant in some spatial-temporal position but are continually 
being pushed further and further into the very excess they attempt to 
limit. But such liberation is not a freeing from the hierarchy itself. Rather, 
it is a liberation into a greater participation within the operation of sacred 
ordering that marks hierarchical community. Hierarchy is an activity, that 
is, an active unifying of difference and an active differentiation of unity, 
that teaches as it assimilates, allowing its practitioners to unify themselves 
with each other and God, as the image of divine beauty (CH 3, 2 [165B]). 
As being is distilled through hierarchical activity, the intentionality 
becomes apparent:
“The purpose, then, of hierarchy is the assimilation and union, as far as 
attainable, with God, having him leader of all religious science and opera-
tion, by looking unflinchingly to his most divine beauty, and copying, as 
far as possible, and by perfecting its own followers as divine images, mir-
rors most luminous and without flaw, receptive of the primal light and the 
supremely divine ray, and devoutly filled with the entrusted radiance, and 
again, spreading this radiance ungrudgingly to those after it, in accordance 
with the supremely divine regulations” (CH, 3, 2 [165A]).
When read through the metaxological distinction between passio 
essendi, that is, the patience of being or the reception of the given, and the 
conatus essendi, that is, the active effort to be, Dionysian community is 
both, though more a passio essendi than a conatus essendi, requiring the 
reception of being given first from its divine source, but then transferred 
through the (secondary causality of) other creatures. In its vertical recep-
tion, ‘being’ in this form is horizontally passed through members of the 
hierarchy to other members: being inhabits the metaxu between ‘vertical’ 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

108
and ‘horizontal.’ This ‘receiving’ and ‘passing on’ occurs when each mem-
ber vertically looks ‘unflinchingly’ at the divine beauty in order to imitate 
this beauty for every other member. Community, in this Dionysian vision, 
involves the ontological union of all things with each other in and as their 
differences from one another.
In the divine name tradition, however, God is both the names and 
beyond these names simultaneously, introducing a depth of between-ness 
not easily spoken or thought. It is this depth of between-ness where the 
ontologically primordial gathering power of being first erupts to become 
intelligible. Metaxology provides the grounds for a deepening recognition 
of this utter between-ness found in the divine name tradition. We see this 
in the way that Desmond articulates, for instance, the role of beauty and 
the aesthetic in the primordial togetherness of being and its subsequent 
communication. “Aesthetic happening,” writes Desmond, “shows the 
enabling ethos as a togetherness of splendid beings. Beauty here is not 
something subjectivistic: aesthetic show communicates the beings them-
selves and their togetherness in terms of integral harmony and community 
with others” (GB 135). Here, beauty reveals how the good (the enabling 
ethos) is already a togetherness of beings that are in themselves splendid, 
or beautiful, albeit in an overdetermined unity. But beauty here does not 
indicate the subjective judgment of taste on the outward appearance of a 
being. It means, in ways similar to Dionysius, the very communication of 
a self as an outward manifestation in self-transcendence (T2) as well as how 
the self relates to or is in togetherness with other beings (T1) in terms of 
an integral harmony with the agapeic origin (T3).
Community, therefore, derives from the communicative dimension of 
being, a dimension which is porous to the overdetermined agapeic origin. 
Desmond refers to being’s porosity to its origin with the name ‘open 
whole,’ a name that, like the divine names, not only identifies the com-
munication of the origin in and as being, but gestures toward the God 
beyond the whole. “The ‘open whole’ of communicative being suggests a 
God beyond the whole, where now communicative being entails the com-
munication of being in a radical ontological sense. If the communicative 
being of the human being (T2) and world (T1) communicates opening to 
their other, is that other merely the recipient of that opening? But how 
could that be? For are not the human being and the world themselves 
given to be? If so, would not the original other be communicative being 
as ‘over,’ as in excess of what is given in finite transcendence? Were not this 
other a source of communicative being, hence a source of giving out 
 
B. T. SAMMON

109
beyond itself, the result would be the fixation of God in a frozen impassiv-
ity, and we would return to dualistic opposition. We would passionately 
transcend to this other, but we would speak with a wall. There would be 
no communication” (GB 108).
In metaxology, community is mined to a depth where being is itself 
communicative: community presupposes communication as much as com-
munication presupposes community, both of which in turn presuppose a 
giving of being that is both an act of self-transcendence and a unity with 
others. The communicative nature of being, in turn, requires and there-
fore can be said to prove transcendence (T3). What we find in metaxology, 
as well as in the divine name tradition is a sense of being as a “communica-
tive togetherness” (GB 176). That is, there is a comradery, a togetherness, 
a solidarity, at the level of communicative intentionality—communication 
intends togetherness in some fashion. In the intention of all events of 
communication, there is a togetherness even prior to the event that reveals 
itself by means of the subsequent act of communication. Communication, 
in turn, manifests the conditions of community that provided the very 
conditions for the event of communication even as the event of communi-
cation now ratifies the primordial togetherness of community (or its 
neglect).
Community and communication bespeak the active presence of those 
phenomena identified as divine names—one could even go so far as to say 
communication and community are themselves divine names precisely 
because they depend on transcendence! God, it might be said, leaks into 
our every effort to communicate, in that every communicative effort pre-
supposes a shared ethos (the good) by which the meaning of communica-
tion can be made intelligible (the true). Such a making intelligible takes 
many forms because the communicative dimension of being is itself plu-
rivocal precisely as communicative. And so what we find in both metaxol-
ogy and the divine name tradition is an account of being whose 
communicative intentionality announces in continual performance the 
divine presence; not, to be sure, as a univocal identity to be taken hold of, 
but as a presence always to be sought in and through community.
Conclusion
In similar ways, metaxology and the divine names provide resources for 
thinking and practicing transcendence and community, both in terms of 
how each engenders a habit of mind conscious of the porous nature of 
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

110
being in its relation to the overdetermined, agapeic origin, and for how 
each offers a more determinate account of what the origin releases in its 
transcendence communication. Also like the divine name tradition, metax-
ology imagines being as a community of the good, the true, the beauti-
ful—in effect, as a community of metaphysical phenomena porously open 
to their origin while equally communicative of that origin to finite human 
thought. When considered in such a context, it becomes possible to see 
how both the divine name tradition and metaxology establish a sense of 
transcendence that is as beyond as it is intimate to the finite order. Only 
from within such a context of transcendence can community flourish 
because such flourishing depends on a coming together in unity of diverse 
agents without compromising either the unity or the diversity. Insofar as 
this sort of gathering is possible, it might be that it is only recognizable 
and communicable by means of a logos that is willing to stand utterly 
between. The divine names once provided both the context and the cour-
age to stand in this between. It may be that one day a debt of gratitude will 
be owed to William Desmond for reawakening this vital sense of transcen-
dence and community.
Bibliography
Adler, Amitai. 2009. What’s in a Name? Reflections upon Divine Names and the 
Attraction of God to Israel. Jewish Biblical Quarterly 37: 265–269.
Dionysius the Areopagite. 1991. On the Divine Names: The Celestial Hierarchy, 
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the Mystical Theology. In Corpus Dionysiacum, ed. 
Beate R. Suchla, G. Heil, and A.M. Ritter, vols. I–II. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1990.
Gieschen, Charles. 2003. The Divine Name in Ante-Nicene Christology. Vigilae 
Christianae 57: 115–158.
Jones, John D. 2008. (Mis?)-Reading the Divine Names as a Science: Aquinas’s 
Interpretation of the Divine Names of (Pseudo) Dionysius the Areopagite. St. 
Vladimir’s Theological Quarterly 52: 143–172.
Kelly, Thomas A.F., ed. 2007. Between System and Poetics: William Desmond and 
Philosophy After Dialectics. London: Routledge.
Leeman, Saul. 2004. The Names of God. Jewish Biblical Quarterly 32: 104–107.
O’Rourke, Fran. 2005. Pseudo-Dionysius and the Metaphysics of Aquinas. Notre 
Dame: NDU Press.
Sammon, Brendan. 2013. The God Who Is Beauty: Beauty as a Divine Name in 
Thomas Aquinas and Dionysius the Areopagite. Eugene: Pickwick.
 
B. T. SAMMON

111
Shaw, Christopher David. 2012. On Exceeding Determination and the Ideal of 
Reason: Immanuel Kant, William Desmond, and the Noumenological Principle. 
Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press.
Simpson, Christopher Ben. 2009. Religion, Metaphysics, and the Postmodern: 
William Desmond and John D. Caputo. Eugene: Wipf and Stock.
Simpson, Christopher Ben, and Brendan Sammon, eds. 2017. William Desmond 
and Contemporary Theology. South Bend: Notre Dame University Press.
Taylor, Charles. 2007. A Secular Age. London: Belknap Press.
  THE METAXOLOGY OF THE DIVINE NAMES 

113
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_7
CHAPTER 7
Metaxologizing Our God-Talk: Desmond, 
Kearney, and the Divine Between
Mark F. Novak
Contemporary philosophy of religion in recent decades has seen tradi-
tional metaphysical understandings of God slowly crumble apart. God is 
no longer generally understood as being omnipotent, omniscient, or 
omni-anything. In certain circles, God is perceived as weak and powerless, 
an event, and a call for justice (e.g., Derrida, Caputo). In other circles, 
God is relegated to the sublime, fully unknown and unrepresentable, in 
two divergent poles: revered and apophatic (e.g., Marion, Levinas), and 
horrific and monstrous (e.g., Žižek, Kristeva). While some of these moves 
seem helpful in our ongoing task of coming to understand who God is, 
others present changes that are either unhelpful or simply negative. 
Regarding all these new possibilities and manners of thinking about God, 
we must ask: Which ones are helpful? What aspects will lead us closer to a 
truer understanding of God?
Two of the main figures engaged in this area of rethinking and reimag-
ining God are William Desmond and Richard Kearney. Their recent work 
pushes the boundaries of the ways that we think and talk about God, and 
they both share a common theme: a strong desire to work in the middle 
M. F. Novak (*) 
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
e-mail: novakm1@mcmaster.ca

114
spaces, in the in-betweens, se metaxu. Their own individual work over the 
years has been productive, as has the ongoing dialogue between them. 
How can we talk about God without creating dominating and totalizing 
views? How can we balance the hope for an eschaton with the weight of an 
archē? When is it appropriate to speak of God as agape and when as eros? I 
explore these questions by examining Desmond and Kearney’s work, to 
see the ways in which they create more space to continue defining and 
imagining God via middle ways and in-betweens between polarizing views. 
Charting a course through actuality and possibility, eschatology and archē-
ology, and agape and eros provides us with the most apt ways of talking 
about God based on our phenomenological and historical experiences of 
the world.
I examine these topics in four main sections: First I look at the work 
done by Desmond on the topics of Being and God with an ear to his 
notion of metaxology. Next, I look at the similar, and in many ways over-
lapping, work of Kearney, a thinker who also inhabits between spaces. 
Third, I examine some of their scholarly interaction, and how it has moved 
their thought forward. I turn lastly to theopoetics, showing that theopoet-
ics and metaxology are apt partners for carrying forward our understand-
ing of Being and God. As Heidegger saliently alerts us:
Language is the house of Being. In its home man dwells. Those who think 
and those who create with words are the guardians of this home. Their 
guardianship accomplishes the manifestation of Being insofar as they bring 
the manifestation to language and maintain it in language through their 
speech. (1977, p. 193)
Since humans and Being both come to fruition in a linguistic milieu, it is 
our responsibility to continually be creative with our language about 
Being and God. By ever expanding and playing with our God-talk, and 
using different modes of imag(in)ing and conceptualizing God at differ-
ent times, we can help prevent the ossification and idolization of those 
conceptions, thus allowing God to truly live.1
1 Richard J. Colledge makes a similar comparison of Desmond and Kearney in a recent 
edited book on Kearney, though he does not pursue the theopoetic angle. Unfortunately, I 
did not have access to this volume before my piece was sent to the publisher. See Colledge 
(2018).
 
M. F. NOVAK

115
Desmond on the Overdeterminacy of the Agapeic 
God
Although I have invoked Heidegger’s notion of the world-creating power 
of language, it must be noted that Desmond is, shall we say, allergic to 
much of what Heidegger has to say. While he agrees with Heidegger that 
there is a need to open ourselves up to the question of Being again, or to 
truly open ourselves up to questions of Being for the first time in a rigor-
ous manner, Desmond finds that Heidegger has left us empty in many 
ways. In an interview with Kearney, Desmond wonders if Heidegger has 
not, in his questioning of Being, removed the Good from Being entirely 
(Kearney and Desmond 2012, p. 239). This is a move that Desmond takes 
to be unacceptable. The question of Being, and of the Divine in relation 
to questions of Being, must be: How do we think of Being and the Good 
together? How can we come to solutions, tenuous as they may be, that do 
not sacrifice one of these to the other? If we are unable to prevent the 
Good from being jettisoned in our ongoing discussions of Being and God, 
then we are doomed from the get-go. Like many working in continental 
philosophy since its post-structural and post-modern events, Desmond is 
cognizant of the need to move past traditional understandings of God and 
metaphysics; however, unlike many of these thinkers, he is not willing to 
abandon metaphysical thinking altogether. He is committed to finding 
new, fresh, and life-giving ways to think on these topics, and his manner of 
approaching this is to do so ‘from the middle.’
Desmond’s aim in thinking of Being is to think of Being and metaphys-
ics in and from the middle. In his words: “I develop what I call the ‘metax-
ological sense of being,’ in contrast to the univocal, the equivocal, and the 
dialectical senses…. The metaxological sense of being is concerned with a 
logos of the metaxu, a discourse of the ‘between,’ the middle” (PU 10–11). 
He sees this middle way as a helpful corrective to extant ways of meta-
physical thinking. According to Desmond, a univocal reading of Being is 
reductionistic, simplistic, and completely misses the complexities of life; an 
equivocal reading, however, swings the pendulum to the opposite side, 
providing a deconstructive reading that is also unhelpful, in many ways 
because it has given up on thinking through the ambiguities of Being (PU 
12–13). While dialectical thinking allows the discourse between opposites, 
such as transcendence-immanence, self-other, unity-plurality, and even 
agape-eros, ultimately, this way of thinking collapses these poles, subsum-
ing both into some new transcendence, what Desmond refers to as a 
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

116
­‘dialectical univocity’ (PU 14). Desmond’s helpful move with metaphysi-
cal thinking is to make this collapse of the middle impossible (PU 12). He 
aims to achieve this state of tension with his novel idea ‘metaxology.’ 
While metaxology is not the antithesis of dialectical thinking, it takes a 
firm stance against any type of thinking that reduces otherness and inter-
mediation (PU 14). Applying this approach to transcendence and the 
divine, Desmond writes: “How think of a God of the between, from the 
between, without reducing God to the between?” (2006, p. 58). Our best 
hope for understanding God and Being must take place in this middle 
space, where genuine dialogue and interaction with otherness can 
happen.
In addition to its commitment to honouring otherness and plurality in 
a non-reducible middle is the dual nature of metaxology. In his recent 
book The Intimate Universal, Desmond explains this dual nature with a 
nod to the Divine:
While there is divine transcendence in excess to immanence, this transcen-
dence is intimate with the being of the metaxu, the between. It involves a 
meta: both a ‘beyond’ and an ‘in the midst,’ both an outside and an inside, 
both making us at home and making us not at home. (IU 418)
If the transcendent Divine were either wholly outside or wholly inside our 
conceptual grasp, destruction and violence would ensue. Rather, metaxol-
ogy calls us towards a faithful response to this doubleness. “Outside: all 
our idols come into question but this is a release toward the true God. 
Inside: agapeic love appeals to us, most intimately and most universally, in 
the beloved community where goodness gives us to ourselves, goodness 
that we can pass on to others” (IU 418). Metaxology, then, is a dialogue 
of the middle and in the middle that helps to stave off totalizing violence 
from either side, especially when it concerns our relation to the Divine. In 
its desire to speak about God, human discourse reaches its limit and so, as 
Desmond writes in God and the Between, “[g]iven our indirect direction to 
God via the hyperboles,” metaxology becomes “an adventure in specula-
tive metaxology” (GB 159). Rather than firm absolutes about God, 
Desmond describes the journey to plurivocity and naming God as “grop-
ing in darkness or feeling one’s way in a fog” (GB 281).
Desmond’s work here highlights something crucial: Metaxological 
thinking requires not just a stance of thinking about Being from the mid-
dle, but an explanation of how this thinking is to be done. Invoking words 
 
M. F. NOVAK

117
such as ‘play,’ ‘prayer,’ ‘adventure,’ ‘poetics,’ and ‘mindfulness’ in his writ-
ing, Desmond alerts us to the approach that we are to take towards life 
lived in the middle. His “interest is not with sheer indefiniteness, nor fixed 
determinacy, but with something of the play between the indeterminate 
and determinacy; and again not an interplay that leads to the determina-
tion or self-determination of the indeterminacy as indefinite” (IST 112). 
Desmond thus encourages a stance of continued openness to the divine 
that is found in the stance from and of the middle. In Is There a Sabbath 
for Thought, he writes that
[p]rayer is awakening to the passing communication of the divine in the 
finite metaxu. We do not produce it; it is not the result of our determination 
or self-determination; we are ‘determined,’ or better, released into the mid-
dle where we can sink deeper into ontological sleep, or begin to awake more 
fully to what communicates us to be at all. (IST 130)
It is this being ‘released into the middle’ (a point that I return to in the 
final section on theopoetics) that is key to bear in mind, for “[m]etaxo-
logical metaphysics seeks to be mindfulness in an agapeic way” (IST 132).
Kearney on the Erotic God of Possibility
Kearney starts his The God Who May Be with the enticing claim “God 
neither is nor is not but may be” (2001, p. 1). This statement exemplifies 
his commitment to overcoming, or thinking through, traditional binary 
logical structures by looking for what lies between. Specifically, this 
statement begins his never-ending wager to overcome ontotheology, 
which he sees as a tradition that has “granted priority to being over the 
good” (2001, p. 19) and actuality over possibility (2001, p. 99). The 
connection or fusion of ontology and theology into ontotheology can be 
largely traced back, as he sees it, to the interpretative mishaps that led the 
’ehyeh ’asher ’ehyeh of Exodus 3:14—that mysterious name of God which 
has a plurality of possible, and ever-growing, meanings—to become “I 
AM that I AM.” Greek translators translated the Hebrew verb ’ehyeh as 
einai, and later Latin thinkers translated it as esse, as they assumed there to 
be no fundamental difference between the original Hebrew and the Greek 
translation (2001, p. 22). When read in the light of Greek philosophical 
categories, this translation encourages us to see no future or past in 
God, but instead to understand God’s essence as synonymous with God’s 
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

118
existence, and even with existence as such. When religious thinkers 
(especially in the scholastic period) interpreted God and scripture 
through Greek metaphysical categories, the “conflation of Yahweh with 
the supreme Being of the philosophers [was] sealed” (2001, p. 24). This 
can be seen, in a way, as the beginning of the death of God. The tempes-
tuous and mercurial Yahweh is now the God of metaphysics, and, as 
Heidegger made clear (1960, p. 53), all ontology was now ontotheol-
ogy, what Kearney calls “the conceptual capture of God as a category of 
substance” (2001, p. 24).
Kearney’s specific approach to God derives from his general approach 
towards matters of divinity and hermeneutics. In The God Who May Be, 
Kearney discusses possible names—“methodological pseudonyms” (2001, 
p. 6)—for the kind of philosophical work that he is engaged in. He names 
three: dynamatology, for describing potency, possibility, and the ‘logic of 
the dynamizing possibility’; metaphorology, for the ways that religious lan-
guage can say something about the unsayable and can “transfer, transit, 
or carry across” (2001, p. 7) that which can be approximated, but never 
fully grasped; and, aptly, the middle of the three options that he suggests 
for his poetics of possibility is Desmond’s metaxology, highlighting his and 
Desmond’s “determination to choose a middle way (Greek, metaxy) 
between the extremes of absolutism and relativism” (2001, p. 6). Kearney 
writes that “this middle space, or as I prefer to call it mi-lieu, is chosen as 
an alternative to what I consider to be two polar opposites in contemporary 
thinking about God (which sometimes end up colluding with each other), 
namely: (a) the hyper-ascendant deity of mystical or negative theology; 
and (b) the consigning of the sacred to the domain of abyssal abjection” 
(2001, pp. 6–7). He argues that “[w]hile both positions push the notion 
of God to opposite extremes—to the highest of heights or lowest of 
depths—they share a common aversion to any mediating role for narrative 
imagination. For both, the divine remains utterly unthinkable, unname-
able, unrepresentable—that is, unmediatable” (2001, p. 7). Coming from 
his strong background in, and methodological adherence to, hermeneu-
tics, Kearney’s approach to questions of religion and the Divine actively 
seeks out this mediating function, not least for its attention to otherness. 
This early work on metaxology is picked up by Kearney in his 2010 book 
Anatheism, where he explores a new way of understanding God after God. 
Similar to how Desmond understands metaxology, Kearney describes 
anatheism as neither a univocal or equivocal reading of God or religion, 
nor as the synthesis of these produced via sublation of a dialectic; rather, 
 
M. F. NOVAK

119
anatheism “is a movement—not a state—that refuses all absolute talk about 
the absolute, negative or positive” (2010, p. 16).
Kearney, then, like Desmond, operates in the between spaces and the 
beyond places of philosophy, religion, and hermeneutics, and seeks a God 
who neither is nor is not—that is, neither ontological (and so surely not 
onto-theo-logical) nor eschatological—but who may be, that is, onto-­
eschatological. Kearney’s proposed third way approaches God “neither as 
non-being nor as being but as the possibility-to-be” (2001, p. 8). He finds 
support for this view from Nicholas of Cusa, the fifteenth-century mystic 
and philosophical theologian, who suggested that we think of God as pos-
sest. This coinage combines, but really seeks to chart a path between, posse 
and esse (or est). According to Kearney, this possibilizing middle way is 
where we “encounter the nuptial nexus where divine and human desires 
overlap” (2001, p. 8). The middle way highlights a stance of co-possibility 
for humanity and divinity. He suggests that, in reference to Exodus 3:14, 
“God’s ‘I shall be’ appears to need Moses’ response ‘Here I am’ in order 
to enter history and blaze the path towards the Kingdom” (2001, p. 26). 
God can then be thought of as beyond Being, or between Being and non-­
Being, requiring us to answer a call to allow God to be. Kearney explicates 
that God may or may not be, and so that God is not required to be. But if 
God is not required to be, if God is a may-be (peut-être) God, what are the 
conditions upon which God moves from may-Being to Being proper? 
Kearney responds that it is the affirming response of humans that continu-
ally brings God into Being. In Kearney’s poetics of a possible God, God 
possibilizes humans who in turn possibilize God. This relation is not a 
one-way street, then, but a back and forth, a dance of lovers. And good 
dances, eschatological dances, take two (2001, p. 110).
Desmond and Kearney Together: Finding 
the Middle Ground
Having looked at Desmond and Kearney on metaxology and the Divine, it 
is quite apparent that there are many similarities in their thinking. The 
most important of these similarities are their adherence to thinking from 
the middle, and the use of play and poetics in their musings on Being and 
the Divine. In this section, I examine the productive interchanges that have 
taken place between them. As we have seen, both thinkers are engaged in 
rethinking our understanding of metaphysics, and do so in a way that takes 
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

120
a stance against univocity, equivocity, and dialecticism. However, even 
though metaxological thinking is antithetical to dialectical thinking, 
because of its attempts to overcome otherness, both Desmond and Kearney 
seemingly take a preference to one side of certain dialectics over the other. 
That is, though they are adamant about being in the middle, they are not 
adrift in the flux completely, but choose to align themselves with a specific 
shoreline. The main dialectics, at least as I read them, are actuality and pos-
sibility, eschatology and ontology, and agape and eros. As both thinkers are 
content to live in the tension of the metaxological space, neither of them 
are tied down to an entrenched and dogmatic position. Rather, we can 
detect a movement in their views of God and Being, due in no small part 
to their ongoing relationship, dialogue, and kindred critique of each other.
Kearney’s attempt at re-conceiving God focuses on the importance of 
eschatology and God as loving-possibilizing, rather than a position that 
sees God purely as actuality and fait accompli. Commenting on Kearney’s 
preferred futural stance, Desmond writes: “I have learned from his stress 
on eschatological possibility, for my own work tends more to stress a 
certain ‘archaeology.’ My conviction is that we cannot think last things 
without first thinking first things, there being no re-creation and escha-
tology without first creation” (2006, p.  56). We can see here that, 
though Desmond is antithetical to how dialectical thinking fully sublates 
two differing positions, he is comfortable with leaning closer to one side. 
So, while he has learnt from Kearney, Desmond’s concern is that 
Kearney’s eschatological possibilizing may fall into certain temptations 
and ignore that for God to possibilize anything, God must first be in 
actuality. As Desmond points out, in The God Who May Be, Kearney writes 
that “possest may now be seen as advent rather than archē, as eschaton 
rather than principium” (2006, p.  67; referring to Kearney 2001, 
pp. 110–111). Desmond is right to question Kearney on this, for if the 
eschatological takes complete precedence, then to what extent is God 
onto-eschatological, and in what sense is this God still seen metaxologi-
cally? Kearney does make clear, though, that his understanding of God is 
onto-eschatological, that possest contains both posse and esse primordially. 
This position of onto-eschatology is one that, though it can lean one way 
or the other, tries to honour the best of what metaxology is aiming for, 
and though Kearney leans more towards eschatological possibility, and 
Desmond more towards archē-­ological actuality, both are willing to live 
and move in this tension.
 
M. F. NOVAK

121
When it comes to the love of God, Desmond and Kearney again find 
themselves leaning towards one type of love over the other. Desmond sees 
agape as the type of love that should be primary, for its self-sacrificial and 
service-oriented stance, whereas Kearney puts primacy on eros, for the sen-
suous, passionate, and desiring nature of God. Since the Bible attests to 
God revealing Godself in both these manners of love, neither Desmond’s 
nor Kearney’s case is without warrant. Because of the dual nature of eros—
heavenly (eros uranios) and tyrannical (eros turannos)—and that the for-
mer is too easily tempted by the latter, Desmond is adamant that, though 
there is an erotic expression to the love of God, ultimately the surplus of 
agapeic love must be primary. Kearney takes the opposite stance: While 
there are dimensions of agape in God, it is the erotic and desiring that are 
primary. So there seems to be a bit of a standoff: Each thinker critiques the 
other’s preference for how best to understand God’s love. However, 
Kearney has responded to Desmond by saying that his understanding of 
God as eros is not operating out of lack.
According to the most common interpretation of desire, something or 
someone is sought out by desire—and usually objectified in the process—
to meet a need, or fill a lack in the seeker. Aware of this general view, and 
avoiding its pitfalls, Kearney avers that the God of loving-possibilizing 
desires out of excess. From this standpoint, God’s desire is not from less 
to more, but from more to less (2007, p. 193).2 Kearney suggests another 
move to further align his and Desmond’s views. In response to Desmond’s 
critique, Kearney writes that
we should try to avoid both extreme positions—of reducing agape to eros 
(as he thinks I suggest) or of reducing eros to agape (as I think he sug-
gests)—and that we should do so by speaking instead of a very specific 
modality of eros, agapeic eros, which would be suitable to God, capturing 
both the sense of unconditional agape and conditional dependency on 
­history for this love to be realized as the ‘more’ (of surplus and excess) mov-
ing towards the ‘less’ (of human frailty and flesh). (2007, p. 195)
2 See also Kearney (2001, p. 64): “But this elevation of desire towards the Most-High does 
not imply (as one might think) a Platonic elevation to a transcendental hinterworld. On the 
contrary, the experience of height arises, once again, in the midst of my relation to the concrete 
living other. The good beyond finds itself inscribed between one and another. Desire here again 
reveals itself not as deficiency but as positivity. Not as manque-à-être but as grace and gratuity, 
gift and surplus. Less as insufficiency than as the bursting forth of the ‘more’ in the ‘less’.”
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

122
Kearney’s sense of ‘agapeic eros’ (and should we not also have an ‘erotic 
agape’?) seems to answer Desmond’s concerns, and more, it seems to 
operate more truly from out of the metaxological space. That is, it strongly 
resists reducing aspects of love to one of its modalities, and so affirms con-
tinually living in the space between them.
How has Desmond responded to Kearney’s idea of speaking of this 
specific modality of ‘agapeic eros’? In The Intimate Universal—which 
came out in 2016, nine years after the chapter containing Kearney’s sug-
gestion—Desmond seemingly provides an answer:
The excellences of immanence need not be negated by the agapeics of the 
intimate universal. Nor is it a question of dualistic opposition of erotics and 
agapeics, of immanent excellence and transcendent good. It is not a ques-
tion of one side determining the other, or of one side dialectically sublating 
the other into a self-determining totality…. The agapeics is not a dialectical 
sublation (or sublimation) of the erotics. (IU 390)
And a few pages later, he writes: “[O]nce again there is no need dualisti-
cally to oppose the erotics and the agapeics. There can be differences with-
out dualistic oppositions, for these latter easily turn into antagonisms and 
so return us to a dialectic of sovereignty and servility” (IU 394). In both 
these passages, Desmond makes clear that agape and eros should be on 
equal footing. Neither type of love should be primary and reduce other 
forms of love to it, thereby attempting to create a self-determined or self-­
mediated totality. In this way, he has greatly complicated their relation to 
one another or, rather, allowed this always-existing complex relation to 
come to the fore. However, it still seems that he gives preference to or sees 
agape as more originary.
The last four chapters of The Intimate Universal, for example, go from 
the idiotics, to the aesthetics, to the erotics, and lastly to the agapeics of 
the intimate universal, this being the pattern that he follows in the ‘selv-
ing’ of human beings in Being and the Between (BB 377–415). So, while 
the erotic and agapeic are related non-oppositionally, there is still an asym-
metry present wherein agape is higher than eros. While this might be true, 
it misses another layer of complexity that Desmond sees when it comes to 
these tiers of ‘selving,’ or the ‘potencies of being,’ and thus to the place of 
eros and agape. The potencies of being should not be thought of as ascend-
ing rungs of a ladder, but as co-existing. From this stance, agape is a type 
of ‘factor’ or secret companion that is present in all four of the aspects 
 
M. F. NOVAK

123
which come to full fruition in the final, agapeic level. Desmond highlights 
this view when he writes that “[a]gapeic being is itself idiotic” (BB 415). 
Though Desmond here complicates the relation between eros and agape, 
his bias towards agape is still clear: Agape is the silent partner and the cul-
minating position; it thus guides and allows the ‘potencies of being’ to be.
At the end of this look at Desmond and Kearney’s influence on each 
other, we can see that there has been a greater alignment of their view-
points. Nevertheless, it seems that in their quest to understand God from 
the middle, both Desmond and Kearney lean towards other sides of the 
middle: Desmond more towards agape, archē, and actuality, and Kearney 
more towards eros, eschaton, and possibility. Commenting on this, and 
how we should understand God and the middle, Desmond writes that
otherness and transcendence is a great problem…. I would say it is not a 
matter of finding a middle between these, as thinking about the meaning of 
middles, and of the God of the between that possibilizes the between with-
out being reduced to it, whose otherness as creative is also a name for its 
being in communication with what it brings to be. (2006, p. 59)
It is Desmond’s invocation of this creative ‘God of the between’ that 
brings us to our final section.
Theopoetics as Metaxology’s Future
In this last section, I want to look at the ways in which theopoetics may be 
a vehicle for metaxology, a way of expressing, espousing, and even creating 
the divine from within the milieu of the between. This is because theopo-
etics is a way of living in the middle, and of eschewing final and totalizing 
answers and discourse. Indeed, theopoetics is as much—if not more—con-
cerned with how it conveys what it conveys, than in what it conveys. This 
is to say that the form of theopoetics is what it is trying to convey. Rather 
than just a way of writing, theopoetics is an embodied way of being-in-the-
world that includes writing, speaking, acting, experiencing, and thinking, 
but ultimately, it is a way of being-in-the-middle. The function of ques-
tions in theopoetics is not to lead one to hard and fast answers, or to 
answers at all, but rather to have one’s questions deepened. The mystery 
of God and life (are they not the same?) is expanded, then, and not 
contracted. This is because theopoetics is not merely another way of think-
ing, another metaphysical jumping through the hoops; rather, it is a way 
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

124
of being-in-the-world. And as a discourse native to being-in-the-­world, 
theopoetics attempts to “speak at the intersection of spiritual and material 
reality without compromising either side” (Krabbe 2016, pp. 13–14).
In his recent book on theopoetics—A Beautiful Bricolage: Theopoetics as 
God-Talk for Our Time—Silas Krabbe discusses the history and develop-
ment of theopoetics, from its origins in people like Gabriel Vahanian, Rubem 
Alves, and Amos Wilder, to figures like Catherine Keller, John D. Caputo, 
and Kearney who are engaging with it today. When discussing theopoetics’ 
relation to God and how we talk about God, Krabbe writes that “[i]nsofar 
as God lives, propositional language will continue to fail to correlate directly 
to God, or fully correspond to humanity that lives anew in the resurrection 
life” (2016, p. 108). By living in this middle space, and at the intersection 
of spiritual and material realities, theopoetics finds that the best way for 
humans to express God is not through propositional language, but through 
the poetic. However, to be clear, theopoetics is not a discourse against the-
ology, or against systematic thinking, nor is it just poetry added to systemic 
thinking. It should rather be understood as what comes before system, and 
so what guides and allows systematic thinking to be. Again, it is a form of 
enactment, a way of being. Further, and in a way that echoes Desmond, 
theopoetics is concerned with releasing, or ‘letting be,’ both humans and 
God into the middle space. Krabbe writes that “theopoetics can be under-
stood as humanity’s way of returning the favor and extending Gelassenheit 
to God. For in theopoetics, there is intentional space for the interpreter, the 
new, the novel, and the possible—all spaces in which God can play and resist 
the ossification of the grave” (2016, p. 108). This aspect of theopoetics 
aligns with Kearney’s emphasis on the co-possibilizing powers for God and 
humans. When system ignores its poetic origins, it becomes stale, static, and 
ultimately destructive towards God and humans. Tuned in to this realiza-
tion, both Desmond and Kearney’s work uses theopoetics as a discourse for 
understanding and expressing God.
In Beyond Hegel and Dialectic, Desmond writes, in a way, of the impor-
tance of a theopoetic way of thinking and writing. He highlights a key feature 
of theopoetics, namely, that poetic thinking is prior to systematic thinking:
The fact that I have to tell a story to make a philosophical point is relevant 
to the metaxological mode of naming the happening of evil.3 As philoso-
phers, we cannot escape from the truth of the story in its representational 
3 Though referring specifically to evil, the point he makes is relevant to all discourse.
 
M. F. NOVAK

125
particularity into the impersonal universal. The story keeps us mindful of the 
intimate truth of particularity that the philosophical concept is tempted to 
subordinate or supersede or forget. Metaxological naming must be both 
imagistic and conceptual to do justice to the mindfulness required by the 
matter at issue. And there is no speculative Aufhebung of the story into the 
concept. Rather the naming of the philosopher must be plurivocal. Our very 
concepts must themselves try to maintain in themselves the memory of the 
truth that the story tells. The concept must bear in itself the traces of its own 
origin in its other, the originating story. (BHD 233–234)
What Desmond draws to the fore here is that the originating story must 
always lead and direct our conceptualizations of it. Though our naming 
and wording of anything, but especially the divine, involves both imaging 
and concepts, both stories and systems, to live life in the between one 
must always be open to the guiding of images and stories. Desmond is 
clear that metaxological thinking is both imagistic and conceptual, but that 
the latter is impotent without the former.
This commitment to living and thinking from the middle of the systematic 
and poetic has been with Desmond throughout his career. Desmond fleshes 
out further his reasoning for this in his essay “Between System and Poetics: 
On the Practices of Philosophy.” He makes salient that philosophizing requires 
systematic thinking; however, since poetic thinking is more primary, and 
closer to the givenness of Being, there cannot be honest systematic thinking 
without poetics (2007, pp. 20–21). On this view, Desmond writes that “with-
out the poetics of coming to be, for us there is no systematics of being at all. 
Poetics deals with a bringing or coming to be; systematics finds interconnec-
tions in what has come to be” (2007, p. 21). When discussing what poetics 
means to him, Desmond elucidates that it is more than just adding poetry to 
systematic thinking. Describing his own practice, he writes that poetics
is not a matter of giving to thought a kind of ‘feel’; not simply a kind of 
evocation, though it can be both; not just a rhetorical embellishment that 
otherwise puts drapery over the sturdy drab furniture of thinking. It has 
more to do with enactment: the very concreteness of thinking itself as per-
formed in fitting words. The words are not just a matter of ‘talk about’ a 
something, but are uttered or written somehow to bring to pass a happen-
ing, to enact it mindfully. (2007, p. 26)
Theopoetics, then, is a way of enacting and performing Being—a way of 
bringing it into existence. It is, Desmond writes, “like a poiesis: a coming 
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

126
or bringing to be; an emergence as if from a kind of nothing, but then also 
a becoming in terms of a forming” (2007, p. 26). Before looking further 
at poiesis, and its relation to language, I turn now to Kearney’s engage-
ment with theopoetics.
Kearney’s commitment to a poetic and narrative way of thinking has 
been a key element of his career. And, according to him, this way of thinking 
is closely tied to metaxology. He writes that the metaxu is “a frontier zone 
where narratives flourish and abound. It is a place where stories, songs, 
parables, and prophecies resound as human imaginations try to say the 
unsayable and think the unthinkable” (2001, p. 8). Rather than making firm 
declarations on who or what the Divine is, these poetic and narrative mus-
ings native to the middle space hint towards, point at, and even lure us in 
the direction of the transcendent, all without reducing or idolizing it. In our 
ongoing efforts to understand God, this poetic type of thinking is necessary: 
“[W]ithout some poetic release into a free variation of possibles, the return 
to a God beyond God is virtually impossible” (2010, p. 15). Kearney, like 
Desmond, does not want to merely use poetics, story, and parable to 
describe the transcendent. Rather, there is a constructive aspect at the heart 
of this type of thinking, which has led Kearney further towards theopoetics 
in recent years. In the essay “God Making: An Essay in Theopoetic 
Imagination,” he says that “[t]heopoetics names how the divine (theos) 
manifests itself as making (poiesis). The term … mean[s] both the making 
human of the divine and the making divine of humanity” (2017, p. 31). 
Tying this idea of theopoetics or theopoiesis to his anatheism, Kearney 
writes: “Theopoiesis is about coming back again (ana)—creating again time 
after time. In a word: ana-poiesis. Theopoetics is anapoetics” (2017, p. 35). 
For Kearney, both anatheism and metaxology’s discourse on the Divine is a 
discourse that continually brings the Divine into Being.
The creative and forming powers of poiesis are important themes in the 
writings of both Desmond and Kearney. It is this formative aspect that 
leads us to language, and the linguistic capabilities of human beings. 
Referring back to the Heidegger passage, we are reminded that through 
our words (i.e., thinking, speaking, and writing), we create the “house of 
Being.” Commenting on these ideas, and their relation to the metaxu, 
Desmond writes in God and the Between: “Word brings a world to be, 
word communicates a world, lets it issue into a space of sharing with oth-
ers. Wording the between (logos of the metaxu): not thought thinking 
itself, not even thought thinking its other, but thought singing the other. 
Wording the between: a sung world” (GB 253). In ‘God Making,’ Kearney 
also highlights the creative powers of language and their relation to God. 
 
M. F. NOVAK

127
He writes, affirming Genesis and Proverbs, that “God is a relation. Not a 
self-subsisting remote substance but a relationship between two—Yahweh 
and Sophia, Elohim and Adam—through the medium of a third (the 
breath of language)” (2017, p. 33). As we can see, for Kearney, God is 
intimately tied to language. God, though not reduced to language, is 
expressed as a relation in and through language. Connecting to thoughts 
that we have seen him express in The God Who May Be, he writes in ‘God 
Making’ that “poetics is the first bridge between word and flesh…. [T]he 
real work of theopoetics [is]: us ‘making’ God as God makes us. When it 
comes to divinity poiesis, not theoria, has the last word. Orthopoiesis 
trumps orthodoxy” (2017, pp. 41–42).
One of the pioneers of theopoetics, Gabriel Vahanian, thought that, 
like Heidegger, our world only occurs through the word and that it is 
impotent without it (2009, p.  56). On the connection of language to 
God, Vahanian writes in No Other God: Wording the World and Worlding 
the Word that God’s “reality is given with ‘the actualization of language,’ 
with the fact of existence, even the empirical irreducibility of the human 
phenomenon” (2009, pp. 57–58). God, then, is indelibly tied to humans, 
and specifically to ways in which humans speak, write, and even sing the 
Divine. “God is a word,” Vahanian writes,
the word that our words do not speak unless they are shocked both out of 
their literal and out of their symbolic meaning. Through the metaphor the 
word of man shows that this is possible. And this cannot be possible unless 
its reality is given with its possibility, unless the Word of God is given with 
the occurrence of that reality. (2009, p. 61)4
Our words, then, can only accurately speak (about) God when they are 
released to the middle between the literal and the symbolic.
In their ongoing desire to understand the Divine, to say something 
about the unsayable, to describe the indescribable, both William Desmond 
and Richard Kearney continue to show that the most fruitful manner of 
doing this is via the artistic, imagistic, and poetic. Although philosophical 
and theological conceptions and systematic formulations of God have 
their place, they must ultimately be led, informed, and created by the 
poetic. Because our being-in-the-world is a being-in-the-middle, and 
because this middle that our being finds itself in is a linguistic and poetic 
4 See also Martin Heidegger, “Hölderlin and the Essence of Poetry,”trans. Douglas Scott, 
in Existence and Being, (Chicago, IL: Henry Regnery Company, 1949), 279.
  METAXOLOGIZING OUR GOD-TALK: DESMOND, KEARNEY… 

128
milieu, our mode of God-talk is most appropriately theopoetic, a mode of 
“contemplating, discussing, and speaking the divine” (Krabbe 2016, p. 4) 
that opens us up to the depth of the mystery at the heart of life. Our 
human response to the awareness of this way of being is to continually 
metaxologize our God-talk.
Bibliography
Colledge, Richard J. 2018. Kin and Stranger: Kearney and Desmond on God. In 
Richard Kearney’s Anatheistic Wager: Philosophy, Theology, Poetics, ed. Chris 
Doude van Troostwijk and Matthew Clemente, 125–141. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Desmond, William. 2006. Maybe, Maybe Not: Richard Kearney and God. In 
After God: Richard Kearney and the Religious Turn in Continental Philosophy, 
ed. John Panteleimon Manoussakis, 55–77. New York: Fordham University 
Press.
———. 2007. Between System and Poetics: On the Practices of Philosophy. In 
Between System and Poetics: William Desmond and Philosophy After Dialectic, 
ed. Thomas A.F. Kelly, 13–36. Burlington: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Heidegger, Martin. 1949. Hölderlin and the Essence of Poetry. Trans. Douglas 
Scott. In Existence and Being, 270–291. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company.
———. 1960. Essays in Metaphysics: Identity and Difference. Trans. Kurt 
F. Leidecker. New York: Philosophical Library Inc.
———. 1977. Letter on Humanism. In Basic Writings, ed. David Farrell Krell, 
189–242. New York: Harper & Row, Publishers.
Kearney, Richard. 2001. The God Who May Be: A Hermeneutics of Religion. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. 2007. Maybe Not, Maybe: William Desmond on God. In Between System 
and Poetics: William Desmond and Philosophy After Dialectic, ed. Thomas 
A.F. Kelly, 191–200. Burlington: Ashgate Publishing Company.
———. 2010. Anatheism: Returning to God After God. New  York: Columbia 
University Press.
———. 2017. God Making: An Essay in Theopoetic Imagination. Journal of 
Aesthetics and Phenomenology 4 (1): 31–44.
Kearney, Richard, and William Desmond. 2012. Two Thinks at a Distance: An 
Interview by Richard Kearney on 9 January 2011. In The William Desmond 
Reader, ed. Christopher Ben Simpson, 229–244. Albany: State University of 
New York Press.
Krabbe, Silas C. 2016. A Beautiful Bricolage: Theopoetics as God-Talk for Our 
Time. Eugene: Wipf and Stock Publishers.
Vahanian, Gabriel. 2009. No Other God: Wording the World and Worlding the 
Word. Eugene: Wipf and Stock Publishers.
 
M. F. NOVAK

129
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_8
CHAPTER 8
Espousing Intimacies: Mystics 
and the Metaxological
Patrick Ryan Cooper
The following aims to explore the porosity between metaphysics and mys-
ticism that animates William Desmond’s metaxology. It does so by tracing 
the general contours of Desmond’s metaxological Augustinianism and, in 
particular, the simultaneity of Augustine’s philosophical and theological 
itinerary to the mystery of God and man alike, ab exterioribus ad interiora, 
ab inferioribus ad superiora, a double vision that both informs and is at the 
root of Desmond’s own unique thinking of the ‘between’ that character-
izes his metaxological finesse. Secondly, as a critical interlude, consider-
ation is paid to certain other modern Augustinian reconfigurations of the 
metaphysical and mystical by exploring the Blondelian influence upon ear-
lier influential Leuven Jesuit inside-outsiders, Pierre Scheuer and Joseph 
Maréchal, for whom the quest for identity and immediacy of ‘presence’ 
within metaphysics and mysticism was both profoundly influential and yet 
of marked contrast with Desmond’s otherwise similar appeals to the idiot-
ics of experience. Finally, this chapter concludes with a certain metaxologi-
cal reconfiguration of the mystical that renews our attention to the very 
mystery of mediation, with special attention paid to the late-medieval 
P. R. Cooper (*) 
Saint Martin’s University, Lacey, WA, USA
e-mail: PCooper@stmartin.edu

130
Brabantine mystic Jan van Ruusbroec (1293–1381) and the Augustinian 
inflections of his view of the common life [ghemeyne leven].
Desmond’s thought converges with the mystical in several respects, 
including his unique contributions toward the intimate universal and the 
intimacy of the idiotics (PO 361n), both of which are crucial for mystical 
theology. Preserving metaxological dynamism is key for Desmond, who 
frequently reminds us that the ‘meta’ is both above and in the midst. Such 
dynamism similarly characterizes his approach to mysticism, as itself exem-
plary of the intimate universal (Desmond 2012, pp. 25–44) characterized 
by the porosity and ‘open whole’ of the metaxological and thus distinct 
from forms of realism, nominalism and the Hegelian universal as concrete. 
The intimate universal becomes manifestly concerned with preserving the 
doubleness of an irreducible intimacy that cannot but remain open and 
communicable to the others (religion, aesthetics, politics, etc.) by its own 
universal promise. Preserving such dialogical openness from otherwise 
closure requires finesse, at once so characteristic of Desmond’s approach 
between poetics and systematics, and is not merely an aesthetic artifice; 
rather, it is Augustinian in its core, by its approach to the very inseparabil-
ity of the double beyond reduction and collapse that in turn portrays more 
than a simple family resemblance to the history of mysticism.
In his early writings, Desmond shows a compellingly nuanced regard 
for mysticism, not as something entirely gratuitous, extraordinary and 
infused, and instead veers decisively toward more the naturally acquired 
and habitual dimensions of contemplation and mindfulness, stating: 
“Mysticism … has nothing to do with a leap into some other world but is 
merely the proper mindfulness of an otherness that is right now present 
to one, proper mindfulness of what is and what one is” (PO 237). In his 
later writings, Desmond will greatly expand upon this basic orientation, 
most notably in the pronounced equivocities of the “woo of the mystic” 
from God and the Between (GB 259–278). However, I want to suggest 
that the intimate universal itself substantiates this compelling intuition 
with an overall philosophical idiom that legitimates the distinctive herme-
neutical character of mystical theological texts and their robust, meta-
physical inheritance of ‘proper mindfulness’ of transcendent otherness as 
given and mediated between others and self without reductively relegat-
ing them as escapist, other-worldly vagaries of what Desmond calls a ‘car-
toonish’ Platonism. Instead, the intimate espousal between metaphysics 
and mysticism renewed by Desmond’s metaxology aims to cultivate anew 
a proper mindfulness toward this very mystery of mediation that renders 
 
P. R. COOPER

131
greater intensity of togetherness, difference and unity within overlapping 
vectors of relationality: the ever-greater interior intimo meo that confers 
an idiotic intimacy of selves not by way of isolation of identity that is self-
referential and reductively autonomous, yet is safeguarded by the bridg-
ing of the togetherness of others and selves within what he calls ‘agapeic 
community’.
Desmond’s approach is indeed highly fruitful for theologians con-
cerned with the mystical theological canon, as he retains a high regard for 
interiority and its erotic ascending, all the while attentive to the very real 
dangers that emerge from within the porosity of the superabundant—or in 
his terms, the ‘overdeterminate’. Approaching intimacy and interiority in 
terms of the idiotics of being redeems the promise of a gratuitous, descend-
ing agapeics by simultaneously opening such idiotic interiority of the self 
into its communal/ecclesial and public relevance and prophetic engage-
ment. Idiocy is here understood as affirming the very prior givenness and 
gratuitousness of being and thus the very contingency and fragility that it 
is at once prior to the vectors of becoming. Contemplative mindfulness of 
such idiotic givenness thus keeps one daily awake to such givenness and 
veers one away from what Desmond calls the ‘familiar middle’ whereby 
the asymmetry and fragility of being’s idiotic giftedness becomes demoted 
into that which is ‘taken for granted’, assumed and thus manipulable. 
Herein the idiocy of being converges with the ethics of that it is and, 
inseparably, that it is good, as the idiocy of being is as much about the 
unsurpassable givenness of being and its created origins as much as it like-
wise concerns the very receptivity and porosity toward such givenness of 
metaxological being. Such receptivity, beyond reductive passivity, is of 
central significance to the mystical, as it likewise is for Desmond (Cooper 
2017, pp.  1–24). For receptivity recognizes the mediatory power and 
ontological worth of the porosity of being, the passio essendi, that is at 
once inseparable with and yet non-identical to the absolute origin, the 
semper maior of God’s transcendence that makes possible the erotic striv-
ings of the connatus essendi.
Finesse for this inseparability, of idiotic givenness and intimate receptiv-
ity that opens onto communicability and otherness with the ‘intimate uni-
versal’ thus allows one to speak of the idiocy of the mystic, an approach 
that occludes both the subjective antinomies of modernism and the ever-­
reappearing phantom of quietism and autotheism that has otherwise 
stalked the mystical tradition. Rather, by keeping with Desmond’s distinct 
Augustinian ethos, such finesse returns us to the very crux of the 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

132
­experiential that is at once both idiotic in its singular intimacy and public 
in the porosity of its communicable address. The complex togetherness of 
the metaphysical and the mystical that Desmond elicits returns us to the 
idiocy of experience that likewise informs the ressourcement of theological 
sources by approaching anew the power of metaphor and analogical simili-
tude, the ontological symbol and the excess of hyperbole (BB 207–222) 
that earlier nominated mysticism the ‘crown of metaphysics’. By its speak-
ing from the between of ontological difference and the superabundance of 
its givenness, this ‘crown’ gives voice to the very eros of impossibility as a 
“hunger unstilled [….] Man cannot leave it, nor grasp it; he cannot do 
without it, nor can he obtain it; he cannot speak about it, nor can he be 
silent about it […]” (Ruusbroec 1991, ll. 554, 555–557).
Desmond’s Metaxological Augustinianism
Early in Desire, Dialectic and Otherness, Desmond describes the root dyna-
mism of the metaxological as his “Augustinian odyssey after Hegel” (DDO 
xxii), citing Augustine’s well-known statement from his Exposition on 
Psalm 145 ab exterioribus ad  interiora, ab inferioribus ad superiora as 
encapsulating the Augustinian way to the ever-greater mystery of God and 
man alike. Desmond reads Augustine’s itinerary as a double movement 
characteristic of our ‘ineluctable desiring’, that is, both our natural desire 
for transcendence and its dynamic happening within the middle that inex-
orably leads through the abyss of man—grande profundum est ipse homo—
all of which are appropriately forecasted in his first published article, 
Augustine’s Confessions: On Desire, Conversion and Reflection. Here, 
human desire is seen as bridging the gap between speculative and experi-
ential approaches—what he would later on term as between system and 
poetics’—to the question of God that entails both individual and universal 
description. Metaxological mediation thereby rightfully turns upon desire, 
for “when reflection turns to desire”, Desmond reminds us, “it cannot rest 
with an abstract knowledge alone. Any way to God […] must pass through 
him as an infinite desire to this desire’s end” (Desmond 1980, p. 25) while 
placing the metaxological firmly beyond any and all anthropological 
reduction.
In Philosophy and Its Others, reference to this Augustinian itinerary is 
conjoined by roundly undermining any depiction of a closed, non-porous 
approach to interiority that obfuscates such “inward otherness” beyond 
the determinacy of self-mastery, in addition to the “closed circle of the 
 
P. R. COOPER

133
‘metaphysics of presence’”. “We cannot master our own otherness”, 
Desmond adds, “much less God’s” (PO 362n). Such assertions show the 
seminal parameters of what Desmond would later on give greater elabora-
tion upon—such as idiocy, the erotics and agapeics—as earlier indicative of 
his treatment of religious inwardness as “not a domination of otherness, 
but a living of metaxological openness in selfhood itself […] deeper than 
the domination of self-mediation of secular modernity, the self can live and 
safeguard in inwardness a metaxological respect for being in otherness…. 
[a] perplexed openness to, patient readiness before the absolute original as 
the radical other” (PO 114).
With Perplexity and Ultimacy, Desmond provides a full-fledged com-
mentary upon this itinerary by explicitly framing his continued interest 
and increasing finesse for the giftedness and overdeterminacy of agapeic 
being as offering an admirable resistance to the wayward, tyrannical erot-
ics of the mystical under its Hegelian influence that too easily regards 
otherness as provisional in its ascent to a unity of sameness and identity. 
Desmond thus regards Augustine’s first movement—from exterior to 
interior—as the waking of our interiority within the “middle of things—
the exteriors” (PU 11), while marking our interiority as both erotic in its 
self-transcending and agapeically porous. The second movement—from 
inferior to superior—foregrounds this porosity within these interior erot-
ics as an opening onto an other, “more ultimate than ourselves” (ibid.). 
For Desmond, it is utterly crucial to recognize that while we identify with 
these interior erotics, so too do we recognize an insurmountable superior-
ity that is both “irreducible to us and mediates with us—the inferior—
through the agapeic excess of its own unequalizable plentitude” (ibid.). 
Here, Desmond’s long-standing interest in correcting a largely philosoph-
ical silence toward agapeic love is keyed within this attention to an irreduc-
ible otherness, such that our desires are intimately defining as much as 
they are othering with a plentitude and giftedness that exceeds and is 
superior to ourselves.
Both the intimacy and otherness of desire unveil in us a capacity for 
such unfolding that extends well beyond psychological description. This 
native capacity for an irreducible otherness refreshes and renews the task 
of metaphysics as the never-ending occasion to think and be mindful of 
this very givenness, plurality and overdeterminacy of such desires that not 
only refuses determinacy yet likewise illumines the “polyphony of being” 
(DDO 169) and subsequently, the plurivocal constitution of metaphysics 
itself. “The paradox of human identity is that, because its origin is linked 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

134
with desire, it is also nonidentity—that is, the space where the sense of 
difference enters the world” (DDO 26). The activity of desire is the neces-
sary movement, not only from the external to the internal, yet by mediat-
ing this between, this active mediatory power of desire opens onto the 
agapeic porosity of the overdeterminate that is at once beyond mere priva-
tion. Desire’s fundamental paradox—that lack proceeds only from a 
greater, replete and inexhaustible fullness—becomes itself doubled as 
emerging from the difference of the self and its native orientation to that 
which is ever greater.
Such movements are signified by what Desmond terms as the “open 
whole”, wherein the irruption of porosity and difference becomes poised 
between the dialectical tension of the infinitude of desires and the ever-­
persistent, wayward temptation toward erotic closure, the “absorbing 
god” (DDO 34–40) of the whole, which is keyed principally in critical 
response to closure and self-mediation of Hegelian dialectic. Considering 
his early Hegelian studies, Desmond shows a rich sensitivity for the con-
cealed workings of such dialectical closure that is immensely relevant and 
constructive for mysticism. The monstrosity of this ‘absorbing god’ regu-
larly reemerges throughout the history of mysticism as the dialectical con-
summation of difference into the erotic self-mediation of the whole, from 
the secret of the gnostic self; the pantheistic collapse of difference; and the 
ascetic and quietistic abnegation of desire and likewise, the blurring of 
distinction between the civitas Dei and the civitas terrain. Desire, after all, 
is inescapably wed to a “commensurate telos with corresponding absolute-
ness” (DDO 35), which in the case of desire’s infinitude, apart from 
ascribing such a telos to a repeated activity that would amount to a bad 
infinity of the same, an object is thereby sought. And this telos-object, as 
we see at various junctions of gnosticism and quietism, the absorbing god 
of the erotic self-mediated wholeness sufficiently lacks the plurivocal inter-
ruptions of the community and the Church as much as the “end is the 
utter abnegation of desire as such, no distinction being made between 
worthwhile and worthless desire” (DDO 35). Subsequently, as much as 
our desires excavate and plumb our interiority, so too do they distinguish 
and particularize our identities, whereas the quietistic abnegation of 
desires in view of the totalizing whole of the absorbing god distinctly 
entails the likewise abnegation of self as distinct (DDO 38).
Desmond completely reorients this familiar apophatic dilemma by 
approaching the inseparability of the mystery of God and the mystery of 
man, both of which “stops short in silence before an enigma it refuses to 
 
P. R. COOPER

135
reduce, a silence not empty but full” (Desmond 1980, p. 25). Desmond’s 
remark on this distinct form of philosophical silence as overdeterminate is 
highly suggestive in contrast with the privative silence of limits (as will be 
seen in Scheuer and Maréchal) that issues from such plentitudes. For 
Desmond, the fullness of silence to which his metaxology is responsive is 
characterized not by a halting of finitude yet by an approach to a limit that 
is fundamentally porous. Hence, the mystery of such porous limits of the 
open whole is not something “lamentable”, but instead “evokes celebra-
tion of the mystery beyond present comprehension” (Desmond 1980, 
p. 32). The silent limit is thus a reckoning of our creaturliness—ab inferi-
oribus—that is both humble and poor beyond privation and thus relishes 
in its finitude. The communicable address of this distinct, philosophical 
silence both engages the dialectic of presence and absence and transcends 
this opposition that fuels the very dynamism of desire within the metaxo-
logical. Moreover, the communicable overdeterminacy of silence and of 
desire are not merely analogous to one another, yet they appear to both 
draw upon hidden reservoirs of secretive plentitude that animate the very 
commercium between God and man, wherein in the midst of that which is 
superior, commercium with the ‘inferioribus’ is exalted by its very being 
reduced to the humility of a porous between—again, not a poverty of 
privation and enclosure, yet the poverty of an idiocy that cannot but open 
onto communicability with others.
Critical Interlude: Leuven Philosophical 
Inside-­Outsiders—Scheuer and Maréchal
Recalling Desmond characterizing his first significant foray into an explicit 
metaxological direction as none other than his “Augustinian odyssey, 
embarked on in the wake of Hegel”, nearly thirty years later, Desmond 
revisits this earlier preferential remark and the central significance of ab 
exterioribus ad interiora, ab inferioribus ad superiora, stating:
I felt that modern philosophy with its turn to the subject represented a ver-
sion of the first move [i.e., from exterior to interior], but that the second 
move had become problematic, not least because the turn to the self left in 
equivocity the essential nature of our relation to otherness. (DDO xxii)
In this following interlude, I would like to show the literal veracity of this 
assertion, over and above the accuracy of its general description, which is 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

136
altogether stunning, when we view the slight, yet crucial distortion of its 
citation by Blondel in furthering his own philosophy of immanence, this 
time however after the wake of Kant:
Ab exterioribus ad interiora, ab interioribus ad superiora. But if, of these 
three terms which Saint Augustine indicates, one suppresses the intermedi-
ary, the bridge is broken, and one has only incommunicable entities present 
to each other. From objective knowledge to the reality of the subject, there 
is no direct route by means of theory or abstract logic. One cannot attain or 
define the transcendent except by the role of immanence, exteriority except 
by interiority. (Blondel 1906, p. 237)
Here, by this literal misquotation, Blondel neglects Augustine’s ‘inferiori-
bus’, while substituting instead the interiority of immanence—the self-­
determinacy of the subject—who alone bridges the external and the 
transcendent, while keeping at bay what would otherwise fly away into the 
equivocal night as “only incommunicable entities” of absolutized differ-
ence. By way of sharp relief, Blondel’s appeal to immanence presents a 
drastic difference from Desmond’s metaxological Augustinianism by 
reducing the metaxological ‘fourth’ and its “internal overdeterminacy, 
preventing the exhaustive definition of each in terms of any binary opposi-
tion” (DDO xix). Instead, Blondel approaches the Augustinian itinerary 
by counting to ‘three’, with the immanent subject holding together and 
bridging these equivocal binaries of externality and transcendence in a self-­
determining manner. Herein, Augustinian interiority is strongly invoked 
within a milieu of philosophical immanence that initially counts to three 
and ends up with one, “the one initially indeterminate, now at the end, 
the absolutely self-determining one” (DDO xix).
The influence of Blondel is indeed complex and thoroughly resists any 
mere simplistic dismissal. However, appeals to such immanence would 
come to be readily detected in the Jesuit Scholasticate in Leuven and its 
own, more dialogical approach to Thomas Aquinas in view of the Kantian 
turn to the subject. The major figures of this philosophical Leuven school, 
among others, are Pierre Scheuer (1872–1957) and Joseph Maréchal 
(1878–1944), both of whom were in their own respects not unlike the 
‘outsider-insider’ of William Desmond yet more so ‘inside-outsiders’. 
Though certainly lesser known today than Maréchal, Scheuer exerted a 
considerable internal influence in Leuven, especially among the Jesuit 
scholastics in the early to mid-twentieth century. For Scheuer, the 
 
P. R. COOPER

137
­immanent interiority and rigor of metaphysics was itself never alien to 
‘philosophy’s others’, especially in its altogether openness to spiritual and 
mystical proclivities whereby the transcendental orientation of mind is 
ultimately one of esse ad Deum and the Platonism of participation fully 
realized in the truths of faith, to which philosophically we can only know 
negatively by way of a reverential silence. This metaphysical grounding in 
the identity of immanence would prove decisive indeed in shaping not 
only the trajectory of the latter Transcendental Thomism of Rahner and 
Lonergan, but furthermore, and more to our specific focus, upon the mys-
tical itself as tethered to such thinking of identity.
Interestingly enough, in Scheuer, as in Blondel, we see the same 
abridged attribution to Augustine that foregoes the inferioribus and 
instead regards interiority as a bridge of transcendental affirmation and 
identity between thought and being. “St. Augustine has an apt phrase” 
Scheuer writes, “which sums up our position: Ab exterioribus ad interiora, 
per interiora ad superiora” (Scheuer 1966, p. 167). For Scheuer, Blondelian 
immanence is expanded upon against this abridged Augustinian formula, 
which from four to three,
expresses the three degrees of being which are our indissoluble data. The 
human Ego is first exterior to itself; as Ego-object it is the body with its rela-
tions, the Ego is identified with the material element. Second movement: 
the Ego enters into itself and knows itself as such, as Ego. Third moment: in 
knowing itself, it knows immediately the necessary identity of the real and 
the intelligible, because the Ego itself is such an affirmation, and transcends 
itself. (Ibid., p. 167)
There is an amazing contrast in appeals to Augustinian interiority as either 
one of self-same identity and affirmation (Blondel/Scheuer) or the inferi-
oribus of a porous otherness that leads both inward and outward 
(Desmond). For Scheuer, the metaphysical quest, from the exterior inde-
terminacy of material being, as both composite and related, to the interior 
determinacy and identity between thought and being, evinces the work-
ings of univocity within a polarized field of sameness and difference. 
Metaphysics, as the first science of being qua being, is here regarded as a 
creaturely undertaking, which for man is thus rooted in the Thomistic 
composite of essentia and esse and thereby knowing is mediated as once 
sensual and rational, whereas the intuitive mindfulness of immediacy is 
denied as exclusively angelic. This familiar Scholastic division reverberates 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

138
within the reduction of the Augustinian itinerary, from the irreducible 
doubleness of the fourth to the resolved singularity of a third that dialecti-
cally emerges from the dualism of creaturely knowing, mediated and 
immediate, man and angel alike.
A casualty of this abridged Augustinian itinerary is none other than the 
diminished mystery of mediation itself, as the irreducible inter from within 
and beyond the between loses much of its initial allure and fascination. For 
such mediation concerns a porosity of otherness that turns upon the infe-
rioribus. Otherness is irreducible to any immanent wholeness that thereby 
in turn keeps open the plurality of the inter such that the one is insepara-
ble to the other. Whereas in the purview of the abridged third, mediation 
is seen as once removed, as a stepping stone, the rung of a ladder of 
ascents, as composite and mixed to the purity of the immediate to which 
it is at once denied. Within such a configuration, there is a certain trans-
gressive allure of limits that takes over in the cry and appeal of the immedi-
ate, heeding the unmixed and pure which swells and affixes the eros of our 
self-surpassing. Subsequently, the allure of immediacy as the self-­
transgression of limits possesses significant consequences in how we frame 
the mystical itself. As a creaturely venture, the adequatio of transcendental 
affirmation of being and thought, from exterior to interior and the closure 
of porous otherness, thus hinges upon the very inadequatio of erotic tran-
scending, from the second to the third, which remains ever superior and 
hence, equivocally negative.
Herein we arrive at the familiarity of the apophatic in modernity, as the 
apophatic as inadequatio is principally self-referential and construed as a 
limit of our finite strivings. The adequatio of identity, the univocal deter-
minability of thought and being in which God is inescapably affirmed—
the ‘proving’ of God by way of transcendental affirmation—is likewise 
inseparable from the very ‘disproving’ of God, as the inadequatio of inde-
terminacy is inseparable from human affirmation of God. In other words, 
it is just as easy to affirm God in such a transcendental scheme as it is to 
disavow him. Within the transcendental affirmation of being and thought, 
the adequatio of being as equal and “coextensive with the intelligible” 
(ibid., p. 163) whereby God too is affirmed in thought itself holds primary 
importance as none other than the principle of identity itself. This abridged 
Augustinian itinerary roots itself in the adequatio of identity, as the move-
ment from the first to the second. Whereas the inadequatio, from the 
second to the third, becomes taken up by the analogy of proportionality 
whereby the dissimilitude of equivocal difference haunts as its ­interminable 
 
P. R. COOPER

139
shadow. Herein, the apophatic becomes itself “identical with the knowl-
edge of the inadequatio of the real and finite; therefore it is a negative 
knowledge” (ibid., p. 168). In the erotic self-surpassing from second to 
third, our knowledge of God becomes inseparable from the indeterminacy 
of the inadequatio itself, “that void which remains in us, through that 
drive of ours towards the intelligible which, finding only the finite, is 
almost entirely frustrated” (ibid., p. 168). The apophatics of the limit thus 
become inseparable from the pursuit of determinacy within the principle 
of identity itself. Scheuer himself recognizes this polarity, noting that the 
apophatic “satisfies at one and the same time both the principle of analogy 
and the principle of homology” (ibid., p. 169).
The dialectics of this abridged Augustinian itinerary similarly rears its 
head in the transgressive eros amid the designation of the mystical itself. 
As an erotic transcending of opposites, between the initial adequatio of 
thought itself and the inadequatio of its finite strivings, a resolved mysti-
cism of identity and unity emerges whereby the mystery of identity 
becomes a source of renewed wonder. Scheuer elicits this allure in his 
influential course notes for Metaphysics: “How does it happen that the 
intellect, while assimilating the objects according to its own laws reaches 
nevertheless the being in itself of these objects? Nay, that the objectivity of 
its knowledge increases with its immanence”, whereby amid this progres-
sion from exterior indeterminacy to interior determinacy, the “real and the 
intelligible are absolutely identical” and that amid such self-same identity, 
the “Ego … discovers himself as the active identity of the real and the 
intelligible, as an infinity which compromises suo modo omnia (everything 
in its own way)” (ibid., pp. 341–342). Scheuer accounts for this resolved 
absolute identity within a metaphysics of participation such that “it is God 
Himself, present at the core of our intellects … who moves us and is the 
middle term between being and thought” (ibid., p. 170). Here, the termi-
nus of a metaphysics of identity, twinned by a mysticism of unmediated 
presence, is fully unveiled as navigating the polarities of the adequatio and 
inadequatio, of sameness and difference, such that
metaphysics turns out to be more than a simple system of abstract truths. It 
is, in our created being, that last and hidden point at which, through a distant 
participation, something lives of the Thought which thinks itself. This explains 
why, discouraged by the scantiness of notional concepts, every metaphysics 
worthy of its name endeavors to transcend them to achieve itself in the pro-
found silence of mystical introversion. (Scheuer 1957, p. 342)
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

140
The rapturous allure of such identity and ‘mystical introversion’ is ampli-
fied by the direct linkage between Scheuer and Maréchal, who only a few 
years later in 1927 first published his highly influential Studies in the 
Psychology of the Mystics. For Maréchal, he too considers mysticism as the 
“crown of metaphysics” [le couronnement de la métaphysique] (Maréchal 
1927, p. v), and in direct continuity with Blondelian immanence and the 
interior metaphysics of Scheuer, he recognizes the “striking analogy” 
between human psychology and mystical ascent that none other than fol-
lows the same, abridged Augustinianism. Maréchal assuredly recognizes 
that the issue of the mystical at once begs for the competencies of the 
philosopher and theologian alike, and yet he explicitly judges the phenom-
enological description of psychology as warranting less suspicion than that 
of the metaphysical. Thus, as a further development of the silence and 
‘mystical introversion’ of unity beyond opposites that we find in Scheuer, 
in the hands of Maréchal, the mystical becomes inescapably defined within 
the self-referentiality of consciousness itself and the question over the 
immediacy of ‘presence’. Maréchal, who was indeed a sympathetic reader 
of the mystical canon, comes to translate his own critical realism, transcen-
dental Thomism and thinking of identity into the very core of the mystical 
tradition itself, defining it as the “feeling of the immediate presence of a 
Transcendent Being” (Maréchal 1927, p. 103). The rich hyperboles of 
mystical experience become instead enveloped within a thinking of iden-
tity and immediacy that becomes inescapably self-referential.
And yet, recalling our earlier discussions of the equivocities between 
the adequatio and inadequatio, any supposed deconstruction of this 
“metaphysics of presence” in favor of such a resolved apophatic is at best 
a redundancy. The radical inadequatio of Scheuer returns in Maréchal as a 
two-fold play between the “immediate assimilation of Being in an intu-
ition” as well as the negative surplus of our created, “radical capacity for 
embracing being …. All our psychology is contained in this natural inad-
equatio of the fundamental tendency and the possible realization” 
(Maréchal 1927, pp. 196–197). Maréchal thus calls the inadequatio of 
equivocal difference the very analogical “connecting-link of supernatural 
grace in human nature” (Maréchal 1927, p. 197). This radical inadequatio 
is then immediately translated back to Thomas’ desiderium naturale and 
man’s obidiential potency as esse ad Deum, such that these natural erotic 
strivings become inseparable to the limits of finitude, of esse ad inadequa-
tio that ultimately facilitates a reading of grace, nature and the very para-
dox of man that both directly influenced and anticipated de Lubac et al. 
and the project of Ressourcement.
 
P. R. COOPER

141
For Maréchal, the very silence and mystical introversion resulting from 
the inadequatio between immediate transcendental affirmation and our 
created capacity for absolute Being is the residue of our “obscure desire 
[that] hurls itself against the barriers of quantity and falls powerless; it 
grasps of Being only an image refracted in sense perception, and all its 
efforts has to be limited to refining symbol” (Maréchal 1927, p. 197). The 
eros and apophatics of the limits of finitude, the limits of the inadequatio 
and the limits of mediation, all become reduplicated, that is, from a silence 
of deficiency and lack to that of the silence as a hyperbolic response, as 
grace itself “completes and crowns nature by transforming into an end … 
what was only the superior and inaccessible limit of a radical tendency” 
(Maréchal 1927, p.  198). In the end, the very negotiations of limits 
retrench the very equivocities of analogy between the adequatio and inad-
equatio, though at the same time, by way of turning to Thomas’ desider-
ium naturale, we see in figures such as Scheuer and Maréchal a clear 
attempt to position equivocal difference beyond philosophical and theo-
logical dualism. Such attempts similarly explain in part their renewed 
interest in mysticism. Herein, the mystical comes to represent the very 
transgression of limits of equivocal difference. Yet so long as this abridged 
Augustinianism remained tethered to a thinking of identity, with imma-
nence as bridging these very equivocities from otherwise flying intermina-
bly away from one another within the autonomous ethos of modernity, 
the transgressions of the mystical would irresistibly become reinscribed 
within the dialectical affirmation of the mystical as self-mediating this 
whole of which God becomes immanently confined as the middle term.
To conclude this brief interlude on Scheuer and Maréchal, once more we 
see a forceful argument of Desmond’s own assessment of modern philoso-
phy’s turn to the subject as at once following yet problematizing the 
Augustinian itinerary, as it “leaves in equivocity the essential nature of our 
relation to otherness”. Regarding the Blondelian legacy of the Leuven Jesuits 
Scheuer and Maréchal, Desmond’s reading is stunning, wherein the adequa-
tio of identity inescapably finds its terminus in the equivocities of the apo-
phatic as limit, while a mysticism of interiority and unity becomes the 
terminus of every metaphysics “worthy of such a name” in its interior recon-
ciliation of these opposites and finds its theological corollary in the appeals of 
the immediate and unmediated mystical experience as one of interiority.
The difference that Desmond’s metaxology revivifies in these respects 
is profoundly contrasted by the irreducible double within Augustine, 
which leads, as in the language of the intimate universal, not between 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

142
“poles of opposition but between partners in espousal”(Desmond 2012, 
p. 25). In the mystical canon, appeals to interiority and immediacy are of 
themselves central and yet, appeals ‘beyond’ mediation are always hyper-
bolic in their own overdeterminacy such that they do not depart from 
forms of mediation. Such appeals rather intensify them, as ascents subse-
quently become descents, as is eminently seen in terms of what Ruusbroec 
calls the “common life” [ghemeyne leven], whereby such commons witness 
to the very flourishing of the fourth as an irreducible doubleness beyond 
dualism. Whereas, by way of the abridged third that steers away from the 
intermediation of otherness, regarding instead polarized difference as the 
occasion of erotic ascent and the transgression of limits, mediation 
becomes reduced to the novitiate and the pious many, the first rung on the 
ascending ladder, while appeals for greater immediacy and purity become 
increasingly static in their gnostic rendering of the secret among the self-­
same few—a recurrence that is of itself, ever ancient, ever new.
Metaxological Mysticism: The Intimate Espousal 
of Analogy
This third and final section will now briefly indicate certain contours of 
metaxology specifically in the direction of the mystical. In doing so, let us 
recall Desmond’s compelling intuition of mysticism’s double mindfulness, 
that is, mindfulness of an “otherness that is right now present to one” as 
well as a mindfulness of “what is and what one is”. Mysticism’s double 
mindfulness of otherness intermediating both what is and what one is nec-
essarily turns upon the very defining of our desires. The history of the 
Christian mystical tradition and its reception history possess a substantial 
wealth in this regard, which in the West largely amounts to tracing the 
enormous Augustinian influence on its own distinctive erotics as much as 
it at various times has (un)wittingly colluded with such forms of erotic 
selving and autonomy such that the heavenly and tyrannical forms of 
erotic closure become excessively blurred. Ruusbroec for one eminently 
displays this Augustinian influence as well as a profound suppleness in his 
erotics. In a pivotal passage from his masterpiece The Spiritual Espousals, 
not only does Ruusbroec synthesize the doubling of exterior-interior and 
inferior-superior with that of Augustinian immanence of interior intimo 
meo, but furthermore, he characterizes the desiring of this dynamic middle 
not simply as ‘autistic’, nor statically polarized, yet doubled in espousal:
 
P. R. COOPER

143
Out of this unity where the spirit is united with God without intermediary, 
flow grace and all gifts …. Thus grace falls into us in the unity of our supe-
rior faculties and of our spirit, from which, by the power of grace, the higher 
faculties flow out actively in all virtues and into which same (unity) they 
return again in the bond of love [minnen] …. Now the grace of God which 
flows out of God is an inward impulse or prodding of the Holy Spirit, Who 
impels our spirit from within and stokes it towards all virtue. This grace 
flows from within, not from without. For God is more inwards to us than 
we are to ourselves, and His inward impulse, or working, within us, naturally 
or supernaturally, is nearer and more inner to us than our own work. And 
therefore God works from in us outwards [van binnen uutweert], and all 
creatures from outward inwards [van buten inwert]. And this is why grace 
and all divine gifts and God’s interior speech come from within, in the unity 
of our spirit, not from without, in the imagination, by sensory images. 
(Ruusbroec 1988, b, ll. 107–108, 115–118, 128–137)
As this specific passage makes evident, Ruusbroec’s writings continuously 
navigate both sameness and difference, however never at the expense of 
the rich porosity and intimacy of the idiotics. When affirming the recipro-
cal degrees of the admirabile commercium between God and the human 
person as the mystical tradition invariably does, accusations of pantheistic 
absorption are often raised—of which Desmond is all too familiar and 
similarly shares at times such cautious reserve—as the Parisian Chancellor 
Jean Gerson (1363–1429) famously charged Book Three of Ruusbroec’s 
Espousals. However, Ruusbroec’s writings, even when hyperbolically push-
ing the limits of identity and difference, never lose sight of God’s ever-­
greater otherness and dissimilitude, which far from being an ill or 
something to overcome is rather encountered endlessly as the central 
Christian mystery and the “greatest of goods”, as von Balthasar acclaimed 
(CDF 1989, n. 14). For the strong erotics that Ruusbroec’s writings 
evince are but a release of the asymmetrical promise of the agapeics them-
selves and the porosity of its plentitude, an anteriority of given superabun-
dance that enflames an insatiable degree of indebtedness that remains 
impossible to reciprocate. Desires become intimately defining, as 
­inferioribus, as much as their gifted plentitude, as superiora, exceeds self-
identity by the sheer superiority of their excess.
As Desmond has repeatedly claimed, it is often in such texts that the 
magnitude and the intensity of the intimate universal and the need for a 
far greater, dynamized or ‘reformed’ analogy, which the metaxological 
responds to, becomes most evident. Otherwise, the invasive ingression of 
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

144
a more traditional analogy of equivocal limits in safeguarding ultimate 
transcendence from a reduction to erotic selving becomes so predominant 
and overbearing that it risks becoming a “fixed polarity”, which Desmond 
repeatedly argues becomes nothing other than an “implicit mathematiza-
tion of the univocal” (BB 212). The univocal can here be clearly seen in 
this static, ossified relation, as the thinking of the beyond is regarded as a 
clearly delineated limit, a demarcation that in fact says far less about the 
beyond itself and more about the constraint of the immanent self-­
transcendence of the creature and the allure of its transgressive drama, as 
seen in Scheuer and Maréchal.
Subsequently, the dynamism of Desmond’s metaxology strongly con-
trasts the mathesis of such a static analogy of proportion, wherein the 
former retains the complex intermediation of the between as we have seen 
previously in his explicit recourse to Augustine (ISB 231–259). The dou-
ble mediation of both the erotics of creaturely immanence as a self-­
mediation that is fundamentally open and porous and the agapeics that is 
itself “other-related with respect to an interplay with what is not itself” 
critically destabilizes the stasis and mathematical univocity of analogy spe-
cifically by way of this complex intermediation of the erotic and agapeic 
hyperboles of being.
Likewise, insofar as Ruusbroec regards union with God—with means, 
without means and without difference or distinction (Ruusbroec 1981, ll. 
34–41)—as corresponding to the fullness of creaturely being, the thinking 
of such plurality and intermediation thus aligns him well within a certain 
metaxological milieu. To argue as much is to firmly counter various com-
mentators, all of whom—and not without good reason—overwhelmingly 
viewed mysticism as a discourse of identity and thereby in turn regarded 
some of the late-medieval canonical masters, such as Ruusbroec—in addi-
tion to Eckhart, Suso and Tauler, the earlier Cistercians such as Bernard 
and William of St. Thierry and the Spanish Carmelite tradition, to name 
but the common canonical list of figures—as thoroughly dialectical in 
their negotiation of difference (active life); sameness (interior life) and its 
self-mediated whole (contemplative/super-essential). However, this 
­dialectical portrait largely obfuscates both the strong erotic and ecstatic 
dimensions of the tradition, and in particular that of Ruusbroec’s thought, 
seen especially in view of mutual indwelling that rightly characterizes him 
not in the least as a thinker of dualistic opposition between transcendence 
and immanence, but instead as a thinker of doubleness that regards rela-
tionality as superabundant and the truthfulness of its loving encounter and 
 
P. R. COOPER

145
union as minne-love, which is seen as intrinsically double (Ruusbroec 
2006, bk. 4, ll. 1687–1709), as fully ours and fully God’s—a common love. 
“This minne-love that is God is common to us all and to each one in par-
ticular and (belongs) totally to those who love” (Ruusbroec 2000, bk. 2b, 
ll. 662–664). Secondly, such dialectical portraits are interminably wrapped 
up in the ever-recurring drama of gnostic quietism, autotheism and the 
self-mediated collapse into the totality of the whole which Ruusbroec 
regarded among the then currents of the Free Spirit movement as unequiv-
ocally heterodox that leads to an idol [afgod] of the self. And yet, in pro-
viding an antidote to this counterfeiting, never once did Ruusbroec 
temper his thinking by insisting upon a more cautious traditionalism 
absent the otherwise provocative and speculative assertions of super-­
essential union and the ecstatic erotics of minne-love. Instead, the anti-
dote repeatedly consisted in the very plurality of the common life, which 
synthesizes the otherwise traditional three ways of knowing and loving 
God only to the extent that this plurality is maintained, as one-in-the-­
other, and lived within a milieu of ecclesial service to others in the world.
Common Is the Common Life: Returning 
to the Mystery of Mediation
Proper mindfulness of that which is interminably turns upon the astound-
ing wonder that it is at all, which subsequently keys us to the fragility and 
contingency of being and therefore, its goodness in the to be. Such fragility 
and its attendant goodness largely escapes us unaware, while the agapeic 
promise of giftedness in this to be is none other than ceaselessly fulfilled—
creatio continua—by way of the excess of the ontological secret whereby 
otherness is given to be for itself as a continual calling out amid the silent 
givenness of things and others. Mindfulness of this ceaseless fulfilling 
beyond the inertness of simple thereness holds out the ecstatic promise 
that patiently ushers us toward the indeterminable absolute origin of that 
which is prior. That is, a leading not away from yet into the coming to be, 
offering but a prayer of all things that “go to God by way of things” 
(Charles 1964, p. 1) as both intimately singular and universally communi-
cable. Such affirmation by way of its superabundant origins requires a 
certain ‘unclogging’ of the porosity, as Desmond often states, that is none 
other than a fruition of the inferioribus that restores wonder at the agapeic 
‘for itself’ that characterizes proper mindfulness of both “what is and what 
one is”.
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

146
However, we may likewise say that this double vision and the contem-
plative affirmation of the for-itself is at the same time redoubled in this 
double vision and is thereby startled from an otherwise restful closure of 
presence such that by its sheer givenness that we can never be fully at 
home with being (PU 19). The double vision of the metaxological affords 
the promise that refreshes us to the very freshest of things given, a fresh-
ness that emerges anew daily as an ‘open whole’ of possibility and by the 
dynamism that we are in, but not of the world, which intensifies and 
charges, rather than mistaking the common is from the commonplace. As 
Desmond writes: “But the very elemental presence of being ought to sub-
vert every form of simplemindedness and challenge us to the highest 
sophistication and deepest openness. The commonness of the ‘is’ indicates 
its significance …. We have our metaxological being in this commonality; 
we participate in, draw on, exhibit its communicating energy” (DDO 
168). Such an ecstatic commons of metaxological being—both in its low-
liness by which its sheer dailyness anonymously refracts attention away 
from its given plentitude and in its sheer relationality as the conjoining and 
bridging of being in community—finds a companion and concretion in 
one of the most pregnant notions from Ruusbroec’s corpus, namely, the 
common life.
For Ruusbroec, the common life is none other than the Brabantine’ s 
addition of a fourth—and thereby implicitly a tensed double to which his 
characteristic erotics of minne-love aptly express—to that of the traditional 
triptych within mystical literature of purgation, interior union and illumi-
nation. The fourth of Ruusbroec’s common life inverts the ladder of tra-
ditional ascent to God as equally one of descent. Here, the dialectical 
tensions so ripe and continuous within the spiritual tradition between the 
vita activa and vita contemplativa arguably are not so much resolved dia-
lectically into a final third as much as they are reaffirmed as a continuous 
life from which the plurality of the fourth releases. The going up as much 
as the going down, in their singular and ecclesial communal expression, 
are tensely held together in the common life. Such a life of participative 
commercium and reciprocity is of itself refreshed and renewed daily, vivi-
fied by an indebtedness that can never be repaid amid the going up into 
rest and enjoyment, and the going down into the suffering outpouring of 
self in recognition that highness cannot but persist in lowliness (Ruusbroec 
2001, ll. 567–570). Hence, it is by recognizing the inexhaustibility of a 
prior debt of givenness that cannot be reciprocated, yet spurns one for-
ward anew from its plenitidinous origins and plurality of responses, that 
 
P. R. COOPER

147
one finds a unique concretion of the energy and ethos of the metaxologi-
cal by way of Ruusbroec’s common life. This vivifying commercium of 
highness persisting in lowliness in Ruusbroec’s common life seeks not to 
appropriate and consume difference and otherness, such as an erotic quest 
for possession proceeds solely from lack to wholeness. However, the exces-
sive goodness of being arises in plentitude from which the moral and the 
ontological are neither dualistically opposed, nor that of the singular indi-
vidual from that of the community’s tense mediation of difference and 
relation from which self-identity emerges from the varying inflections of 
such a commons.
From these convergences, the porous exchange of a metaxological mys-
ticism cultivates anew the very mystery of mediation, the mystery of the 
open commons. Such an intimate espousal of mysticism metaxologically 
finessed is seen decisively in contrast to the legacy of the transcendental 
turn to the subject, its thinking of identity and psychological self-reference 
of consciousness in pursuit of a metaphysics of presence and transcendent 
immediacy, whereby such a particular reconstructed ethos largely degrades 
the very allure of mediation itself. Mediation, so construed, was some-
thing to be transgressively overcome, especially in view of ‘religious expe-
rience’ and the mystical tradition. Whereas the espoused intimacy of the 
metaphysical and the mystical that we see in Desmond is in part anchored 
in the Augustinian view of the fluid penetration of the theological and 
philosophical and thus of grace and nature such that our ways to God are 
neither reducible too, nor inseparable from, the abyssal depths of the 
human person wherein fresh appeal is made to a philosophical capacity 
whereby transcendence exceeds and thereby mediates diversely within life 
that calls upon our ability to cultivate a proper mindfulness to better reflect 
upon this plural mediation.
Bibliography
Blondel, Maurice. 1906. Le Point de Départ de la Recherche Philosophique. 
Annales de Philosophie Chrétienne 152: 225–250.
Charles, Pierre. 1964. The Prayer of All Things. New York: Herder and Herder.
Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith. 1989. On Some Aspects of Christian 
Meditation. Vatican: Holy See.
Cooper, Patrick. 2017. The Virginal Middle: Towards a Marian Metaxology. 
Medieval Mystical Theology 25: 1–24.
Desmond, William. 1980. Augustine’s Confessions: On Desire, Conversion and 
Reflection. Irish Theological Quarterly 1: 24–33.
  ESPOUSING INTIMACIES: MYSTICS AND THE METAXOLOGICAL 

148
———. 2012. Mysticism and the Intimate Universal: Philosophical Reflections on 
the Arnhem Mystical Sermons and Sri Aurobindo. In Mystical Anthropology: 
Cross-Religious Perspectives and Interdisciplinary Reflections on the Arnhem 
Mystical Sermons and Sri Aurobindo, ed. Ineke Cornet, Rob Faesen, and Martin 
Sebastian Kallungal, 25–44. Leuven: Peeters.
Maréchal, Joseph. 1927. Studies in the Psychology of the Mystics. Trans. Algar 
Thorold. New York: Benzinger Brothers Press.
Ruusbroec, Jan van. 1981. Boecsken der verclaringhe. Trans. Ph. Crowley and 
H. Rolfson. Tielt: Lannoo, Leiden: Brill.
———. 1988. Die Geestelike Brulocht. Trans. H. Rolfson. Tielt: Lannoo, Turnhout: 
Brepols.
———. 1991. Vanden Blinkenden Steen. Trans. A.  Lefevere. Tielt: Lannoo, 
Turnhout: Brepols.
———. 2000. Vanden XII Beghinen Text and Apparatus. Trans. H. Rolfson. Tielt: 
Lannoo, Turnhout: Brepols.
———. 2001. Spieghel der eeuwigher salicheit. Trans. A. Lefevere. Tielt: Lannoo, 
Turnhout: Brepols.
———. 2006. Van den Geesteliken Tabernakel. Trans. H. Rolfson. Tielt: Lannoo, 
Turnhout: Brepols.
Scheuer, Pierre. 1957. Notes on Metaphysics. Trans. Joseph Donceel. Cross 
Currents 7: 337–346.
———. 1966. An Interior Metaphysics: The Philosophical Synthesis of Pierre Scheuer 
S.J. Trans. Daniel J. Shine S.J. Weston, MA: College Press.
 
P. R. COOPER

PART III
Autonomy, Porosity, and Goodness

151
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_9
CHAPTER 9
Evil: From Phenomenology to Thought
Cyril O’Regan
William Desmond is a philosopher of enormous accomplishment who 
exhibits an encyclopedic grasp of the Western philosophical tradition and 
who has shown the ability in his celebrated trilogy of the ‘Between’ to keep 
it all in play as he charts his own unique phenomenological-­metaphysical 
course in the wake of Hegel, who has betrayed phenomenology and dis-
credited metaphysics, and also Hegel’s postmodern tormenters content to 
embrace a nihilistic alternative.1 If Desmond is a major critic of philosophi-
cal gluttony that insists on speculatively mastering the entire range and 
depth of the real, this should not disguise the fact that the refusal of system 
does not function to narrow, but rather open up multiple phenomenolog-
ical-metaphysical vistas into individuals, communities, selves, desire, drive, 
receptivity, the nature of art, religion and philosophy, and the good, the 
true, and the beautiful to name but a few. If the theme of evil is just one of 
many in Desmond’s ever-expanding oeuvre, ­nonetheless, here Desmond 
proves to be as intellectually penetrating as he is in his elaboration of the 
1 I have written articles on each of these major contributions to philosophy. See O’Regan 
(1997, 2002, 2008, 2012).
C. O’Regan (*) 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
e-mail: Cyril.J.O’Regan.1@nd.edu

152
good and, it goes without saying, also as existentially and phenomeno-
logically adroit as he refuses to position his phenomenology against meta-
physics. Although the theme of evil recurs constantly throughout its 
oeuvre, as yet Desmond has not offered a monograph-­sized account, nor 
for that matter have his interpreters felt it necessary to highlight the 
importance of the theme, present its outline, explore its ramifications, 
and discern how Desmond’s views are in critical conversation with other 
views in the Western philosophical and theological traditions, and take on 
the responsibility of broadening and deepening the range of critical 
conversation.
The aim of this chapter is to attend in some modest way to all the 
above-named lacks. I propose to carry out this task in three main steps. In 
the first section, cutting across a wide swathe of texts from different peri-
ods of Desmond’s literary production, I present (a) a Gestalt of Desmond’s 
phenomenological but also metaphysical view of evil and (b) underscore 
Desmond’s emphasis on the surd quality of evil that makes it resistant to 
explanation and rules out theodicy. In the second section in addition to 
pointing to philosophical figures and religious thinkers such as Augustine 
and Kant with whom Desmond is in actual discussion on the topic of evil, 
I develop a comparison with Paul Ricoeur, the contemporary philosopher 
who has offered the deepest and most ramified analysis of evil in a broadly 
phenomenological register which, similar to Desmond, pays as much 
attention to symbols and myths of evil as concepts of evil. In addition, 
both philosophers illustrate a high degree of openness to religion in gen-
eral and a significant degree of elective affinity to Christianity without 
either essentially blurring the boundaries between philosophy and theol-
ogy. In Section ‘Principle of Reserve: Inverted Icon—Figure of Medusa,’ 
having already underscored Desmond’s tendency to approach evil side-
ways through literary figures in the previous section, I both thematize and 
supplement Desmond’s reserve with regard to evil which essentially pro-
scribes any form of tarrying with evil that might fold into obsession by 
proposing that the figure of Medusa haunts Desmond’s discourse as the 
crisis and limit in focus that must be avoided should we successfully avoid 
becoming complicit with the evil that we would represent.
 
C. O’REGAN

153
Phenomena of Evil and the Lure of Explanation
In the first section of this chapter I would like to do two different but 
related things. First, I would like to offer a sketch of the negative phenom-
ena that appear within the metaxological milieu, tax it, deplete its energy, 
contract its joyousness, and perhaps take away its singing. Second, I would 
like to lay bare how Desmond, on the one hand, fully accepts that the 
phenomena of evil give themselves to thought and, on the other, that such 
phenomena resist it sufficiently that at the very least we have to give up on 
the lure of total explanation. The most elementary thing to say about the 
metaxological milieu, which is truly elemental, is that we are not in control 
of it: what appears is what appears, and one set of appearances are nega-
tive. From the perspective of experience, we can say that in significant 
respects appearances of evil are—to use the ugly Heideggerian locution—
‘equiprimordial’ with the appearances of the good.2 I will return to the 
implied caveat in due course when I speak to an implied narrative line of 
origin and end.
Although there is no single text of Desmond in which he provides an 
inventory of the phenomena of evil, and we can find instruction through-
out his work, early or late, when he writes diversely of tragedy and cour-
age, on particular philosophical figures such as Kant and Schopenhauer, 
or literary figures such as Shakespeare, I think on balance that we find the 
deepest and most ramified discussion on the phenomena of evil precisely 
in the text where we would expect to find it, that is, Ethics and the Between. 
Although Desmond understands his discussion of evil to be secondary 
with respect to his discussion of the good, importantly we are speaking of 
phenomena of evil rather than the phenomenon of evil. In the metaxo-
logical milieu we experience our own fragility and incoherence (EB 55) 
and the drift toward nothing (EB 44). This experience is not only a grasp 
of our mortality and deep vulnerability, but a deeper sense that our exis-
tence is without why, something grasped existentially by Augustine and 
expressed with slightly different accents in modern thought in Kierkegaard 
and Heidegger. For Desmond, the experience of evil certainly includes 
what happenings turn out to be unpropitious for human beings, whether 
these experiences are enveloped in chance or fate, but, as we might expect 
in a text which has ‘ethics’ in the title, human failure and evil intention are 
2 The locution of ‘equiprimordial’ (gleichursprünglich) is a key term of Heidegger’s exis-
tential analysis of Dasein in Sein und Zeit (1927).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

154
relatively prominent. There is the tendency toward construction and fab-
rication (EB 55), systemic displays of disordered forms of erotic sover-
eignty (EB 307 and 311) that run the gamut from lack of solicitude 
toward the other, to sheer malice and will to destruction, the perception 
of constitutive existential tension and dividedness (EB 296), and within 
the ligatures of the division at the root of the self-temptation as a presenti-
ment of one’s succumbing to what one would and presumably could avoid 
(EB 282–285).
This is hardly a full catalogue of human vulnerability and morally dis-
torted agency provided by Ethics and the Between, not to mention other 
texts. Elsewhere death and physical suffering parse vulnerability, and 
throughout his oeuvre Desmond puts literature to work as a phenomeno-
logical resource to get at the appearances of jealousy (Othello), hatred or 
malice (Iago), nihilism (Iago, and Dostoyevsky’s ‘underground man’), 
and overweening ambition (many characters in Greek tragedy and also 
Lady Macbeth). Arguably, Desmond’s underscoring of the systemic nega-
tive phenomenon of idolatry represents his homage to Platonic tradition, 
such modern versions of it laid out by Weil and Murdoch as well as the 
texts of the historical Plato.3 The function of the idol is to project tran-
scendence only insofar as it contributes to individual or communal self-­
affirmation and self-enhancement. The idol tends toward its reproduction 
and protects its generator or recycler against the inconvenience of testing 
the truth of their assumptions. In addition, the function of the idol is to 
neutralize the claim of the other beforehand by not recognizing her. The 
idol both reflects and induces a form of studied ignorance or regime of 
inattention. Still, even if there is a significant recall of Platonism in 
Desmond, when it comes to the appearances of evil and some of its more 
basic structures, it would be a mistake to think that this is the sole or per-
haps even the dominant figuration.
What suggests that Platonism provides an important language of 
response to human evil, but neither the sole nor constitutive response, 
is  Desmond’s reflections in Ethics and the Between on ‘sovereignty.’ 
Sovereignty is both an old-fashioned word in that it is common to both 
Christian and legal thought, and suggests both negative and positive 
3 See O’Regan (2002) in which I articulate the relationship between the highly situated 
and enfleshed Platonism of Simone Weil and Iris Murdoch and the particular configuration 
to be found in Desmond’s Ethics and the Between.
 
C. O’REGAN

155
­freedom, that is, freedom from and freedom to.4 In the case of Christianity, 
sovereignty is a kind of transferred asset from the divine to human being 
who is commanded to exercise its gifts of intelligence and judgment respon-
sibly and be mindful of its creatureliness. In the case of legal thought, sov-
ereignty is applied to a corporate rather than individual subject. Sovereignty 
is supposed to enjoy respectful recognition from other corporate entities 
and perhaps also enjoin certain privileges vis-à-vis them. In both cases will, 
at the very least, seems to be as pertinent as reason. Of course, sovereignty 
is also a concept that circulates within postmodern discourses. If it is implied 
in Nietzsche, it is elevated in Bataille,5 who in turn brings the tradition of 
Sade into the twentieth century, recycled in Agamben,6 who has Carl 
Schmitt as a precursor. Here the voluntarist calibration is elevated. The best 
way to think of Desmond’s excurses on ‘erotic sovereignty’ is to think of 
him bringing to our attention the tendency toward destructive self-asser-
tion over others that is a common feature of human selving, which in turn 
should force us to think long and hard about the givenness of the other as 
other and our would-be Levinasian obsession with the other as other and 
our persecution by her.7 If the latter is a given, then it necessarily must be 
archeological: if we experience the other as the singular categorical impera-
tive, it is sometimes only in and through the haze of the other’s construc-
tion and violation. Desmond provides his readers with good reasons that 
the general register of erotic sovereignty is Augustinian, even if not exclu-
sively so. Clues are provided in his account of tension and division as con-
stitutive of the self and of the tendency of human beings to construct and 
fabulate. But the clincher with regard to the Augustinian nature of the 
register is the violence always near to the surface of sovereignty. Libido 
dominandi is at its very heart. If not intrinsically willfully violent, on 
Desmond’s account, erotic sovereignty exhibits a tendency to be so.
Now, at the very beginning of this section when I announced the 
‘equiprimordiality’ of the phenomena of good and evil, I also suggested a 
caveat. Here it is: negative phenomena are ambiguously primary and sec-
4 Here I recall Isaiah Berlin’s famous distinction in his essay ‘Two Concepts of Liberty,’ 
originally published as a pamphlet by Clarendon Press in 1958 and included in Berlin (1969).
5 For convenient English access to Bataille’s reflection on sovereignty, see Bataille (1993).
6 For Giorgio Agamben on the notion of sovereignty with a particularly deep engagement 
with the political philosophy and ‘theology’ of Carl Schmitt, see Agamben (1998, 2005, 
2011).
7 See Levinas (1969, 1981).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

156
ondary. They are at once phenomena of interruption and thus endemic to 
the metaxological field. Yet, they might just as easily be cast as interrup-
tive phenomena, which suggests a kind of secondness. I submit, then, that 
what Desmond attempts to do in Ethics and the Between and elsewhere is 
precisely to suggest a kind of secondness in the metaxological sphere 
despite the fact that in many respects the phenomena of evil are given just 
as the phenomena of the good are given. Now faithfulness to the originat-
ing experiences demands that one cannot have recourse to the kinds of 
metaphysical explanation of secondness provided by the Platonic tradition 
and taken up into Christianity: logically and ontologically evil always is 
inscribed in a hierarchy in which it is invariably second.8 With this kind of 
explanation not a viable option, ‘secondness’ will necessarily be somewhat 
more phenomenological and more spectral, since at first blush the phe-
nomena of evil give themselves to be every bit as primary as the phenom-
ena of the good, care, solicitude, happy dependence, and so on. This 
spectrality deserves a far more detailed treatment than what I can provide 
here. Perhaps it might be sufficient to draw attention to one detail in 
Desmond’s account of erotic sovereignty. Desmond is convinced that 
human beings reveal themselves as complex unities of agency and passion, 
exercise of will and vulnerability, or, putting it in the language of human 
unity provided by Leibniz, complex unities of conatus essendi and passio 
essendi.9 Unlike Kant and Levinas, Desmond does not think that we are 
justified in excoriating the energy or drive of the self as given. In harmony 
8 While Desmond has profound sympathies with the classical philosophical tradition, given 
the phenomenological register of his metaphysical thought, he does not automatically buy 
into received notions in Catholic philosophy such as analogy or for that matter evil as the 
privation of being. These notions have to pass the phenomenological test. In Being and the 
Between, Desmond worried about the abstractness of the traditional doctrine of analogy and 
wondered whether in the last instance it sufficiently emphasized difference. In this sense 
metaxology is the counter. One could, however, see his recent work as evincing a greater 
hospitality to analogy. Similarly, although Desmond is shy about adopting a privatio boni 
view of evil for fear that the seriousness of evil is diluted, this does not mean that he would 
not be open to it as long as the metaphysics would not uncouple from the experience of evil 
in which the phenomenon is all too real.
9 Desmond is in line with much of modern philosophy and theology in rejecting theodicy 
as a properly philosophical aspiration. While this rejection most certainly applies to Leibniz’s 
Theodicy (1710), which has commonly come to be regarded as theodicy’s laughable limit, 
this does not apply to Leibniz’s metaphysics. Desmond’s articulation of conatus essendi and 
passio essendi certainly recalls the metaphysics elaborated in Leibniz’s Monadology (1714) and 
his earlier Discourse on Metaphysics (1686).
 
C. O’REGAN

157
with the passion of the self, energy and drive can be affirmed. He under-
scores their mutual correction and enhancement: the passion for existence 
modifies the potential for aggression of the conatus essendi, just as conatus 
essendi gives energy and strength to the passio essendi. If expressions of 
good are to be powerful, then the energy of desire will have been har-
nessed, and if a good person is to be formed, then the passio essendi will 
have to be supplemented by energy and power. While Desmond hardly 
depends on precedent to make this point, it is interesting that two post-­
Leibnizians, Schelling and Nietzsche, spent considerable time making the 
point.10 Now, if the conatus essendi is not intrinsically violent, it becomes 
so when separated from its complement that keeps it in check. Moral evil, 
then, comes into being when the desire for self-affirmation and self-­
enhancement separates from the givenness of the self and its porosity with 
respect to other selves and the world and comes to behave like a free radi-
cal. The relevant contrast thus is between a good that is an integral part 
of action and passion, and a fragment that terrorizes and rends the metax-
ological milieu. If in some sense the phenomena of evil are on the same 
phenomenal plane as the phenomena of the good, in another sense, there 
are at least penumbral hints of splitting and thus secondness. Of course, it 
should be pointed out, and here the analogy with Schelling in particular 
is relevant, Desmond thinks of good in two different ways: on the one 
hand, the elemental good of ‘to be’ in which the self has precipitated out 
the elemental field of becoming and lives in a certain innocence, and, on 
the other, a good that signals recognition of the phenomena of evil and 
one’s capacity for complicity and repetition and a choice for good.
With this we turn to the second of my two tasks in the first section of 
the chapter that is the correlative of the first. I am speaking here of 
Desmond’s insistence that we tarry with the phenomena of evil as long as 
possible and resist acquiescence to the lure of explanation. Although 
Desmond is an anti-theodicy thinker, this is not to say that theodicy is a 
focal subject of analysis. In his wide-ranging discourse of evil, there is no 
recourse to Bayle, Voltaire, or Hume. Nor are there any vatic pronounce-
ments on the obscenity of theodicy, as occur fairly regularly in current 
philosophy of religion.11 Nonetheless, it is obvious from his very earliest 
10 Schelling’s famous Freiheit essay (1809) is illustrative here. For a recent translation, see 
Schelling (2007).
11 Various forms of the ‘moral obscenity’ provided by Voltaire are offered in the more 
recent philosophical and theological literature that focuses on theodicy. Representative 
examples include Tilley (2000) and Pinnock (2002).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

158
work that theodicy emerges as a problem because of the tendency of the 
experiencer of evil to contain the phenomena of evil that emerge within 
and to some extent rend the metaxological milieu. The primary form of 
containment that Desmond attends to is discursive, but in principle the 
containment might also take the form of ritual action or political response, 
and it is, arguably, the case that the third form of containment is just now 
appearing on the horizon of Desmond’s work (see IU), although much of 
his work and all of his appreciation for Plato and Augustine have prepared 
for it. In terms of discursive response, Desmond is aware that the dis-
courses of art, religion, and philosophy can all respond to the provocation 
of the phenomena of evil by enacting a program of containment in which 
the challenge of evil to meaning, truth, and goodness is met or at least 
significantly alleviated. Art and the Absolute: A study of Hegel’s Aesthetics is 
an early text that provides a complex response, since aesthetic theory in 
Hegel is an elaboration of the principles of art within a governing philo-
sophical matrix. In his chapter, ‘Aesthetic Theodicy and the Transfiguration 
of the Ugly’ (AA 150–159), Desmond challenges Hegel’s preferred pat-
tern of the concordance of discordance and concordance in which discor-
dance is resolved. The tears in the fabric of sense are always stitched over 
in and through an aesthetic that reconciles opposites. This is perhaps clear-
est in Hegel’s treatment of Greek tragedy. Despite the fact that Hegel 
chooses Antigone, in which there is irreconcilable conflict between the 
imperatives of family and state, he insists on tragedy as the epitome of all 
art and as providing a pattern of resolution that both religion and philoso-
phy can imitate and philosophy can justify. Desmond’s resistance to the 
symbolic and narrative domestication of the phenomenon of evil as elabo-
rated in Hegel recalls both Adorno and Derrida without, however, giving 
credence to the negative dialectics of the former or the exaltation of the 
sublime of the other in which irresolution rules.12
12 Adorno and Derrida are advocates of the postmodern sublime which radicalizes Kant’s 
reflection. One can also certainly add Jean-Luc Nancy to the list. Among other things the 
sublime both establishes and is signaled by a separation between sign and signified. After 
Edward Jabès Derrida can associate this disconnection with Judaism and counterpose 
Judaism to the Western philosophical tradition with which Christianity is broadly and deeply 
imbricated. See Derrida (1978, 64–78, 1990). Originally published in French in 1974 this 
text is a takedown of Hegel’s speculative system. See O’Regan (2013, 383–425). Looking 
for tropes that expose both the ontotheological and logocentric nature of the Western tradi-
 
C. O’REGAN

159
As Desmond’s work unfolds it gains amplitude regarding its resistance 
to over-explanation of the phenomena of evil while also adding nuance. In 
a very important chapter in God and the Between (GB Chap. 11) Desmond 
shows that all forms of pantheism, ancient or modern, represent attempts 
to elevate the universal at the cost of what is contingent, singular, and 
most relevantly here interruptive. While there is no listing of suspects, one 
can suppose that certain forms of Platonism, Christian or otherwise, would 
come under the general interdiction, as would certain forms of Romantic 
and Idealist thought, while it would not be clear whether so-called current 
panentheistic forms of Christian thought would be provided a clean bill of 
health. There is no intimation of whether Spinoza would come under the 
condemnation, although in any event the identity of Spinoza would have 
to be decided: either the naturalist that the eighteenth century made him 
out to be or the ‘refined pantheist’ he was assumed to be in German letters 
from Lessing on. Needless to say, judgment one way or the other is not 
essential to Desmond’s claim that pantheism, whether in a more nearly 
religious or philosophical modality, is a discourse of containment. 
Nonetheless, in his other text on Hegel, Hegel’s God (HG 143), Desmond 
does seem to suggest that Spinoza’s pantheistic metaphysics is a discourse 
of containment. And Desmond essentially doubles down on German 
Romantic and Idealist insistence that Spinoza’s discourse is a non-­
dialectical analogue of their more dialectical, more historical holistic dis-
course. Of course, Hegel’s dialectical ontology represents the limit in 
explanatory ambition to comprehend evil. In his outstanding chapter on 
Hegelian theodicy (HG Chap. 6), Desmond focuses on the washing out 
of singularity in Hegel’s discourse, laments the lack of attention to the 
victims of history who cry out against a mere historical judgment, and 
condemns the substitution for the agapeic Christian God of a God of 
erotic becoming for whom history is the arena of divine self-definition. 
Desmond grasps well that in Hegel the appearance of evil is, from a meta-
physical point of view, a felix culpa that guarantees that the end exceeds 
origin. In Desmond’s telling reading of Hegel’s account of the Fall story 
in Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion and in his Zusatz to #24 of the 
Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences (HG 158), unenlightened egoism 
and the turn to objectification are dialectically positive insofar as in the 
long run they serve as vehicles toward total knowing, mastering the earth, 
tion, Derrida also types the sublime as Egyptian. See his famous essay—again directed at 
Hegel—Derrida (1982, 69–108).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

160
and creating community. Yes, there will be a price to be paid. Desmond 
sees the relationship between his reading of Hegel and that of Bataille,13 
whose reflection on Aufhebung in Hegel operates in terms of the meta-
phor of labor and the yielding of profit. However, although Desmond 
denies what Bataille denies, he does not affirm what Bataille affirms. He 
does not yield to Bataille’s an-economic alternative of excess, which posi-
tively comes to involve ecstatic, unknowing forms of knowledge within 
the alternate matrix of sovereignty and transgression. Desmond believes in 
innocence, in childlikeness which involves a return move to the plenitude 
of origin, and does not think that the participation so desired is to be 
granted by maddening logic and escape from mere knowledge verified 
only through outrage. This is at once the road of Sade and Nietzsche. By 
the same token, Desmond does not refuse Derrida’s diagnosis of Hegel’s 
discourse as being constitutively theodicy oriented in nature, and rightly 
so since the main contours of Derrida’s critique are set down by Bataille. 
In his Hegel book he takes advantage in the way that Derrida does in Glas 
of Hegel’s organic metaphors,14 especially the alimentary. In Hegel’s case 
singularity and evil are not appearances that refuse assimilation; rather, 
they are the conditions of assimilation’s operation. In Hegelian logic, pre-
cisely as a theo-onto-logic, nothing can resist the assimilating power of 
Spirit except nothing which cannot make an appearance.
As is obvious from the subtitle of his second Hegel book, Desmond 
does not think that Hegelian thought presents an adequate translation of 
the rendering in Christian symbols and narrative of the emergence and 
perduring of the appearances of evil. It is not simply that there is consider-
able distortion. It is also the case that the contingency of the emergence of 
evil as well as the gratuity of origin and end, which are both fundament to 
the sense of the Christian story, are erased (HG 158). Christianity is pro-
voked by evil and responds to it in thought, liturgy, and in church, while 
recognizing all the time its contingency as well as its power. While it is true 
that he demonstrates Derrida’s adage that it is extraordinarily difficult for 
13 In addition to narrating the history of transgression and using his novels as explorations 
of transgression that uncover sovereign subjectivity, Bataille was a relentless critic of Hegelian 
dialectic which not only issued in the closed circuit of self-knowledge, but also justified itself 
in that all negation yielded a profit. With respect to the former, see Bataille (2001). With 
respect to the economy (of sacrifice), see Bataille (1989).
14 The generalization of the image of digestion from its local site in Hegel’s Philosophy of 
Nature to characterize dialectic as such is prominent in Glas.
 
C. O’REGAN

161
a philosopher not to keep returning to Hegel,15 Desmond is not Hegel 
obsessed. There are forms of religious thought in the Western tradition 
not so philosophically adroit as Hegelianism that also suggest a solution to 
the ‘nightmare’ of embodiment, time, and history. As he describes the 
phenomenon in God and the Between, Gnosticism constitutes an impor-
tant exemplar of a mentality that makes knowledge itself crucial for deliv-
erance (GB Chap. 10),16 even if the range of deliverance is considerably 
more restricted in scope than that advanced by Hegel by insisting on dis-
embodied existence. Moreover, Desmond’s commitment to embodiment 
is such that it is not evident that he can entirely avoid charting a distance 
between his own thought and a certain Plato who figured knowledge and 
memory sufficient for liberation from accident, opinion or ideology, and 
the brutality of power.
A second objection to Gnosticism can serve as a bridge to qualms 
expressed by Desmond regarding the explanatory quotients in other mod-
ern discourses that intentionally are anti-theodicy in form. In his wonder-
ful chapter on Gnosticism in God and the Between, it is not only Gnostic 
therapy that is an object of critique, but the suggestion of a quasi-demonic 
origin of a material temporal world that will show only evidence of neces-
sity and none of providence. Here contingency is removed and the enigma 
mastered. One might say that Desmond’s response here is patterned after 
Augustine’s response to Manichaeism which holds an analogous view of 
the necessity of the phenomena of evil and the peculiar consolations pro-
vided to the knowing subject that there is no way out or only impossible 
ways out. How to determine Nietzsche’s aesthetic philosophy? Granted its 
consistently anti-rationalist complexion, the question arises—is this suffi-
cient to guarantee that his discourse is anti-theodicy? Desmond’s reflec-
tion on Nietzsche throughout his oeuvre forces the question, even if he 
does not explicitly answer it. Perhaps, given Nietzsche’s styles, his 
­contradictions, and his double takes, it is difficult to construct a univocal 
answer. But if life is the seething cauldron depicted in The Birth of Tragedy 
that goes under the figure of Dionysus, then the world is locked in a neces-
sity that the genuine thinker must accept and recognize. If the appearances 
of evil are questionable, they are only notionally so, since, as is the case in 
Spinoza, and perhaps also in Heraclitus, whose ontological agonism 
15 For Derrida’s avowal of the inescapability of Hegel, see Derrida (1981, 43–44).
16 I have discussed this particular chapter which is explicitly on ancient Gnosticism as well 
as modern candidates for Gnostic ascription in O’Regan (2017, 239–268).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

162
Nietzsche venerates, the answer precedes the question. Nietzsche’s aes-
thetic philosophy then, which is absolutely disposed against theodicy 
explanations thrown up by the Western tradition, whether Platonic, 
Christian, or modern bourgeois, can be understood to be a theodicy dis-
course by other means.
The Ricoeurian Template
While the title of the chapter may accidentally recall Heidegger (Richardson 
1963), it is calculated to evoke Paul Ricoeur, whose reflections on evil 
begin with the phenomenon or phenomena of evil as these are embedded 
in symbols and narratives and invite—if not compel—reflection. Without 
suggesting that Desmond’s exploration of the phenomena of evil or his 
analyses of the symbols and narratives of evil is anywhere near as focused 
and systematic, and again without implying that in his reflections and anal-
yses Desmond is genetically dependent on Ricoeur, it is evident that there 
is a significant measure of repetition on both the substantive and method-
ological levels. In texts such as The Symbolism of Evil and Fallible Man, 
Ricoeur sets the essential terms of an analysis of evil in a phenomenologi-
cal register (Ricoeur 1969, 1986). Arguably, the three most important of 
these are (a) the complexity and ambiguity in the experience of evil, (b) 
plurality in the experience of evil, and (c) the reference always implied in 
the symbols and narratives of evil to evil’s overcoming.
The experience of evil is complex in that it concerns the origin as well 
as the nature of evil, and ambiguous in that the phenomenon of evil does 
not give itself to univocal identification. Evil gives itself as simply being the 
order of things, or origin as simply being there from the foundation of the 
world, thus as moira or fate; or evil gives itself as divinely directed envy of 
mortals who are presumptuously divine in their ambition. Or again as the 
upsurge of chaos that can never be reduced to naught. Or evil gives itself 
as arising from finite and vulnerable human being who is the chiasmus 
between the voluntary and the involuntary.17 As with origin, nature is not 
without a fundamental measure of ambiguity. Evil gives itself as chance 
17 The Symbolism of Evil is basically divided into two parts. The first deals with the different 
forms of experience indicated in the symbols of ‘defilement,’ ‘sin,’ and ‘guilt.’ The second 
deals with the four main narratives or myths of evil, in order (a) the drama of creation (theo-
gonic account); (b) the myth of the jealous God; (c) Genesis Adamic myth; (d) myth of the 
fall of the soul; they are the focus of the second part of the text.
 
C. O’REGAN

163
that makes human intention incoherent, as affliction, that is, a reduction 
of the vulnerable human subject to some form of abjection or alternatively 
as uncontrolled and violent self-insistence. As well as being complex and 
ambiguous, the experience of evil is plural. This is already suggested by the 
complexity in the experience of evil. Ricoeur speaks eloquently of 
temptation,18 the phenomena of sin and guilt,19 the struggle within the 
self not so much of body and soul, but of fundamental orientation best 
captured, perhaps, in Paul and annotated in the Western tradition of 
reflective thought by Augustine and Pascal,20 and finally in and as the enig-
mas of divine forces and cosmic misrule. Third, for Ricoeur every archeol-
ogy of evil implies an eschatology in which the specific phenomenon or 
phenomena of evil are overcome. Usually, but not always, this means that 
human beings either revert back to or move forward to their normative 
state in which the negative features of individual and corporate human 
existence are done away with, harmony achieved with the cosmos, and 
reconciliation achieved with non-human forces beyond human control.
Now, as Ricoeur outlines the matrices of a phenomenological account 
of evil he sets very definite strictures regarding the conceptualization of 
evil. First, it is no accident that the phenomena of evil are mediated pri-
marily through symbols and narratives rather than concepts, even if there 
has been much conceptualization of evil in the Western philosophical tra-
dition from Plato to Hegel, Nietzsche, and Heidegger. The appeal of sym-
bols and narratives is obvious: relative to concepts, symbols and narratives 
under-interpret rather than over-interpret the phenomena of evil, thereby 
being more faithful to the originating experiences and more responsive to 
18 When contrasted with Hegel’s reductive account of the Fall of Adam, Ricoeur’s account 
in 1969, 232–278 tarries with the text. A particular result of this is an analysis of temptation 
of Adam by the serpent (252–260), which is a detailing of the phenomenon which centrally 
involves incentives for transgression coming at once from inside and outside the self. Of 
course, unlike Hegel, Ricoeur thinks that the temptation is destructive to the self.
19 It should be noted that while in The Symbolism of Evil Ricoeur generally keeps philoso-
phers and theologians out of the picture, when it comes to the fall or what he calls the ‘ethical 
view’ of evil, he does not fail to notice, on the one hand, Saint Paul (1969, 332–335), and 
Augustine (83, 84, 89, 90, 91), on the other.
20 Augustine and Pascal are two major exemplars of the existential rather than ontological 
duality of the self that Ricoeur thinks is phenomenologically verifiable and at the same time 
the properly biblical view. While this contrast was not a theme in The Symbolism of Evil, it is 
implied in the contrast between the Adamic myth and Orphic myth of the fall of the soul. If 
Plato is the second-order philosophical reflector of the latter, Augustine is the second-order 
reflector of the former.
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

164
the irreducible density, complexity, and ambiguity of the phenomena of 
evil and their enigmatic corona. Yes, ‘the symbol gives rise to thought,’21 
yet equally it continues to exceed the thought it calls forth. And, as is well 
known, for Ricoeur the narratives of evil cannot be exhaustively translated 
into a conceptual idiom. Just as with regard to individual symbols and 
nexuses of symbols, narratives of evil invite interpretation, indeed, multi-
ple interpretations, and it is presumed no final interpretation. No concep-
tualization is likely to be fully adequate to the phenomena and derivatively 
to their symbolic and narrative expressions, since while conceptualizations 
bring increased clarity and focus on the phenomena of evil, they also 
reduce the measure of complexity, ambiguity, plurality, and self-­
involvement evident at the symbolic and narrative level. Second, and relat-
edly, Ricoeur’s phenomenological program is consistently anti-theodicy in 
its fundamental orientation. Attempts to rationalize the phenomenon of 
evil by appeal to the aesthetic contrast of dark and light—a canard gener-
ated in Neoplatonism, taken up by Augustine, and ready at hand in the 
bouquet of arguments in modern attempts to defend the accused divine—
are dismissed. So also are dialectical accounts of evil, as well as other non-­
dialectical views of evil such as the metaphysical view of the best of possible 
worlds in which fault is aligned with the finitude of creation.
Third, an associated feature of his recurrence to symbol and narrative 
when it comes to registering the phenomena of evil is Ricoeur’s general 
elevation of religion vis-à-vis philosophy. With regard to the symboliza-
tions and narratives of evil in religions, Ricoeur lacks the range of the great 
phenomenologist of religion Mercea Eliade: one will not find in Ricoeur 
an analogue of Eliade’s account of the upsurge of evil present in the myth 
of the aborigines in Australia, the accounts of shamans in Siberia, or that 
of the native-American Indians of the Plains. Nor do we have accounts of 
the Meso-American myths of evil of either the Incas and Aztecs and the 
peoples they displaced, nor again accounts of Asian world religions. Yet 
one can find in Ricoeur’s discussions of the symbols and narratives of evil 
of the ancient Near East, Greek mystery religions such as Orphism and 
Pythagoreanism, as well, of course, of Judaism and Christianity.22 
Philosophically tinted religions such as Gnosticism and Manichaeism, and 
21 This phrase is nothing less than the guiding principle of Ricoeur’s interpretation of evil 
in The Symbolism of Evil.
22 For explicit connections between the Orphic myth of the fall of the soul and subsequent 
Platonic and Neoplatonic philosophy, see Ricoeur (1969, 279–281, 286 and 289).
 
C. O’REGAN

165
religiously inflected forms of philosophy such as Neoplatonism (Ricoeur 
1979a, 264–286), also come in for attention, even if much of the atten-
tion is somewhat negative, since the etiological quotient is deemed to be 
too dominant. Fourth, and finally, Christianity is the religion that is privi-
leged by Ricoeur. It is a matter of fundamental importance to Ricoeur 
how its symbols and narratives in general are interpreted and how its sym-
bols and narratives of evil and its overcoming are interpreted in particular. 
In terms of reception, the Patristic connoisseur of evil, that is, Augustine, 
is a prominent focus. Throughout Ricoeur’s work there is a complicated 
to and fro between embrace and rejection. Embraced is Augustine’s read-
ing of the Fall story as the exercise of a fundamental option that has no 
ground, but which admits of being characterized relationally by rebellion 
and offense, psychologically as pride, and consequentially as alienation.23 
Refused is an Augustine who repeats the aesthetic theodicy of Platonism, 
as well as an Augustine whose dark eschatology in which the emphasis falls 
on damnation as a default. Ricoeur sides with Julian, Augustine’s Pelagian 
adversary, who characterizes Augustine’s eschatology as Manichaean,24 
thus the return of the repressed after his discovery of the Bible and his 
appropriation of Neoplatonic philosophy as a means to critique Manichaean 
mythological mystification.
I want to suggest that in his phenomenological account of the phenom-
ena of evil at the level of both substance and method, Desmond operates 
broadly speaking within the parameters laid down by Ricoeur. With an eye 
turned toward the material presented in Section ‘Phenomena of Evil and 
the Lure of Explanation,’ it seems safe to say that for Desmond the appear-
ances of evil are complex, ambiguous, and plural and that no less than for 
Ricoeur imagined ends of evil are invariably tied to the symbols and narra-
tives of the origin of evil. Moreover, there is also considerable overlap when 
it comes to details. The overlap in terms of method is—if anything—more 
striking. Desmond is a great believer in the irreducibility of symbol and 
23 Despite reservations, Ricoeur does think that historically Augustine contributed signifi-
cantly to the ‘ethical’ or freedom view of the origin of evil. He makes this clear in his essay 
on ‘Original Sin’ but also provides the basis of a cure from a literalization of symbols in 
Ricoeur (1979b, 287–314).
24 On the basis of his own reading rather than a thorough grounding in the secondary lit-
erature, Ricoeur suggests that in his anti-Pelagian texts Augustine tends to construct or 
reconstruct a form of the Manichaean dualism that he had repented of almost 30 years ear-
lier. This is not an uncommon accusation against Augustine made in the secondary literature 
and first made by his Pelagian opponent, Julian of Eclanum.
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

166
narrative to concept and is open eyed regarding the danger of the originat-
ing experiences becoming lost in translation and hostage to the impossible 
claim of total explanation. Desmond also favors religion over philosophy 
when it comes to preserving the grain and texture of the phenomena of evil 
and in turns favors Judaism and Christianity over other major world reli-
gions and over all other philosophical religions and religious philosophies. 
Even if the choice for Christianity in Desmond’s work occurs largely out of 
sight, it seems likely that were Desmond asked to supply warrants, he 
would argue that it is Christianity that best uncovers the tensional constitu-
tion of human being that serves as the background for the experiences of 
evil being acquiesced in or willed. On the methodological side, Augustine 
can be regarded as a quintessential Christian figure to the degree to which 
his interpretations of the Christian symbols of evil and the enframing nar-
rative do not leave behind the precipitating experiences.
Needless to say, neither at the level of substance nor method is 
Desmond’s repetition of Ricoeur exact. Beginning with departures in 
terms of substance, I would like to draw attention to four in particular. (a) 
Relative to Ricoeur in Desmond’s work the tension within the self, consti-
tutive of self, is more hyperbolic. Although both Ricoeur and Desmond 
advance Pascal as an important thinker of the middle, it is only Desmond 
who is prepared to borrow the language of ‘monster,’ even if this language 
of self is more proximally recycled through Dostoyevsky’s reflection on 
the doubleness and contradiction at the core of the self. (b) Of the two 
thinkers Desmond is the more focused on the nature rather than origin of 
evil. He is much less reluctant to produce malice as an appearance of evil, 
more eager to expose the tragic knots between persons, and less inclined 
to admit that temptation is only a psychic state. Desmond seems to allow 
with Ricoeur the structural ambiguity in representing temptation between 
interiority and exteriority,25 but is more like Dostoyevsky in keeping the 
persona of the tempter in play. (c) Desmond is more given to figurations 
of evil: not only Adam, Eve, the serpent, and Job but also Iago, Lady 
Macbeth, Othello, and the correlative demonic figures in Dostoyevsky’s 
hall of mirrors. For Desmond, figuration helps us to pick out forms of evil 
that otherwise would go unnoticed, which picking out in turn allows us to 
see more perspicuously the various shapes of the end. (d) Finally, Desmond 
25 For the phenomenological analysis of the tempting of Adam, see Ricoeur (1969, 
252–260).
 
C. O’REGAN

167
not only more forcefully insists on the secondness of the phenomena of evil, 
he essentially performs this secondness not only by pluralizing and ramify-
ing it into phenomena but also—and essentially—by providing the thickest 
possible account of human being in the middle in which self-­insistence is 
balanced by porosity with others, and self-determination and conatus essendi 
are offset by vulnerability and passio essendi. In general, in his account of the 
emergence of evil from the finite subject, Ricoeur seems to function more 
or less in the manner of the Kant of Religion within the Boundaries of 
Reason Alone26: both the character and the field of innocent humanity 
before the appearance of evil are presupposed rather than thickly illustrated. 
Desmond’s genius goes in the opposite direction: the goodness of ‘to be’ is 
elemental, and a sphere of enjoyment and innocence, of which Kant, so 
focused on knowledge and responsibility, has no inkling, is rendered thickly 
throughout his trilogy, but with special force in Ethics and the Between.
Nor is there anything like a pure repetition of Ricoeur’s dealing with 
evil at the formal or methodological level. For one thing, while in the 
movement from experience to thought Desmond insists, as Ricoeur does, 
on epistemic reserve, there is a noticeably different accent. While both can 
approve the ‘dialectical’ argumentative Job, unlike Kant from whom 
Ricoeur borrows his particular inflection of Job,27 Desmond’s Job has not 
been wrung through the epistemological strainer. Desmond points rather 
to an ethos of reserve that serves as the horizon for the symbolization, 
narratization, and figuration of evil. For another thing, Desmond elevates 
literary symbolization, narratization, and figuration of evil far beyond 
what they are granted in Ricoeur’s discursive economy. If he privileges 
Greek tragedy, Sophocles in particular, Shakespeare, and Dostoyevsky, he 
refers to many others. Moreover, the openness to the deliverances of lit-
erature with respect to the phenomena of evil suggests the prospects for 
significant expansion. Perhaps more Dante but also Bernanos and Gide 
who give very different accounts of the violation of innocence.28 Perhaps 
26 For a good English translation of this text, see Kant (1996, 41–215).
27 Ricoeur makes an appeal to Job as a block against complete explanation of evil as early as 
The Symbolism of Evil (Ricoeur 1969, 314 ff.). Before Ricoeur Kant had used the figure of 
Job as a refutation not only of all actual but all possible theodicies. See his famous essay ‘On 
the Miscarriage of All Philosophical Trials in Theodicy,’ in Kant (1996, 19–31). For Ricoeur, 
see Ricoeur (1995, 249–261).
28 Georges Bernanos and André Gide come at good and evil from very different points of 
view. Gide tends to think that ‘good’ is a mere conventional descriptor and that true human 
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

168
adding to Dostoyevsky, other Russians such as the poet Anna Akhmatova 
and the novelist Alexander Solzhenitsyn. Perhaps adding William Golding, 
maybe the Irish novelist John Banville.
These are but two of the more important differences on the level of 
method. There are others. Christianity is favored by both religiously ori-
ented philosophers, but there are salient differences with regard to the 
content and level of depiction of the end of evil and the healing that might 
take place in the between given the appearance of evil. With regard to the 
former, Desmond’s protology suggests a far richer profile of what the end 
might look like in terms of converted selves, genuine community, and non-
expropriative relations to the physical world. In contrast, when it comes to 
both the lived world that is ruptured by evil and the reintegrated world 
that is its end, Ricoeur tends to be more or less stipulative. Desmond is far 
more declarative about the prospects of healing, at once suggesting that 
the original milieu is not so spoiled as not to be in some respects a vehicle 
of the good—the hyperbolic good—and the generosity of reality granted 
at the foundation of the world. And finally, there are subtle but manifest 
differences when it comes to the interpretation of Augustine. Desmond is 
not quite as willing as Ricoeur to dismiss as retrograde any and all relation 
of Augustine to Platonism. For Desmond, both Weil and Murdoch have 
shown the genius of Platonism when it comes to unmasking inattentive-
ness and the complacency of insistence as two major forms of evil, which in 
turn are conditions of the possibility of the decay of community. In addi-
tion, while Desmond would grant Ricoeur’s right to question certain ele-
ments in Augustine’s reflection on evil, for example, his recurrence to an 
aesthetic theodicy, there are also real opportunities that he ignores. 
Ricoeur’s ethical bias gets in the way of being instructed by an Augustine 
who embraces beauty as more fundamental than ugliness as well as being a 
possible source of healing. And Desmond is far more alive to the doxologi-
cal Augustine who recites and comments on the Psalms as he gives glory 
back to God in gratitude which is the normative stance of the creature and 
who only in this modality of praise and gratitude is the glory of God.
development demands flouting convention. Transgression of value norms is a good that 
completes the self and refines the consciousness. One may consider L’Immoraliste (1902) as 
both an example and a manifesto of this attitude in which the innocent are merely ignorant. 
In contrast, Bernanos’ world, whether it is the country priest Joan of Arc or other heroines 
under the charge of a delinquent cleric or lay, ratifies innocence and shows the depths of 
malice in the attempt to corrupt it.
 
C. O’REGAN

169
Principle of Reserve: Inverted Icon—Figure 
of Medusa
In Desmond’s oeuvre, reserve with regard to evil is exhibited—even pro-
duced—by two strategies: first, by a refusal to be loquacious or obsessive 
about the phenomenon of evil which, as we have seen, is really more nearly 
a compact or cluster of phenomena; second, by what Desmond actually 
says about evil, including its plurality of forms, its secondness regarding 
the truly primitive given of to be and the good of to be, as well as evil’s 
intrinsic recalcitrance to analysis. ‘Kakophany’ is also a mysterium tremen-
dum et fascinans and its excess can ‘kill’ which, following Exodus 3, means 
to undo the self that would pretend familiarity and intimacy with the phe-
nomena of evil and think that he can perceive or conceive evil in the way 
it can perceive or conceive ordinary facts or objects in the world and do so 
without consequence. To apprehend evil is to remember, recall, perhaps 
over and over again, the insouciance of chance that explodes expectation 
and intention, the reality of broken bodies and vulnerable psyches, and the 
maiming of spirit that happens in environments of inattention or malice. 
To attempt to comprehend evil is to attempt more than to apprehend, and 
presents even more danger: it is to vet singly and together the unaccount-
able happenings of human failure and malice, to cut against the grain of 
evil’s refusal of sense in accounting for and rhyming the stories of atroci-
ties committed in the name of an idol or ideology, and pay insufficient 
attention to the reality of unaccountable apathy regarding humans in the 
most unaccommodated state, the shattering of all fidelity, empathy, and 
trust, and the pornographies of violence and torture and the desecrations 
of sexual bodies.
For Desmond, the attempt to comprehend the phenomenon of evil 
brings one to a threshold, an unholy ground, in which one should shake 
with fear comparable to the holy fear which is the appropriate response to 
the Holy: the fear is that one becomes what one sees. Perhaps literature 
provides the best examples of bringing the perception of evil to the dan-
gerous threshold in which there is effected a decision to succumb or to 
resist. It is difficult not to consider the work of Georges Bataille, the nov-
els which detail rituals of transgression (Le Bleu de ciel; L’Abée C); his cold 
but interested analysis of sensational murderers (Gilles de Rais) and viola-
tors (de Sade); his representation of the history of cruelty, including 
Chinese torture (l’Histoire de l’oeil); and his enunciations and even annun-
ciations on sovereignty (Une liberté souveraine) as providing an example of 
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

170
writing succumbing to what it lays bare. And perhaps Bataille speaks for a 
French canon of the literature of transgression which has its origin and 
guide in Sade in which there is expressed the desire to reduce human sub-
jects to things, to excrement, and perhaps not even that, since it too can 
be consumed (coprophagy).
A more approachable example of succumbing, however, is to be found 
in the work of the Polish-American novelist Jerzy Kosińksi, who is a survi-
vor of the holocaust. In his searing novel of the coming of age of a young 
Jewish boy on the run from the gas chambers (partly autobiographical), 
The Painted Bird (Kosiński 1982), atrocity is impossibly piled on atrocity 
(betrayal, killing, rape) in the manner of Candide, except in this case the 
protagonist all too easily adapts and is constructed as a sociopath. The 
novel hangs on the razor’s edge, at once a chronicle of how history and 
circumstance corrupt, thus a moral tale without a happy ending, and an 
exercise in sheer nihilism in which not only this world but any possible 
world is without empathy, connection, accountability, where all feeling is 
anaesthetized, and which in an not too subtle way prescribes predation. 
One way of thinking of the authorship of Kosińksi as a whole is the way 
that subsequent novels such as Blind Date and others display a measure of 
desensitization in representing human action that is on a par with the acts 
themselves which operate in a world beyond good and evil (Kosiński 
1998).29 The curiosity in presenting a history of suffering and producing 
fabula leads to the paradox of rhetorical distance from and psychic proxim-
ity to the ‘realities’ described.
An alternative writing on evil at the threshold of succumbing and resis-
tance is that of the American novelist, Cormac McCarthy, who resists 
whereas Kosiński and Bataille succumb. In its chronicle of unremitting 
violence between the colonizing whites and Indians in the American West 
under an unforgiving and godless desert sky, McCarthy’s classic Blood 
Meridian matches Kosinki’s The Painted Bird (McCarthy 1990).30 It 
29 Whereas as in The Painted Bird one can track the construction of a young sociopath from 
the horrors experienced in the Shoah, in the case of Blind Date, the tone and style of the 
novel conspire to make it difficult to determine whether the protagonist who perpetrated 
rape in the beginning is being condemned or applauded because he avoids special pleading 
in his own case.
30 This is McCarthy’s masterpiece in which he excavates the violence and counter-violence 
that is the expression of the wounded psyches of both whites and Indians in the West and 
thereby indelibly written into the American psyche as such. The evening redness of the 
Western desert sky recalls bloodletting but also a kind of nihilistic overcoming. Interestingly, 
 
C. O’REGAN

171
would not exaggerate to say that violence is not only the theme of the 
novel, but the subject of the novel in that it is the measureless measure of 
everything in the world of death, scalping, rape, and bloodlust. The blind-
ing clarity with which McCarthy renders violence creates an ambiguity: he 
can equally be read as being in league with the violence he represents and 
thus an extension of it, or he can be read to expose the violence that con-
stitutes the American Southwest with a view to getting rid of illusion. As 
in the case of Kosiński, McCarthy’s later work disambiguates. Low-flying 
ethical measures do appear in the so-called Border trilogy, and especially 
in All the Pretty Horses (McCarthy 1993, 1994, 1998), which if filled with 
unanticipated violence, also has moments of loyalty and recognition of the 
rule of violence, which itself is a check on its absolutism. Allowing the 
Border trilogy to interpret Blood Meridian allows the analogy between 
McCarthy and Homer, at least the Homer of the Iliad as seen through the 
genius of Simone Weil, to come into view. Weil made a number of points 
in her great essay ‘The Iliad as poem of Might.’31 The most famous, how-
ever, is that the persona of the poem is war itself and the reproduction of 
violence in which the Greeks and Trojans trade places in that both seem 
equally incapable of transcending violence and unveiling real subjectivi-
ties, that is, subjectivities that are not a function of war and violence. This 
epical stance in which the interests of the particular groups are suspended 
in taking a look at war as a whole is I think repeated in the contagion of 
violence depicted by McCarthy in Blood Meridian. The other feature iso-
lated by Weil is the appearance in the poem of might of a measure and thus 
an alternative to the violence which is the blind logos of the poem. This 
measure is provided by Achilles’ best friend, that is, Patroclus, who is per-
haps the only truly reflective man in the battle and the offset to the heroes 
(Achilles) and pseudo-heroes (Hector) alike. There is, as far as I can see, 
no such hero in Blood Meridian and thus no such critical measure. But 
such heroes are to be found in McCarthy’s later novels which disambigu-
ate in the direction of such a measure. In No Country for Old Men 
(McCarthy 2002), the sheriff, who has seen much evil in his life, nonethe-
less, believes it has limits or at least ought to have. But he also is the ethical 
measure of the sociopathy in which cruelty lives by rules all the more 
powerful because arbitrary, thereby confirming that the world is a world 
one of the epigraphs is from the German apocalyptic mystic, Jacob Boehme (1575–1624), 
although Boehme spoke of Aurora or ‘morning redness’.
31 See Weil (1986, 162–195). See also O’Regan (2004, 182–186).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

172
without value, where ‘good’ does not qualify the ‘to be.’ Perhaps the zenith 
in terms of the transparence of the moral measure is offered in the post-
apocalyptic novel, The Road (McCarthy 2006),32 in which the love of a 
father for his son shines out with impossible radiance in a world without 
light, a perpetual winter in which individuals are regarded as food either to 
be harvested or eaten in an orgy of rage. This small apocalypse of love rep-
resents a residual faith in humanity as well as a fragile hope for the future. At 
the end of the novel, as he is in his death throes from cancer, the father yields 
to the hope that the Trinity of humans he comes across, father, mother, 
daughter, will not consume his son and thus constitute him as another sign 
in the desecrated and defecated sacrament of violence that is the world.
As far as I am aware Desmond tarries with none of the above authors, 
who represent the phenomenon of evil so broadly and deeply as to come 
to the threshold, and in fact other than Bataille, does not mention them. 
Nonetheless, one can think of his reserve as being responsive to the prob-
lematic which defines each of the three authors’ musings on evil. Curiosity, 
even curiosity which thinks of itself as an ethical necessity, brings one to 
the threshold where you run the danger of becoming what you see or, as 
theorists of the power of imagination such as Paracelsus and Boehme 
suggested,33 becoming what you imagine. Desmond understands as well 
as any of these authors, including McCarthy with whom he appears to 
have most in common, that to stare too long at the phenomena of evil is 
to risk being petrified. Medusa is the symbol of the fate of the connoisseur 
of evil who presumes to transcend it. The mandate is not to look. Yet after 
significant exposure it might prove impossible to carry out. Still, the hid-
eous aliveness of Medusa, with heads as trophies, hair-like serpents, and 
coiling limbs making resistance to her overwhelming chthonic force 
impossible, suggests that those who get too close blend with the chaos 
32 This post-apocalyptic book might be regarded as something of an answer to the apoca-
lyptic of Blood Meridian, which concerns violence in the form of proctology as this text 
concerns violence in the form of eschatology. The ferocious love of a father for his son is the 
counterpoint to this violence and the sign of hope or hope against hope in a world in which 
violence is an essential part of the fabric of things. Counters to violence and the nihilism 
which is its source and its consequence can be found also in No Country for Old Men and in 
All the Pretty Horses.
33 The German theosophical mystic (1575–1624), whose thought recalls both the 
Kabbalah and alchemy, in Aurora (1611), finds evil everywhere. Later in the texts of 
1619–1624, however, it is not just the ubiquity of evil but its structural connection to the 
divine that is to the fore. For a focus yet comprehensive account of evil in the thought of 
Boehme, see the dissertation by Defoort (2012).
 
C. O’REGAN

173
and disorder of the phenomena of evil that they would bring to our atten-
tion and defeat. If Pandora is the symbol of what happens when curiosity 
insists on an answer, and Bluebeard’s Castle the symbol of a death wish, 
Medusa is the symbol of the writer who comes too close, even as she looks 
at a slant, looks too long and too keenly, and can never rid her mind of the 
images of violation.
I have thus far left out the most important thing about Medusa, that is, 
her gaze back or stare back that undoes the writer’s gaze, whether the 
writer is a novelist, a theologian, or a philosopher. Desmond is rightly 
afraid of Medusa. While he glances, and he does often enough, as I have 
demonstrated, he also has the scruple of averting his gaze. I think we can 
get at Desmond’s reserve by means of his fear of petrification, which will 
undo his singing of the real original of the ‘to be’ by another less imagistic 
reflection that can, however, also be interpreted as a kind of phenomeno-
logical translation of the Medusa figure. Recall in an early text by Jean-Luc 
Marion the famous distinction between ‘icon’ and ‘idol’ in which the lat-
ter mode of knowing is reflective of the limits of desire that involves 
­self-­affirmation and self-enhancement, whereas in contrast the icon is the 
phenomenon that is not only not captured by desire, but undoes it, by 
appearing to have an irreducible agency.34 Although Marion, given his 
Patristic preoccupations, undoubtedly, has the iconodules or iconophiles 
as models for this, that Cusanus is the ultimate model is clear when Marion 
speaks of the icon as not only escaping our gaze, but which in its perceived 
looking back deconstitutes and reconstitutes the aim of our desire. Of 
course, the icon in the early Marion functions as the hyperousiological 
ultimate plenitude of Christian Neoplatonism, precisely the Good beyond 
determinate good that is the ground and apex of Desmond’s figuration of 
transcendence.
One can easily imagine the superdeterminate reality of the Desmond of 
the trilogy and especially of Ethics and the Between being cast in the iconic 
terms of Cusa and Marion of that early text. But what if the phenomenon 
was not that of superessential being or the superessential good (coextensive), 
but of its phenomenological opposite? Can this be threaded through the 
34 See Marion (2001) in which the idol is as the limit of the human gaze the projection of 
human desire. In contrast, the icon as the limit of the human gaze is coming to be seen rather 
than seeing. Although Cusanus is not mentioned in this text, the reversal of flow from seeing 
to being seen finds its classical expression in De Visione Dei in which through the monks 
looking at an icon of Christ in a semi-circle each judges Christ’s gaze to be uniquely on them. 
This receives full recognition in Marion (2016, 305–331).
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

174
language of icon and cast light on Desmond’s reserve with respect to the 
phenomenon of evil which, if related to the strategies of excessive naming 
and silence, seems different in kind since it indicates a cessation rather than 
a stretching forward? I want to suggest that the phenomenon of evil func-
tions iconically to the degree to which it stares back and in so doing decon-
stitutes and reconstitutes desire. Kakophany, however, stares back otherwise 
than theophany: it arrests or explodes the gazer’s seeing and her subjectivity 
and comes to enlist it in its own culture of counter-­seeing. It draws the seer 
into an economy of death and chaos, while confirming that eros can never 
be insistent enough, can never refuse transcendence enough, can never 
affirm its constructions and productions sufficiently enough. Ironically, as 
icon, kakophany confirms the idol and declares that it has no beyond. The 
phenomenon of evil is not the icon as such; it is the inverted icon.
Amen
In this chapter I have barely scratched the surface of Desmond’s explora-
tion of the problem of evil, since not only would I have had to be far more 
ramified and subtle in my treatment of the experience, the discourses that 
try to express it, and its impenetrable mysteries, but to be faithful to the 
problem, I should have, as Ricoeur insisted throughout his career, linked 
evil to its eschatological overcoming, and to be faithful to Desmond, I 
should have brought out more aggressively the priority of the protological 
given which is the good of ‘to be.’ Still, the three features I have presented 
and explored in the chapter—(a) the phenomenological uncovering of 
evil; (b) the comparison with the work of Paul Ricoeur, who is not as 
friendly toward myth as Desmond and if Augustinian a different kind of 
Augustinian; and (c) finally my treatment of the conundrum of whether 
with respect to the phenomenon of evil silence as well as speech is neces-
sarily part of a complex response—suggest at least the richness of 
Desmond’s talk on this topic and invite us to think with him and even 
think further. This chapter is in the mode of amen and thank you, where 
the amen is simply an echo of ample amen of epic lyricism of Desmond’s 
work and my thank you but a reverberation of the great thank you that is 
his work. In this work, in a register that is hospitable to Judaism and 
Christianity in a way that Heidegger’s thought is not, thinking (Denken) 
is a thanking (Danken) directed at a person who hovers over the abyss and 
is not of it, to whom we direct our praise and hopes, and in the night of 
suffering, direct our complaints, which are counted on.
 
C. O’REGAN

175
Bibliography
Agamben, Giorgio. 1998. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Trans. 
Daniel Heller-Roazen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
———. 2005. The State of Exception. Trans. Kevin Attell. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
———. 2011. The Kingdom and the Glory: For a Theological Genealogy of 
Government. Trans. Lorenzo Chiesa with Matteo Mandarini. Stanford: Stanford 
University Press.
Bataille, George. 1989. Theory of Religion. Trans. Robert Hurley. New York: Zone 
Books.
———. 1993. The Accursed Share, Vols. 2 and 3: The History of Sexuality and 
Sovereignty. Trans. Robert Hurley. Boson: Zone Books.
———. 2001. The Unfinished System of Nonknowledge. Trans. Michelle Kendall 
and Stuart Kendall. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Berlin, Isaiah. 1969. Four Essays on Liberty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Defoort, Filips. 2012. Imagination and Evil in Jacob Boehme’s Mystical 
Anthropology. Dissertation, Leuven.
Derrida, Jacques. 1978. Edmond Jabès and the Question of the Book. In Writing 
and Difference. Trans. with Intro Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———. 1981. Positions. Trans. Alan Bass. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1982. The Pit and the Pyramid. In Margins of Philosophy. Trans. Alan Bass. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1990. Glas. Trans. John P. Leavey Jr. Lincoln: University of Nebraska 
Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1996. Religion and Rational Theology. Trans. and Ed. Allen 
Wood and George di Giovanni. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kosiński, Jerzy. 1982. The Painted Bird. Essex: Arrow Press.
———. 1998. Blind Date. New York: Grove Press.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1969. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority. Trans. 
Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press.
———. 1981. Otherwise Than Being or Beyond Essence. Trans. Alphonso Lingis. 
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Marion, Jean-Luc. 2001. Idol and Distance: Five Studies. Trans. with Intro Thomas 
Carlson. New York: Fordham University Press.
———. 2016. Nicholas of Cusa’s Contribution in De Visione Dei. Journal of 
Religion 96: 305–331.
McCarthy, Cormac. 1990. Blood Meridian, or the Evening Redness in the West. 
London: Picador.
———. 1993. All the Pretty Horses (Volume 1). New York: Vintage Books.
———. 1994. The Crossing (Volume 2). New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
  EVIL: FROM PHENOMENOLOGY TO THOUGHT 

176
———. 1998. Cities of the Plains (Volume 3). New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
———. 2002. No Country for Old Men. New York: Vintage Books.
———. 2006. The Road. New York: Vintage Books.
O’Regan, Cyril. 1997. Metaphysics and the Metaxological Space of the Tradition. 
Tijdschrift voor Filosofie 59: 531–549.
———. 2002. The Poetics of Ethos: William Desmond and Poetic Redemption of 
Platonic Archeology. Ethical Perspectives 8: 272–302.
———. 2004. Counter-Mimesis and Simone Weil’s Christian Platonic Hints for 
Overcoming the Glamor of Evil. In The Christian Platonism of Simone Weil, ed. 
Jane E. Doering and Eric Springsted. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame 
Press.
———. 2008. What Theology Can Learn from A Philosophy Daring to Speak the 
Unspeakable. Irish Theological Quarterly 73: 243–262.
———. 2012. Naming God in God and the Between. Louvain Studies 36: 282–301.
———. 2013. Hegel, Sade, and Gnostic Infinities. Radical Orthodoxy: Journal of 
Theology, Philosophy, and Politics 3: 383–425.
———. 2017. The Impatience of Gnosis. In William Desmond and Contemporary 
Theology, ed. Christopher Ben Simpson and Brendan Thomas Sammon. Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Pinnock, Sarah Katherine. 2002. Beyond Theodicy: Jewish and Christian Continental 
Thinkers Respond to the Holocaust. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Richardson, William. 1963. Through Phenomenology to Thought. The Hague: 
Martinus Nijhoff.
Ricoeur, Paul. 1969. The Symbolism of Evil. Trans. Emerson Buchanan. Boston: 
Beacon Press.
———. 1979a. Original Sin: A Study in Meaning. In The Conflict of Interpretations, 
ed. D. Ihde. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
———. 1979b. The Hermeneutics of Symbols and Their Philosophical Reflection. 
In The Conflict of Interpretations, ed. D. Ihde. Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press.
———. 1986. Fallible Man. Trans. Charles A.  Kelbley, into. Walter Lowe. 
New York: Fordham University Press.
———. 1995. Evil, a Challenge to Philosophy and Theology. In Figuring the 
Sacred. Trans. David Pellauer and Mark L.  Wallace. Minneapolis: Fortress 
Press.
Schelling, F.W.J. 2007. Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human 
Freedom. Trans. Jeff Love and Johannes Schmidt. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Tilley, Terrence W. 2000. The Evils of Theodicy. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock.
Weil, Simone. 1986. The Iliad or the Poem of Might. In Simone Weil: An 
Anthology, ed. Sian Miles. New York: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
 
C. O’REGAN

177
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_10
CHAPTER 10
Retrieving the Primal Ethos of Life: 
(Bio)Ethics in the Love of Being
Roberto Dell’Oro
R. Dell’Oro (*) 
Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA, USA
e-mail: Roberto.Dell’Oro@lmu.edu
I want to reflect in this chapter on love of being, or being as love, as the 
condition for the retrieval, in the field of bioethics, of what William 
Desmond calls the primal ethos of life. Such retrieval has been hindered, in 
the medical context, by the limited vision of positivist natural sciences, a 
recurring temptation of medicine. In ethics, the loss of the intimate univer-
sal is connected with a methodology that tends to reduce the contribution 
of ethics to the reconstruction of the conditions for moral consensus in 
society at large. My chapter comprises three parts. In the first, I make gen-
eral claims about the predicament of contemporary bioethics with respect 
to what I call the oblivion of the intimate universal. In my second part, I 
reflect more specifically on the cases of assisted reproductive technologies 
and so-called aid in dying, showing how the ethical reflection on both 
practices reflects a distancing from the call of intimate universality, and thus 
warrants a task of retrieval. Finally, I offer a reconstructive attempt, in light 
of The Intimate Universal, of an ethics defined by love of being and the 
porosity that is bound up with the generosity of the agapeics.

178
The Wasteland of Medical Ethics and the Oblivion 
of the Intimate Universal
Some time ago, Warren Reich suggested that the problem of the search 
for meaning in medical ethics might be illustrated by the metaphor of the 
stethoscope. Richard Baron, in a famous article for the Annals of Internal 
Medicine, tells the story: “It happened the other morning on rounds, as it 
often does, that while I was carefully auscultating a patient’s chest, he 
began to ask me a question. ‘Quiet’ I said. I can’t hear you while I’m lis-
tening” (Baron 1985, p. 606). The stethoscope metaphor is emblematic 
of the inattention to meaning (‘not hearing’) brought about by the reduc-
tionist focus (the mode of restricted ‘listening’) in the methodologies of 
both modern scientific medicine and contemporary ethical theory (Reich 
and Dell’Oro 1996; Zaner 1988).
To start with, the mind-set created by modern scientific medicine has 
required for medicine to be inattentive, that is, not to hear the sick person’s 
experience of illness. Influenced by a positivist framework, nineteenth-­
century medical scientists popularized the notion that practical clinical 
medicine should be viewed as a form of applied theoretical medicine. In 
the United States, the reformation of medical studies introduced by the 
medical educator Abraham Flexner, in the first part of the twentieth cen-
tury, completed the picture. Moreover, this happened as a result of moder-
nity’s understanding of scientific knowledge, which Hans Georg Gadamer 
poignantly describes as a capacity to produce effects. In the modern ver-
sion of scientific knowledge, the mathematical-quantitative isolation of 
laws of the natural order provides human action with the identification of 
specific contexts of cause and effects, together with new possibilities for 
intervention (Gadamer 1996, p. 35). In relation to clinical medicine, such 
an idealization entails a tendency to reduce the praxis of medicine, with its 
matrix of subjective components and contextual features, to the detached 
‘objectivity’ of theoretical knowledge, and to interpret the healing process 
itself as a production of effects (Wartofsky 1997).
Of course, one cannot in principle question the application of scientific 
reasoning to medicine. In trying to identify and explain the cause of symp-
toms, medicine employs probabilistic laws and rules, theories and princi-
ples, of the biomedical sciences. Concepts of normal and abnormal, for an 
example, are statistically derived concepts, based on scientifically validated 
norms of human biological functioning. In the attempt to classify symp-
toms as the manifestation of particular disease entities, medicine relies 
 
R. DELL’ORO

179
upon hypothetic-deductive and inductive reasoning. Moreover, in order 
to determine what can be done to remove or alleviate the cause of particu-
lar diseases, medicine appeals to prognostic knowledge about the course 
of the diagnosed disease, as well as efficacy and toxicity of relevant thera-
peutic possibilities.
And yet, in spite of its undisputable scientific basis, medicine cannot be 
entirely equated with science. The goal of medicine is not to reduce differ-
ent segments of scientific explanations into a unified theory; rather, the 
specific goal of medicine consists in bringing together, in a synthetic 
action, which is theoretical and practical at the same time, an understand-
ing of illness with a specific medical decision on behalf of the patient 
(Pellegrino 1979; Pellegrino 1983). Unlike the patho-physiology of dis-
ease, the phenomenon of illness cannot be observed, analyzed, and 
explained noumenically, that is, “in itself” (Dell’Oro 2005). As Gadamer 
suggests, it can be fully understood only hermeneutically, that is, through 
an act of interpretation that takes place within the sociological, cultural, 
and ideological matrix of a defined life-world. For this reason, medicine 
represents a peculiar unity of theoretical and practical knowledge within 
the domain of the modern sciences, “a peculiar kind of practical science 
for which modern thought no longer possesses an adequate concept” 
(Gadamer 1996, p. 39).
For sure, careful scientific attention to the patho-physiology of disease, 
together with ever more extensive biotechnological applications, has 
doubtlessly yielded marvelous advances in modern medicine (Kass 2002, 
pp. 29–53). Yet, its positivistic reduction has also created a mind-set that 
brackets questions of meaning, themselves highly significant to human 
well-being and to the ethical aspects of medicine. Perhaps, the judgment 
of Edmund Husserl in his Crisis of the European Sciences, while summariz-
ing the development of modern sciences, offers at the same time a pro-
phetic anticipation of the predicament of contemporary medicine:
The exclusiveness with which the total world-view of modern man lets itself 
be determined by the positive sciences and be blinded by the “prosperity” 
they produced, meant an indifferent turning away from the questions which 
are decisive for genuine humanity. Fact-minded science excludes in principle 
precisely the questions which man finds the most burning: questions of the 
meaning or meaninglessness of the whole of human existence. (Husserl 
1970, pp. 5–6)
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

180
The central task of ethics in medicine is to foster an anamnesis of the 
meaning of the very questions medicine seems to suspend: the significance 
of illness and disease, of our human condition as embodied, of birth, suf-
fering, and death, and of the service to the ethos of generosity that sus-
tains the healing professions (Dell’Oro 2016; Kass 2002, pp.  55–76; 
Meilaender 1995).
I could rephrase the issue in terms that are closer to Desmond’s lan-
guage: we fashion for ourselves a second ethos that bears no connection 
with the primal ethos of life:
We are rooted in nature, but we risk denaturing ourselves in claiming to 
make ourselves according to a second nature. The second nature is not a 
second ‘yes’, a redoubled ‘yes’ to the first ‘yes’ at work in the poiesis of 
naturing and our passio. More often, it is a ‘yes’ to a conatus that has devi-
ated from the subtle insinuations of the now sunken matrix of fecundity. 
(IU 327)
I want to show this in relation to two issues that are on the forefront of 
our public ethical discussion today: one concerns the morality of artificial 
reproductive technologies, the other the ethics of a good death.
The Discussion on Assisted Reproduction 
and the Exploitation of the Body
A look at the cultural context in which artificial reproductive technologies 
have developed shows quite clearly that their evolution has led to nothing 
less than a deconstruction of procreation. From an integral experience of 
human relationality, endowed with specific phenomenological characteris-
tics, procreation has now been reduced to reproduction, a process of tech-
nical making, guided by the logic of calculative rationality. Such a 
deconstruction, subtle as it may be, entails also a redefinition: not only of 
parenthood, but of human identity tout court. Though originally born of 
a commitment to the alleviation of infertility, artificial reproductive tech-
nologies have progressively surpassed, if not abandoned, their original 
therapeutic intent, taking on, rather, unquestionable eugenic features. The 
search for a remedy to pathological conditions in both women and men 
has morphed into the search for the perfect progeny, a development in line 
with the logic of neutralizing commodification pursued by the market: like 
things, gametes, embryos, the wombs of women, and so children also, 
 
R. DELL’ORO

181
have now a price, rather than a dignity. In the end, artificial reproductive 
technologies have revolutionized the dynamics driving the appropriation 
of personal identity, the bond between generations, and the meaning of 
the historical links that tie them together.
The discussion about artificial reproductive technologies is not taking 
place without being nourished by recessive premises. Consider, among 
others, the question of embodiment, a topic that hardly surfaces as rele-
vant in contemporary bioethics. The focus on normative dimensions, fur-
ther exacerbated by the pragmatic concern for a public policy based on 
so-called common morality, tends to push to the side premises of a deeper 
philosophical nature, unquestionably central to any ethical reflection 
(Taylor and Dell’Oro 2006; Evans 2002). Thus, what one encounters as 
serious suggestions for policy proposals on artificial reproductive technol-
ogies do fly in the face of elementary considerations about our embodied 
condition; as such, they hardly withstand even the lowest bar of philo-
sophical justification.
Take as an example the case recently publicized in the American news, 
concerning the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of an 
in vitro fertilization technique, which uses DNA from three people in an 
attempt to prevent certain illnesses, like muscular dystrophy and respira-
tory problems (Tingley 2014). The United Kingdom’s fertility regulator, 
the Human Fertilization and Embryo Authority, already changed its own 
laws, in December 2016, to permit the procedure. And last January, the 
announcement came from Ukraine, that a child had been successfully pro-
duced with such mitochondrial transfer technique.
Most commentators, especially scientists and doctors, welcome the 
advent of yet another technological fix to a congenital predisposition with 
an attitude of unquestionable awe. On the other hand, the more critically 
minded, among them ethicists, are willing to grant that some moral prob-
lems for this ‘three parent baby’ solution do exist after all: doubts about 
safety are raised, together with the fear of unforeseen eugenic slippery 
slopes. Strangely passed over in silence, though, remains the most obvious 
question, ‘whose child will this baby be?’
Of course, experts are quick to rebut this preoccupation as scientifically 
naïve, if not totally unfounded: they reassure the concerned public that 
because the female donor of healthy mitochondrial DNA to the defective 
biological mother provides, in the end, a very negligible genetic contribu-
tion, she should not be described appropriately as ‘a parent’. However, 
when considered from another angle, namely, that of the personal identity 
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

182
of a child thus produced, the question ‘whose child will this baby be?’ 
comes to the fore as actually very serious.
This is so because personal identity is now imperiled by what I would 
call ‘an ambiguity of belonging’: for the child so produced, the embodied 
matrix of traceable biological debts represents more an opportunity for 
doubt than a condition for self-identification. Lack of evidence about 
one’s distinct genetic lineage may turn the trust in the source that gives to 
be, under normal circumstances, the syngamy of two genomes into puz-
zlement about one’s own origin and identity. Examples could be multi-
plied ad infinitum. Like others, the one I mentioned cannot fail to raise 
concerns. At stake are recessive premises about the body, embodiment, 
and the “embodied self” that drive these technologies in the first place 
and, more in general, our understanding of medicine’s goals (Thiel 2013).
There is no denying the paradoxical situation within which artificial 
reproductive technologies have developed. As William Desmond suggests: 
“On the one hand, we block fertility, and, on the other hand, never have 
such extraordinary and emergency techniques been available and used to 
promote unblocked fertility” (IU 327). In his work, Desmond provides a 
genealogical interpretation, stemming from the recognition that the 
development of artificial reproductive technologies, especially in their 
most extreme expressions, stands squarely within the legacy of a dualistic 
anthropology, itself resting upon a broader attitude toward being as such. 
Anthropology always reflects a specific view of metaphysics, of what it 
means ‘to be’, and the mechanization of the body brought about by 
modernity can be properly understood when seen within the horizon of a 
more general neutralization of reality (EB 17–47; GB 17–30; Guardini 
1951). The world, now become ‘objective’, stands also empty of meaning 
before a ‘subject’ that constitutes the only presence of value. As neutral, 
the natural order has no language of its own, no deeper message to convey 
to an observer willing to see or to listen. This is so because a deep perplex-
ity has now replaced the ancient wonder (thaumazein) about the inherent 
value of being, more, about the inherent goodness of being.
In this view, the subject becomes also the only source of value in an ethi-
cal sense: the good is not, as in the classical definition, ‘what everyone 
wants’ (bonum est quod omnes appetunt); rather, what we want, we call the 
good (so Hobbes and his contemporary “contractualist” versions). 
Whether responding to the necessity of a rational ordering of duty, as in 
the Kantian version of autonomy, or the maximization of value in a net-
work of effective powers, as in the calculative prudence of utilitarian 
 
R. DELL’ORO

183
­rationality, the moral self of modernity emerges as ‘radically self-assertive’. 
Moreover, the moral self stands before the good as a dis-embodied self, 
‘auto-nomous’ because it is separated not only from what it sees as the 
heteronomy of nature, including that of the body, but also from the het-
eronomy of larger claims to social solidarity, as in the various versions of 
individual liberalism. The modern self, as Alasdair McIntyre and Charles 
Taylor have so eloquently highlighted, is, in the end, the unencumbered 
self, an atomistic individuality that fails to recognize the embodied nature 
of communal and historically defined ties. In his latest encyclical letter, 
Laudato Si’, Pope Francis has reminded us that the problems inherent in 
the modern paradigm cannot be denied any longer, for example, in the 
face of the current ecological crisis.
And yet, it is not only an explicitly Christian-inspired anthropology 
what raises doubts about our current predicament. The debate within 
feminist theories on the ethics of artificial reproductive technologies, 
among others, suggests something of the tensions intrinsic to the modern 
understanding of body, procreation, and parenthood as neutral practices, 
as such entirely open to endless manipulation (Lauritzen 1993). For sure, 
pro-interventionist feminist thinkers tend to welcome developments in 
reproductive technologies as positive. They promise to control nature, 
and to redefine the meaning of gender constructions, relative especially to 
the distinction between male and female. In this view, invasive procedures 
that break women’s links to biology, birth, and maternal nurturing can 
only further a feminist agenda of self-sufficiency and control. On the 
other hand, non-interventionist feminist thinkers see reproductive tech-
nologies differently: a strengthening of arrogant human control over 
nature and thus over women as part of the ‘nature’ that is to be con-
trolled. They see new reproductive technologies as an imposition upon 
women who look at themselves as failure, if they cannot become preg-
nant. They insist that technological progress, requiring the invasion and 
manipulation of women’s bodies, must always be critically scrutinized 
with a kind of ‘hermeneutics of suspicion’, especially when the market 
becomes the ultimate mechanism for the exploitation of the body (Duden 
1993; Haker 2011). It is hard to miss the marketing and advertisement 
strategies associated with fertility clinics and service providers, which, 
understandably, are eager to do what any business does best: sell to pro-
spective customers and this in the language of products and commodities. 
As Desmond puts it:
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

184
The danger is that the bodies of the couple and the child—now conceived 
as a product—are seen too much under the light of serviceable disposability. 
Indeed embryos are disposable if they are not serviceable. It is manipulation, 
not participation, but also manipulation through a kind of participation: the 
exploitation of life is beneficiary to the gift of life that forgets the giftedness 
it exploits. These manipulations are ominous with respect to the deeper 
participation of the human being in energies of fecundity that come to it 
from beyond itself and that take it, help it partake of what is, beyond itself. 
(IU 327)
Indeed, there is more to body, procreation, and parenthood than our 
technical rationality assumes. There is an irreducible otherness to them that 
reflects the personal presence of the embodied person, an ontological 
incommunicability that resists any constructive pretense. Moreover, to rec-
ognize the embodied condition of our being-in-the-world, to grant its 
radical otherness, is to abide by the symbolic reminder of our being given 
to be. In the flesh that nourishes our joy and suffering, pain and pleasure, 
lies the trace of the source that releases us into being, the subtle allusion, 
most often forgotten, at times denied, of the gift that we are, not from 
ourselves, but from another.
The Debate on the ‘Good Death’: Striving 
to Be or Letting Go
The debate on the ethics of a good death provides a second example. 
What is at stake in the conversation is the problem of articulating the con-
ditions for a good death—and more specifically, for a good death when 
faced with the vulnerability of old age, terminal disease, and unbearable 
suffering. Such a task remains quite formidable both in relation to its phil-
osophical foundations, as well as with reference to the analysis of specific 
ethical quandaries. Drawing on William Desmond’s distinction between 
conatus and passio essendi (IU and Desmond 2006), I focus on two ‘exis-
tential modalities’ of confronting death, and delineate some ethical impli-
cations with regard to these.
Conatus essendi is a way of standing before things defined by the 
endeavor, the effort, the strife to be. Here one is dealing with a position 
based on distance from reality, in which the subject determines the condi-
tions for the appearing of things, whose certainty, if not truth, will entirely 
be defined by relation to a subjectivity that posits and determines. Being is 
 
R. DELL’ORO

185
insofar as it responds to the (transcendental) forms of its apperception on 
the part of a subjectivity that measures and rules its phenomenic 
presence.
Such a position has, first of all, an epistemological meaning. On the 
premise defined by the ambiguity of the appearing of things—thus the 
doubt pertaining to them—the cogito tries to recover an irrefutable cer-
tainty, no longer starting from the promise of meaning that inhabits real-
ity, but from the subjective certainty that defines the very act of thinking, 
an act that must necessarily presuppose—and beyond all doubt no less—at 
least the existence of the cogito who thinks. In this way, however, one sees 
a shift, a ‘Copernican revolution’ in the way of conceiving of the relation 
between subject and object, and, moreover, of the priority of the former 
over the latter. Without entering here into the details of this ‘anthropo-
logical turn’, let us consider some of the important cultural consequences 
it entails. The scientific revolution, which affects medicine as well, is one 
of the significant consequences of this anthropological shift, wherein the 
relationship with nature is no longer ‘undergone’, so to speak, but shaped 
by precise heuristic models that reduce the complexity of nature to a uni-
vocal parameter. Nature is subjected to the mathematical hypothesis that 
will allow for it to be described and verified empirically. If true reality is 
only that which can be described mathematically, then we ought to bring 
the unverifiable pathos of reality back to the dianoetical precision of the 
formula. This holds true also for the subject, whose emotional complexity 
will have to be reduced, now, to the act of ‘thinking clearly and distinctly’. 
In the words of Spinoza, neque lugere, nec ridere, sed intelligere.
What about the ethical implications of such an epistemological posi-
tion? The subject who fashions reality is also he who grants it value. This 
is so because the neutralization of being, with respect to the object, entails 
something like a rebound effect, a kind of ‘contraction of value’—espe-
cially with Kant—in favor of the subject. Only the person possesses an 
intrinsic value, is a good in itself, never to be treated as a means, only as an 
end. Unlike nature, understood now as a phenomenal field open to end-
less manipulation, the person is not neutral; rather, being the source of 
absolute meaning, she is the condition for the very possibility of meaning’s 
attribution:
Here is the sting. The subject cannot live with this devaluation of otherness, 
and even less with the devaluing of its own valuing. It will not be passive to 
this. It will be active. The subjectification of value inevitably leads to the 
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

186
primacy of self-activity that impresses itself on the other. … We witness the 
recoil of the subject on itself out of the hiding of neutrality it had schemed 
for itself. There is no escape from itself, but now when it awakens again to 
itself, it has been transformed into a more radically self-assertive subjectivity. 
(EB 29)
One might say that the good death is the humanized death, that is to 
say, death lived not as something man undergoes or endures; rather, as 
something man chooses to the extent that he determines it, in the same 
way in which he chooses and determines the theoretical models for his 
access to reality as such. If man is the ‘measure of all things’, death cannot 
be greater than man. Death can and should indeed be neutralized, if not 
in its inevitability of a fact that inexorably happens, at least, in its dramatic 
quality of an experience that can be endured (Scheffczyk 1992, p. 271). 
The effort to be, the conatus essendi, is a struggle against death, the attempt 
to indefinitely postpone it, or else to anticipate it rationally, as in the case 
of euthanasia or assisted suicide. Absolute passivity is not worthy of man.
This position is not without important emphases. The efforts to human-
ize death, for an example, the tasks of health care and scientific research 
aiming at the treatment and management of pain, are essential dimensions 
to our relationship with death. An inhumane and dehumanizing death 
cannot be good. Yet, if the good death represents the fulfillment of a good 
life, there is the risk of thinking about death according to the logic of 
scientific-­technological control and neutralizing planning that, in the par-
adigm of modernity, renders a life worth living. The most we can do is to 
prolong life, eliminating from it all pain and suffering, but we have not yet 
succeeded in ‘managing death’. Death will always come, now as an unex-
pected surprise, an expression of the heteronomy of nature that is even 
more striking, because it seems to contradict the autonomy with which we 
attempt to completely define ourselves.
Again, the separation, the dualism of person and nature, if it constitutes 
the condition of possibility for controlling death, can also lead to conflict-
ing results: a technological effort that depersonalizes nature, or a will to 
power that denaturalizes the person to the level of a self-determining 
rationality, as in the cases of euthanasia and assisted suicide. For Desmond, 
the conatus essendi does not represent the ultimate (in the sense of the 
German ursprünglich) existential modality: the effort to be rests on a pri-
mal porosity, an attitude of more radical openness toward being. In won-
der, man takes up his residence in the between, attuned to the saturation 
 
R. DELL’ORO

187
of meaning that dwells in things, in their value, and in whose midst he is 
called to make himself a world (Desmond 1995, pp. 3–46). Thus, the 
conatus essendi can only be a derivation, of course possible and legitimate, 
of a more original passio essendi, of an ‘undergoing’ (passio) being that also 
becomes a ‘passion’ for being.
The passio essendi entails the recognition that man is not the origin of 
meaning, only insofar as he is originated; he can and must attribute mean-
ing to things. But man can do this only on the condition of a previous 
attunement to the promise of meaning that already dwells in reality. In this 
perspective, there is no separation between being and value, fact and 
meaning, for being is, intrinsically, promising and valid, good and beauti-
ful. Of course, man produces and makes, searches, and fashions, yet he 
does all this far from the presupposition of a neutralization of nature, 
rather, on the basis of an activity that perfects nature, as it acknowledges 
in being a reserve of meaning to make his own and bring to fulfillment. 
The receptivity in question is clearly not a form of passivity either, for it is, 
nevertheless, to a consciousness and to its active intentionality that the 
meaning of things discloses itself. And yet the activity of consciousness 
rests on the presupposition of the inexhaustible depths of the mystery of 
things, of their endless and never to be reduced profundity, which makes 
itself known because it opens itself up, because it reveals itself. Man lives a 
relationship with reality in an attitude of trust, not of doubt or distancing 
suspicion. The task of freedom is to do and to build, to fashion the world 
only because, prior to this, the world was ‘let be’. The task of freedom is a 
response, a responsibility, and one beyond the autonomy that is exercised 
in the will to power, seized at another’s expense: a freedom that leaves 
things be in the generosity of love and gift. This inevitably entails a demys-
tification of the modern ideal of autonomy, the recognition that, in the 
long run, Kantian autonomy degenerates into will to power (EB 17–47; 
Guardini 1951; De Lubac 1945).
The relationship with death unfolds within this context and according 
to the same logic. The humanization of death will be possible on the con-
dition that death be accepted and not suppressed or censured. Death is, 
after all, part of the human experience, an event whose significance cannot 
be anticipated, in fact, a disclosure, a total revelation of meaning, both 
promising and significant (Scheler 1974; Sölle 1973; Demmer 1987). The 
‘passivity’ implied by death is, thus, the final expression of the more gen-
eral receptivity of life:
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

188
There is a passivity without which man could not be man. Part of the reason 
for this is the fact we were born, we were given-birth-to. Here there follows 
the fact that we are loved. So, too, is the fact that we die. (Jüngel 1975, p. 85)
Yet, to accept death also implies an activity, an act of preparation that 
opens up a space of creativity. We all die, yet we face death differently; not 
unlike life, requiring its own special art, one that is accomplished daily in 
silence, and in the cultivation of virtues, so, too, does death require a kind 
of art, the ars moriendi, shared along a passage wherein one is not alone, 
in what Norbert Elias calls “the solitude of the dying person” (Elias 2001; 
Reich 1996). Death is a threshold toward which we journey together, as if 
in pilgrimage, comforted by prayer. In a Christian framework, death is, at 
bottom, an eschatological event, one which belongs to the personal narra-
tive of each and every human being, yet also points to a transhistorical 
fulfillment, to definitive communion with God beyond the limits of his-
tory: “Birth and death are thresholds and transitions, and as the radical 
transition of birth is creation, the radical transition of death may not be 
nothing, but resurrection” (IU 363).
Bio(Ethics) in the Love of Being
Desmond’s work offers several important insights into the predicament of 
contemporary bioethical thinking, and not only in relation to the issues 
highlighted above. Ethical conclusions stand or fall on the fundamental 
metaphysical imperative to retrieve the intrinsic value of being as loveable, 
and to recognize that the discovery of moral truth rests on the premise (or 
promise) of a just rapport with the good. To be on a par with the claim the 
good makes is to be more profoundly attuned to the generosity of its self-­
giving (bonum diffusivum sui), attentive to an offering of grace that is born 
(or reborn) of a porous opening. In it, the disposition to receive subtends 
any endeavor to be, mindfulness of the cum already companions the co-
natus, and this in terms of relativity to both the deeper theological and 
metaphysical (onto-theological?) sources of being, as well as the daily demands 
of merely ontic otherness: from those more intimate, implicated in the prox-
imity of family and friends, to those awaken by a more universal generosity: 
to the unknown stranger, the lonely widow, the immigrant foreigner.
The reconstructed ethos of contemporary bioethics is blind to the 
sources of value that nourish the primal ethos of life. Phenomenologists 
speak of Wertblindheit (von Hildebrand 1953; Schmucker-Von Koch 
 
R. DELL’ORO

189
1992), and perhaps this is an appropriate, if somewhat technical, way to put 
it: blindness to the sheer, I should say idiotic, givenness of being as good, 
now reduced to neutral thereness available for endless manipulation. Being 
springs from an origin that gives without boundaries, out of a love that is 
agapeic because unconditional, a love that lets be in a pluralized creation 
saturated with aesthetic worth. I speak of creation here, not to immediately 
qualify the issue as theological. One should resist the attempt to recolonize 
public discourse in the name of a political use of theology, born of resent-
ment toward a secular bioethics that has marginalized religious voices. A 
metaxological metaphysics sees the issue as more deeply philosophical in 
nature: the task of a theologically mindful bioethics may not be achieved 
without unclogging the resistances to “think beyond”, recognizing the 
hyperbolic signs at the heart of being itself. But this requires philosophical 
finesse more than proselytizing ardor. As von Balthasar suggests, “in order 
to be a serious theologian, one must also, indeed, first, be a philosopher; 
one must—precisely also in light of revelation—have immersed oneself in 
the mysterious structures of creaturely being” (Balthasar 2000, p.  8; 
Demmer 1989, pp. 119–178). The Intimate Universal puts the matter in 
terms of the porosity that we are: both in relation to what we have received, 
and in terms of our own openness beyond ourselves:
We are porosity because we are first received in being: given to be, before we 
are self-surpassing, or porous in a derived sense to what is beyond ourselves. 
We are in being as idiotic singulars, but at the heart of the idiotic selving is 
this intimate porosity that is the mark of our being creatures: emergent as 
what we are from no-thing—created from nothing. (IU 211–212)
Recovering a sense of the worth of beings entails more than an articula-
tion of respect on our part. This too is necessary, if not that, qua human 
expression, respect remains ambiguous, even contradictory: in the lan-
guage of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission that drafted the 
first document on embryo experimentation for the purposes of stem cell 
extraction, respect for the embryo could still coexist with the intention to 
destroy and use it. The matter then, is deeper. At stake is not only an 
­ethical attitude, but an ontological love, love of being as worthy to be and 
to be affirmed.
That we exist and live in the opening of such love, in the passio essendi 
that generates our ontological complacentia toward being, orients all our 
endeavors, the striving of our conatus, in the direction of an affirmation of 
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

190
otherness. Porosity beyond the atomistic individuality of ‘unencumbered 
selfhood’ is more than an exercise in autonomous self-determination. The 
question of what limits the latter is very much at stake in the tension 
between liberalism and communitarianism, which defines much of con-
temporary ethical discourse. For sure, the world endorsed in the commu-
nitarian social model appears to be in tension with the individualist 
mind-set of liberal thinkers. Individualists even claim that communitarians 
express little more than nostalgia for a simpler, premodern past. I believe 
the ‘communitarian’ model does not necessarily stand in opposition to the 
‘liberal’ model. The recognition of individual freedoms, such as freedom 
of speech, religion, association, and privacy are unquestionable values for 
any contemporary rendition of the relation between self and society. A 
society is a good society when it sustains freedom through the mutual 
respect its members show in their interaction with one another. This goes, 
first of all, to the realization that aiming at the good of society entails pro-
tecting, rather than eroding, a space for moral pluralism, hospitable to an 
interaction across differences, on the presupposition that the public realm 
is not just the neutral space to be conquered or won over, and that the 
members of an ‘open society’ are not to be faced as enemies but as partners: 
dialogue among moral agents, whether ‘strangers’ or ‘friends’, to use the 
distinction in vogue, can only function on the presumption that any claim 
to meaning and truth is, at the same time, an attestation of freedom and 
respect for the other. To that extent, liberalism and communitarianism not 
only stress two different dimensions of the same reality, but grow one on 
top of the cultural achievements of the other. As Charles Taylor recognizes, 
free individuals with their own goals and aspirations are themselves only 
possible within a certain kind of civilization. It took a long development of 
certain institutions and practices, of the rule of law, of rules of equal respect, 
of habits of common deliberations, of cultural self-­development, and so on, 
to produce the modern individual. Without these, the very sense of oneself 
as an individual would atrophy (Taylor 1989).
This is true. However, the agapeics of the intimate universal go even 
deeper, beyond the recognition of the potential accommodation of two 
reciprocally implicated social models. If what is at stake is ultimately the 
full extent of the porosity as an ontological condition, then the question is 
not only retrieving the relativity of autonomy to otherness, but ‘to open 
up’ autonomy, even the autonomy of social intermediation, beyond itself, 
toward a more generous freedom that responds to the worth of the other 
in its unconditional worth. Such freedom is irreducible to the erotics of 
 
R. DELL’ORO

191
serviceable disposability, whether predicated on contractarian interest or 
utilitarian maximization of social value: “The agapeics transforms the 
social space of our between-being, consecrates it into a neighborhood of 
love wherein neighboring, as a ‘being beside’, is neither simply passive nor 
simply active … We receive and do ourselves in the agapeic neighbor-
hood” (IU 411). Can such a freedom beyond autonomy be recognized 
without reference to an agapeic God, a source of endowing freedom that 
is also an enabling of social intermediation? Desmond speaks of the ‘antin-
omy of autonomy and transcendence’ and seems to offer a negative 
response, for the God of autonomy is only a practical postulate, not an 
endowing source. But to be bound to an agapeic God is not to be in 
bondage:
The enabling of social power is given but now understood as gifted by a 
surplus generosity, ultimate in itself and calling human beings to imitate and 
to enact this generosity in finite life. This is not a matter of our erotic self-­
transcendence, it is a communication of transcendence itself into the midst of 
our transcending, which now no longer can just circle around itself. (IU 417)
Will contemporary ethical discourse heed the call to such a freedom, 
breaking the spell that has bewitched its reasoning into the vicious circu-
larity of will to power, affirming only itself, only to destroy itself? I suggest 
that the opening can be occasioned by porosity to a theological contribu-
tion, itself sustained by a robust metaphysics, which calls public discus-
sions on moral questions to the suspension of preconceived judgments 
and dogmatisms of any kind, opening our eyes to a deeper vision of what 
is good for us, because worthy to be affirmed in itself.
Bibliography
Balthasar, Hans Urs von. 2000. Theo-Logic: Theological Logical Theory, Volume I/
Truth of the World. Trans. A.J. Walker. San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press.
Baron, Richard. 1985. An Introduction to Medical Phenomenology: I Can’t Hear 
You While I’m Listening. Annals of Internal Medicine 103: 606.
De Lubac, Henri. 1945. Le drame de l’humanisme athée. Paris: Éditions Spes.
Dell’Oro, Roberto. 2005. Interpreting Clinical Judgment: Epistemological Notes 
on the Praxis of Medicine. In Clinical Bioethics: A Search for the Foundations, 
ed. Corrado Viafora, 155–167. Dordrecht: Springer.
———. 2016. Why Clinical Ethics? Experience, Discernment, and the Anamnesis 
of Meaning at the Bedside. Persona y Bioetica 20: 86–99.
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

192
Demmer, Klaus. 1987. Leben in Menschenhand: Grudlagen des bioethischen 
Gesprächs. Freiburg: Herder Verlag.
———. 1989. Moraltheologische Methodenlehre. Freiburg: Herder Verlag.
Desmond, William. 1995. Being and the Between. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
———. 2001. Ethics and the Between. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
———. 2006. Pluralism, Truthfulness, and the Patience of Being. In Health and 
Human Flourishing: Religion, Medicine, and Moral Anthropology, ed. Carol 
Taylor and Roberto Dell’Oro, 53–68. Washington, DC: Georgetown University 
Press.
———. 2008. God and the Between. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
———. 2016. The Intimate Universal: The Hidden Porosity Among Religion, Art, 
Philosophy, and Politics. New York: Columbia University Press.
Duden, Barbara. 1993. Disembodying Women: Perspectives on Pregnancy and the 
Unborn. Trans. Lee Hoinacki. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Elias, Norbert. 2001. The Loneliness of the Dying. New York: Continuum.
Evans, John H. 2002. Playing God? Human Genetic Engineering and the 
Rationalization of Public Bioethical Debate. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Gadamer, Hans Georg. 1996. The Enigma of Health: The Art of Healing in a 
Scientific Age. Trans. J. Geiger and N. Walker. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Guardini, Romano. 1951. Das Ende der Neuzeit: Ein Versuch zur Orientierung. 
Würzburg: Werkbund Verlag.
Haker, Hille. 2011. Haupsache gesund? Ethische Fragen der Pränatal- und 
Präimplantationsdiagnostik. München: Kösel Verlag.
von Hildebrand, Dietrich. 1953. Christian Ethics. New York: David McKay Co.
Husserl, Edmund. 1970. The Crisis of European Sciences. Trans. D. Carr. Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press.
Jüngel, Eberhard. 1975. Death: The Riddle and the Mystery. Trans. Iain and Ute 
Nicol. Edinburgh: The Saint Andrew Press.
Kass, Leon. 2002. Life, Liberty and the Defense of Dignity: The Challenge for 
Bioethics. San Francisco, CA: Encounter Books.
Lauritzen, Paul. 1993. Pursuing Parenthood: Ethical Issues in Assisted Reproduction. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Meilaender, Gilbert C. 1995. Body, Soul, and Bioethics. Notre Dame, IN: University 
of Notre Dame Press.
Pellegrino, Edmund. 1979. The Anatomy of Clinical Judgment: Some Notes on 
Right Reason and Right Action. In Clinical Judgment: A Critical Appraisal, 
ed. Tristram Engelhardt et  al., 169–194. Dordrecht: D.  Reidel Publishing 
Company.
 
R. DELL’ORO

193
———. 1983. The Healing Relationship: The Architectonics of Clinical Medicine. 
In The Clinical Encounter: The Moral Fabric of the Patient-Physician 
Relationship, ed. E.  Shelp, 153–172. Dordrecht: D.  Reidel Publishing 
Company.
Reich, Warren T. 1996. L’arte del prendersi cura del morente. Itinerarium 4: 
31–43.
Reich, Warren T., and Roberto Dell’Oro. 1996. A New Era for Bioethics: The 
Search for Meaning in Moral Experience. In Religion and Medical Ethics: 
Looking Back, Looking Forward, ed. Allen Verhey, 96–119. Grand Rapids, MI: 
Eerdmans.
Scheffczyk, Leo. 1992. Die Phänomenologie des Todes bei Dietrich von 
Hildebrand und die neuere Eschatologie. In Truth and Value: The Philosophy of 
Dietrich von Hildebrand, ed. J. Seifert, 265–278. Bern: Peter Lang.
Scheler, Max. 1974. The Meaning of Suffering. In Max Scheler (1874–1928): 
Centennial Essays, ed. Manfred S.  Frings, 121–163. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhof.
Schmucker-Von Koch, Josef. 1992. Wertblindheit als Signatur der Moderne: Zum 
Verhältnis von Recht und Sittlichkeit bei Dietrich von Hildebrand. In Truth 
and Value: The Philosophy of Dietrich von Hildebrand, ed. J. Seifert, 141–152. 
Bern: Peter Lang.
Sölle, Dorothee. 1973. Leiden. Stuttgart: Kreuz Verlag.
Taylor, Charles. 1989. Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, Carol, and Roberto Dell’Oro. 2006. Health and Human Flourishing: 
Religion, Medicine, and Moral Anthropology. Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press.
Thiel, Marie-Jo. 2013. La corporéité face à la maladie et la mort. In Exploring the 
Boundaries of Bodyliness: Theological and Interdisciplinary Approaches to the 
Human Condition, ed. Sigrid Müller, 1–13. Göttingen: Vienna University 
Press.
Tingley, Kim. 2014. The Brave New World of Three-Parent I.V.F. The New York 
Times, June 27.
Wartofsky, Marx W. 1997. What Can the Epistemologists Learn from the 
Endocrinologists? Or Is the Philosophy of Medicine Based on a Mistake? In 
Philosophy of Medicine and Bioethics: A Twenty Years Retrospective and Critical 
Appraisal, ed. Ronald A. Carson and Chester R. Burns, 55–68. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Zaner, Richard. 1988. Ethics and the Clinical Encounter. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
  RETRIEVING THE PRIMAL ETHOS OF LIFE: (BIO)ETHICS IN THE LOVE… 

195
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_11
CHAPTER 11
Silence, Excess, and Autonomy
Dennis Vanden Auweele
Letting go of his hopes for a miracle, Alyosha Karamazov, one of the pro-
tagonists of Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s The Brother Karamazov (1880), comes 
to silence. Silence is in itself equivocal: there is a silence of impotence, con-
sideration, trepidation, snide, and many more, but silence can also be a 
convalescence, a moment of repose that allows distance from one thing and 
the advance of something else. When his spiritual mentor, Father (Starets) 
Zosima, died, Alyosha hoped that some sort of miracle would signal his 
holiness, a miracle preferably accompanied by the angelic and vociferous 
blare of trumpets. The Heavens were silent, though, and this silence 
brought Alyosha to a crisis of faith. Another moment of silence, narrated 
masterfully by Dostoyevsky, brought Alyosha to renewed hope and faith:
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin, at the covered, motionless 
dead man that lay in the coffin, with the ikon on his breast and the peaked 
cap with the octangular cross, on his head. He had only just been hearing 
his voice, and that voice was still ringing in his ears. He was listening, still 
expecting other words, but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the 
cell. He did not stop on the steps either, but went quickly down; his soul, 
D. Vanden Auweele (*) 
KU Leuven (University of Leuven), Leuven, Belgium
e-mail: Dennis.Vandenauweele@kuleuven.be

196
overflowing with rapture, yearned for freedom, space, openness. The vault 
of heaven, full of soft, shining stars, stretched vast and fathomless above 
him. The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the horizon. 
The fresh, motionless, still night enfolded the earth. The white towers and 
golden domes of the church gleamed out against the sapphire sky. The 
autumn flowers, in the garden, were slumbering. The silence of earth 
seemed to melt into the silence of the heavens. The mystery of earth was one 
with the mystery of the starts. (2007, p. 418)
Silence as a convalescence—can this be a resource for philosophical theol-
ogy and ethics? Is silence, the intentional halting of autonomous thought 
and speech, of use when thinking about God, goodness, and autonomy? 
Or do we determine, must we determine, always the goodness of things? 
Are we legislators or subjects in the life of morality? Kant famously sug-
gested in his final formulation of the categorical imperative that we are to 
think of ourselves as if we are both. But Kant’s view emerged against the 
backdrop of a specific rhetoric about thinking God, ethics, and most 
importantly autonomy, one that is simply lacking in finesse in the grand 
pageant of the overdeterminacy of ethical life. In order to advance beyond 
this, that backdrop has to come to silence, and only then can silence and 
heteronomy serve again as a way of creating space for appreciating given-
ness (heteronomy) without dismantling self-determination (autonomy).
No better resource exists to make such a point than the metaxological 
philosophy of William Desmond. In his trilogy on ‘the between’ (dealing 
respectively with being, being good, and absolute being), Desmond con-
sistently provides a sort of genealogy of our contemporary hesitations 
about speaking about being as such, the goodness of being and God as 
absolute being. A certain way of speaking has come to silence. His reflec-
tions on the porosity between philosophy and religion in Is there a Sabbath 
for Thought? is prefaced by a suggestive reflection on such silence:
I remember a time when to mention God or religion in the company of 
advanced intellectuals was like mentioning sex in a prudish Victorian draw-
ing room. An icy silence would descend, and the silence communicated 
more than the argument possibly could: we do not now talk of these things. 
(IST xi)
Such a silence can be deafening and is generally unhelpful for appreciating 
the goodness of receptivity. Many would read Desmond’s work as reac-
tionary against such silence, boldly advancing toward the glory of a 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

197
Christian, metaphysical theism. I think there are many people, Christian 
and otherwise, who advance forward despite silence, but this method sim-
plifies matters as philosophy ought to be more appreciative of different 
sorts of silences. Indeed, one can learn from such silence that a certain way 
of speaking was inappropriate and thereby come to new insight and move 
toward more finessed ways of speaking. But also, one can take the moment 
of silence, of Sabbath, as occasion to get a good fill of those things in 
excess (overdeterminate) to human determination. Many philosophers 
and theologians today recognize the latter, but what sets Desmond apart 
is that such silence can give way to a new way of speaking, which leaves for 
a constitutive ambiguity of the chiaroscuro of thinking and living in ‘the 
between’.1
Silence and Excess
Much of postmodern philosophy is keen on heckling traditional philoso-
phy. For one, it likes to point out that the tradition has done a poor task 
of coming to terms with thinking those things that are in excess of finite 
self-determination, most importantly God. They believe that traditional 
attempts to think God have been overly univocalizing and leveling; they 
have turned God into a being among beings that could be understood 
through immanent rationality. Heidegger might say that this approach 
misses the constitutive and infinite distance between immanent forms of 
rational thought and the poetry of transcendence: one should not speak of 
God in the way that one speaks of tables, germs, and potatoes. Indeed, 
there has been a long and lamentable tradition of turning God as transcen-
dence into a counterfeit double of himself, to use Desmond’s term (see 
HG and GB), where God is not transcendence thought of as absolute 
transcendence, but as the reversal of human finitude, the sum total of 
immanent being or even the world-historical process itself. This problem 
was perhaps most emphatically signaled by Jean-Luc Marion when he 
gives voice to the need to remove ourselves urgently from metaphysics, at 
least if we hope to think of God appropriately:
1 In earlier work, I have taken up a similar topic where, at that point, I argued that metaxo-
logical porosity to divinity and a Nietzschean existentialist rejection of God are equally justi-
fied responses to the issue of religion and ethics (Vanden Auweele 2013, pp. 637–655). 
I consider the present account of the matter to be the more refined and nuanced.
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

198
Nonidolatrous thought of God, which alone releases ‘God’ from his quota-
tion marks by disengaging his apprehension from the conditions posed by 
onto-theo-logy, one would have to manage to think God outside of meta-
physics insofar as metaphysics infallibility leads, by way of blasphemy (proof), 
to the twilight of the idols (conceptual atheism) […] the step back out of 
metaphysics seems an urgent task. (2012, p. 37)
Postmodern philosophers very loudly call for silence when it comes to 
philosophical, and particularly metaphysical, accounts of God. Perhaps 
this can be a well-deserved respite from the clamoring of rationalist phi-
losophy as an overexposure of thought to rationalism, reason, knowledge, 
and metaphysics has problematic consequences: too much talk makes for 
little understanding. In order for human beings to live and flourish, meta-
physics has then to die; in order for humanity to prosper, we ought to 
come to silence about God. But is such philosophical silence about God 
and the step back from metaphysics the final move in the long and laud-
able history of philosophy? Is silence where philosophy comes to die? Or 
is there thought after silence?
If this were possible, this would have to be a thinking that takes the 
silence seriously. It cannot be the case that our newly developed poetry of 
God simply slides back into old patterns and rightly criticized ways of 
thinking: No new wine in old barrels. This is a mistake that ought to be 
avoided at all costs: simple repetition. In his recent In Praise of Heteronomy, 
Merold Westphal argues that those postmodern theologies that most 
vociferously want to get away from modern claims to universal reason are 
usually the ones that repeat similar mistakes:
Certain postmodern theologies are only partly different from the modern 
theologies from which they seek to distance themselves. […]. They have 
taken the hermeneutical turn and do not profess to speak as the voice of 
some universal view from nowhere. But if their understanding of reason is 
postmodern in this sense, they give it the same hegemony as their 
Enlightenment predecessors over the special revelation on which the ‘reli-
gions of the book’ seek to ground themselves. […] Just as some postmodern 
thinkers have not abandoned the Enlightenment ideal of epistemic and 
social critique, so some have not abandoned the project of religion within 
the limits of reason alone. It should be noted that their faith in the resultant 
religions can be just as strong and (epistemically) intolerant as the faiths that 
seek to ground themselves on special revelation. But they are faiths, never-
theless—rival faiths. (2017, p. 214)
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

199
The silence about God can then not be a brief stammer in an otherwise 
fluent speech, a brief hiccup in a self-same plan. For most, this means that 
the silence kills metaphysics. Is there another way? This would mean that 
a speech emerges out of this silence, a speech invigorated and wounded by 
the silence at the same time.
Let us take silence seriously for a moment. When do we tend toward 
silence? Most profoundly, we are silent when we recognize that words do 
not do justice to what is happening. Better then to soak it all in than to 
render shallow those events of profundity. In Perplexity and Ultimacy, 
William Desmond discusses this form of silence, strangely illustrated by 
the ‘howl’ of Shakespeare’s King Lear: a primal roar is tantamount to 
silence as words escape us. Entering the stage bearing Cordelia’s dead 
body, Shakespeare’s King Lear is tragically at loss and without words; at 
best, he utters a howl to give voice to his agony. About the tragic, one 
cannot speak philosophically: “We cannot, we will not speak about this 
Howl. We will be silent about heaven” (PU 28). But that voice of tragic 
howling, so continues Desmond, is itself being silenced by philosophy 
because it upsets, perhaps incapacitates, the philosophical project of deter-
minate and systematic completeness: “It threatens, not because it will not 
hear the other, but rather from excess of hearing, from excess of exposure 
to an otherness that destroys every human self-sufficiency” (PU 28). What 
philosophical words of comfort could be offered to poor King Lear? At 
the high point of their personal tragedy, what logical argument might have 
wrested the danger from Romeo and Julia’s hands? What use are argu-
ments when we are being threatened in our very capacity for self-­
determination and self-understanding?
How must philosophy cope with this call to silence and reverence? Kant 
recognized something of this in the exaltation of the moral law, for which 
we must stand still and show reverence (Achtung). There is an honesty in 
Kant, who recognized the limits of the reach of philosophical talk. Very 
generally, philosophical thought comes to a breakdown when it vividly 
realizes that there is a gap between what can be determined and what is in 
excess of reasonable determination. This is not something that philosophy 
is at ease with since it is “driven by the conviction, should we say faith, that 
being is not ultimately tragic. True reason will never be at a loss; true rea-
son will be the intelligent finding of the deep logical intelligibility that is 
inherent in the nature of things” (PU 30–31). Traditionally, much of phi-
losophy has kept talking through the silence, insisting upon logos when it 
was not appropriate. In response, there is a trend in most postmodern 
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

200
philosophy, especially its deconstructive line of thought, to emphasize that 
such excess invites philosophy and metaphysics to silence: of which one 
cannot speak, one ought to be silent. This seems like defeatism to me and, 
with Desmond, I would ask whether “philosophical mind [can] break 
through to a deeper metaphysical thinking even in this breakdown?” (PU 
29). This is not to say that all silence can inaugurate a new being. Silence 
is said (or not said!) in many ways:
There is the empty silence of meaninglessness. There is the silence of an 
acknowledging, full of reverent respect before the other. There is a silence 
of despair. There is a silence of peace beyond measure. There is a tragic 
silence: this is a transconceptual silence that rends the silence, all silences, 
the conceptless silence of Lear’s Howl. (PU 36)
Our focus further is only on this sense of tragic silence that brings philoso-
phy’s project to a standstill. How do we react to a givenness in excess of 
determinate thought? Is autonomous self-determination or heteronomous 
submission the answer? Or is this a false binary?
The Equivocity of Autonomy
In Plato’s dialogue Euthydemus, Socrates gives us an image, one that is 
supposed to describe what it is like to do philosophy. The cover of this 
volume tries to communicate something similarly. Despite the seriousness 
of philosophical dialectics, Socrates there describes doing philosophy as 
children clumsily running after birds: “We were really quite ridiculous—
just like children after crested larks; we kept thinking we were about to 
catch each one of the knowledges, but they always got away” (Plato 1997, 
p. 728 [291 b]). This wonderful image calls to mind something of the task 
of philosophy, namely to aspire to as much determination as humanly pos-
sible without thereby reducing the phenomena. The children are autono-
mously running after the larks, but when they reach out to catch one, their 
grip cannot be overly tight. If it would, then bye bye birdy. The same thing 
goes for dealing with those things in excess of determinate thought: when 
one grasps them too tight, one kills their vital energies. Plato knew well 
that such things as a carefulness out of truthfulness are hard to convey to 
readers yearning for determination. Because of this, as Desmond points, 
out Plato leaves us with an image when thinking about his own moment 
of tragedy, the death of Socrates:
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

201
This is not logic; this is not system; this is not the abstract universal. All of 
this is an image, a philosophical icon. At one level the image says: Philosophy 
must go on. But at another level it cautions: It can only go on if it is honest 
about loss, if it keeps before its thinking the image of death, the memory of 
the dead. (PU 44)
Moral goodness is one of these things that we risk grabbing too tight. 
What is the good, how is it determined, and where does it come from? 
From us or God? There is a view of the history of ethics that moves ethics 
from absolute heteronomy toward absolute autonomy, as for instance 
from the theory of moral obligation as a divine command toward the 
Kantian morality of autonomy. Most would see this move as an improve-
ment, where the moral good is now determined relative to our autono-
mous giving the law to ourselves. But even in authors most famously 
associated with such a view, the matters remains equivocal. According to 
Kant, the sole moral good is the “good will” (1996, p. 49 [4:393]), which 
is a will that is free as “efficient independently of alien causes determining 
it” and as “being a law to itself” (ibid., p. 94 [4:446–447]). A morally 
good person has a will that determines itself according to certain universal 
and immutable laws. But what exactly does it mean to be a lawgiver to 
oneself? For Kant, this signals that the human will dictates to itself, from a 
source entirely a priori, certain basic principles:
Here philosophy is to manifest its purity as sustainer of its own laws, not as 
herald of laws than an implanted sense of who knows what tutelary nature 
whispers to it, all of which—though they may always be better than nothing 
at all—can still never yield basic principles that reason dictates and that must 
have their source entirely and completely a priori. (1996, p. 77 [4:426])
The source of the dictates of morality lies in a priori reason, and the moti-
vation to act in accordance with these principles, in turn, rests in respect 
for these principles. These principles, so Kant continues, “must have their 
commanding authority from this: that they expect nothing from the incli-
nation of human beings but everything from the supremacy of the law and 
the respect owed to it, failing this, condemn the human being to contempt 
for himself and inner abhorrence” (ibid.).
Despite a whole, very lucrative, business of Kantian apologetics attempt-
ing explicitly to reconstruct and validate Kant’s thoughts, this way of 
thinking about autonomy must strike our contemporary ears as awkward: 
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

202
Kant turns autonomy into obedience! In Daybreak, Nietzsche berates this 
German proclivity, namely to find its own excellence in its capacity for 
obedience. There, he writes of German morality that “man has to have 
something which he can obey unconditionally” (1997, p. 129 [207]). Kant 
himself was not oblivious to the issue. In what is sometimes called the 
‘antinomy of duty’, he calls moral duty the “necessitation (constraint) of 
free choice through the law” (1996, p. 512 [6:379]). When under a moral 
duty, human beings necessarily see themselves as both a sensible being and 
an intelligible being (1996, pp. 534–544 [6:418]). The intelligible aspect 
of the human being determines then the sensible aspect of the human 
being. This sort of panicky dualist metaphysics fails to do the trick any-
more. In fact, Kantian autonomy has all semblance of heteronomy.
The equivocity in Kantian ethics is this: the moral law supposedly 
derives from our own lawgiving, but it lifts human beings to the level of 
universality. Kantian ethics, so says Desmond, tries to mediate dialectically 
between ‘being given the law and giving oneself the law” (EB 133). In 
Kantian ethics “we find ourselves under the moral law” (EB 136), but 
where exactly that moral law comes from remains unclear. Traditionally, 
one would point to a universal and absolute source of moral goodness, 
such as God, but Kant is averse to that:
While Kant, at some decisive points, lets God peep ambiguously through 
the thick curtains of the critical system, he does not always want to draw 
attention to the fact. Why? Because his view of theological ethics entails a 
heteronomy that for him is undignified for us: we risk submission to the 
commands of a tyrannical master and are turned into abject dependents. 
(EB 136–137)
So for Kant, things remain ambiguous, but Kant’s contemporary offspring 
evacuates any leftover dogmatism and heteronomy from his moral phi-
losophy. Autonomy as self-law, autonomous decision—whether rational or 
not—is what bestows moral worth on behavior. Autonomy can then only 
be successful insofar as it succeeds in relativizing and mitigating any other 
source of moral value: “Autonomy functions only by relativizing this other 
source; and the more radically we insist on this autonomy, the more this 
relativizing must be completed” (EB 137). For the sake of absolute auton-
omy, the absoluteness of any other source of morality must be denied: 
“The antinomy: absolutize autonomy, and you relativize the good as 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

203
other, or more than our self-determination; absolutize the good as other, 
and you must relativize autonomy” (EB 137–138).
This situation, and its equivocity, is even more apparent in Nietzsche’s 
ethical imperatives, even though he refuses to call them as such. In 
Nietzsche, “the self-legislation of Kantian morality is transformed into an 
autonomy that is not under any moral law, since it claims itself to be the 
source of the law” (EB 152). Human beings are will to power and give 
expression—either strongly or weakly—to their will. Anything that could 
count as good in Nietzschean morality is to be understood in terms of 
human self-transcending, the capacity to overcome certain stagnant per-
spectives of the self. The case is similar in Nietzsche as in Kant: for the sake 
of their autonomy, they must deny absolute, heteronomous value. But this 
trapped Nietzsche in the nihilism he so hoped to overcome:
Nietzsche so wanted to avoid inherent value that he was trapped in […] 
nihilism, despite his excess of rhetoric about overcoming nihilism. And he 
wanted to avoid inherent value, because he wanted to avoid God, just as 
Kant wanted to put God in epoche to cling to the sacred cow of his own 
autonomy. (EB 154–155)
In The Gay Science, Nietzsche presents what most would take to be his 
prime ethical imperative: to give style to one’s character. By this, he means 
the practice of those “who survey all the strengths and weaknesses that 
their nature has to offer and then fit them into an artistic plan until each 
appears as art and reason and even weaknesses delight the eye” (2001, 
p. 163 [290]). What is meant by this is that a self-styled person is someone 
who takes the myriad aspects of his personhood and molds these into 
something that adheres to a singular taste or style: “In the end, when the 
work is complete, it becomes clear how it was the force of a single taste 
that ruled and shaped everything great and small—whether the taste was 
good or bad means less than one may think; it’s enough that it was one 
taste!” (2001, p. 164 [290]). Nietzsche’s main dislike of much of his con-
temporary culture is that it is a motley patchwork of different tastes and 
styles, incapable of discerning finesse.
Nietzsche then follows Kant’s lead in thinking about ethics in a sense of 
aestheticized autonomy: we create ourselves according to a style. But 
Nietzsche does not lack the intellectual honesty to recognize that submis-
sion to style reeks of subjection. How does one cope with submitting 
oneself to a singular style? Nietzsche believes that weak individuals can 
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

204
only respond slavishly, grudgingly following the imperatives (and allowing 
themselves occasional, small deviances). Strong natures, however, will 
adopt style as their fate, and move to love their fate: “It will be the strong 
and domineering natures who experience their most exquisite pleasure 
under such coercion, in being bound by but also perfected under their 
own law” (ibid.). Only this can make a human being bearable sight to 
behold, as he becomes self-satisfied through obedience to style: “For one 
thing is needful: that a human being should attain satisfaction with him-
self—be it through this or that poetry or art; only then is a human being 
at all tolerable to behold!” (ibid.).
Kantian and Nietzschean attempts at formulating a morality of auton-
omy inevitably wind up entangled with the heteronomy they so desire to 
avoid. Some sort of obedience cannot be avoided, if only obedience to 
some ambiguous sense of self (see EB 159–162). The Kantian moral law 
and Nietzschean love of fate, both of these are shimmers of heteronomy 
intent upon saving their respective moralities from the threat of nihilism. 
Autonomy is the wall we have set up to ward off nihilism. Perhaps rightly 
so, they fear together with Pascal that the silence of their own autonomy 
will make the silence of these infinites space dreadful. But then again, per-
haps it is silence that can here be the savior?
The Silence of Autonomy
The moral project of autonomy operates under the conviction that the 
good is determined teleologically only. For instance, the generic answer to 
the question what the value is of such thing as being born white or black, 
Catholic or Muslim, man or woman, is simple: what you determine it to 
be. The good of something is what we determine it to be. But as we grow 
and develop autonomously into formidable individuals, we cannot help 
but ponder our roots. Does not absolute autonomy require us to belittle, 
even reject, the potential good of our origin? What does it matter that I 
was born a man if I desire to be a woman? Why can I not turn Buddhist 
overnight? Or why could I not transition to a new race, if that is what I 
desire? These are the views of a radical existentialism à la Sartre, which has 
crept in to what counts for moral decency today. Each determines at every 
moment what the value is of an origin, a given, a heritage, a thought, a 
belief, an orientation. But who or what is then doing the determining? 
What self are we obeying now? What supports this project of autonomous 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

205
self-(re)creation? What solid ground is there to be who I want to be, if 
what I want to accomplish is to destroy all foundations?
There is a suspicion of otherness that creeps into these ways of think-
ing, an overemphasis on self-insistence when faced with otherness in favor 
of acceptance. There are other ways of handling this, evidenced by metax-
ology: “This concerns our being in the between insofar as our self-­
surpassing goes beyond itself from more than lack, and beyond erotic 
self-determination. There is a release towards the other for the sake of the 
other” (EB 161). When it comes to properly engaging the other, it is 
often the case that speech and reason stand in between us and the possibil-
ity for authentic engagement, even if the other is our self. Too much talk 
does not allow for intimacy. I know of no better illustration of this than 
the scene at the close of part III of Thus spoke Zarathustra. Here, Nietzsche 
paints a picture of a frustrated protagonist, unnerved by the elusiveness of 
his object of desire: Life. Dancing around and avoiding Zarathustra’s 
grasp, Life as the ultimate other eludes Zarathustra. Zarathustra responds 
in anger and indignation, taking the whip to Life: “You witch, if I have so 
far sung for you, now you for me will—yell! To the beat of my whip you 
will dance so and yell so! But did I forget the whip?—Oh no!” (2006, 
p. 182). Life’s response? Squeamishly she covers her ears and answers: 
“Oh Zarathustra! Please do not crack your whip so fearfully! Surely you 
know: noise murders thoughts—and just now the most tender thoughts 
are coming to me” (ibid.).
Nietzsche realizes he has come to a stalemate: insisting upon autonomy 
is possible, but it would have to take the whip to life. And as anyone ever 
in love will tell you, when you try to force reciprocity, then true love is 
gone. Life’s elusiveness is what makes her enticing, rich, and fertile; a 
whipped life would be like a Platonic squeezed lark: empty of life. This 
kills what is excessive to determination, which is the fuel and life-blood of 
living. But is then Zarathustra, and so also we, supposed to submit to 
Life’s desires and currents if this means relinquishing autonomy? Are we 
then condemned to silence and heteronomy? And how does one answer 
such a question when speaking and reason themselves make for the prob-
lem? Nietzsche’s solution, brilliant in its rhetorical and imaginative poten-
tial, is thus: “‘Yes,’ I answered hesitating. ‘But you also know—’ And I 
said something in her ear, right in between her tangled yellow, foolish 
shaggy locks” (2006, p.  183). Nietzsche’s final answer is a whisper, a 
secret kept between Life and himself. Whatever way this might be inter-
preted in the narrative structure of Thus spoke Zarathustra, it is telling that 
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

206
Nietzsche’s final word to Life borderlines silence. True intimacy requires 
one to drop the volume, to be willing to mitigate autonomy and keep 
open a release of self for the sake of the other.
This is what Desmond calls an “archeology of the good” (EB 163–165), 
which sees the good as developing from an origin (arché) prior to being 
able to progress toward an end (telos). Recognizing that there is some-
thing good at work in what is given in being, the good of the to be as 
such, is initially a matter for silent wonder. Such a given can arise in many 
ways: the goodness of being as such, the goodness of given beauty, the 
goodness of regularity, the goodness of becoming, the goodness of the 
gift, the transcendent good as other (EB 170–220). When the worth of 
such things is only dependent upon autonomous choice, one does not 
recognize that such autonomous choice, and its capacity for discernment, 
is itself derivative from a more original source, endowing it with goodness. 
Autonomy is then always relativized autonomy, never absolute, as depen-
dent upon numerous sources of inspiration.
How does this end? With autonomy coming to silent reverence for the 
good of the given? On no account: the given goodness of being endows 
autonomy and reason with its own goodness; as inspired now by the inti-
macy of the goodness of being, autonomy is invigorated. In silence, there 
can be an intimation of a more primal passivity which impassions the pur-
suit of ever higher and more good. This is, I believe, what Desmond tries 
to signal with passio essendi being more primal than conatus essendi: a pas-
sion or patience for being that is more original than any endeavor to be. 
Such a patient and passionate silence is only to be feared if we remain in 
the project for an absolutized sense of autonomy. Then, all silence is 
dreadful. When we are willing to relativize autonomy and opening up 
charitably to the given, then silence can be an occasion for convalescence. 
Silence can then be itself an overcoming, an overcoming of an absolutized 
sense of selfhood in favor of a more community-based, open-dialectical 
entanglement with the world. Excess calls us to silence; silence brings us 
to new and more appropriate speech.
Conclusion
Silence can be a calling, evidenced by many religious people who take 
upon themselves a vow of silence. Silence can allow for superior listening, 
capable of recognizing the merit and goodness of otherness. And yet, 
silence is often dreaded, and we rush to fill in the silence with idle talk. In 
 
D. VANDEN AUWEELE

207
this contribution, I aimed to show that not all silence is to be feared as it 
can allow for an authentic openness to those things in excess of finite and 
autonomous determination. The modern project for an absolutized sense 
of autonomy runs into its own ambiguities, but it can be pushed beyond 
its own capacity. Then, the good is what we determine it to be, but we 
have no grounds to determine anything as being good, no community 
from which to receive our value as originators of value. For some, there is 
something offensive about being touched, or called to silence, by some-
thing other, something elevated over ourselves. Nietzsche quipped at one 
point that there could be no gods, because otherwise he could not stand, 
not to be a god. There are many reservations in modernity against those 
things that hamper our autonomous speech. And yet, silence, like Platonic 
madness, brings so much that is good.
Bibliography
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor. 2007. The Brothers Karamazov. Trans. Constance Garnett. 
New York: Signett Classics.
Kant, Immanuel. 1996. Practical Philosophy. The Cambridge Edition of the Works of 
Immanuel Kant. Ed. Paul Guyer and Allen Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Marion, Jean-Luc. 2012. God Without Being. Trans. Thomas Carlson. Chicago 
and London: University of Chicago Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1997. Daybreak. Ed. Maudemarie Clark and Brian Leiter. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2001. The Gay Science. Ed. Bernard Williams. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 2006. Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Ed. Adrian Del Caro and Robert Pippin. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Plato. 1997. Euthydemus. In Plato: Collected Works. Ed. John Cooper and Trans. 
Rosamond Kent Sprague. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.
Vanden Auweele, Dennis. 2013. Metaxological ‘Yes’ and Existential ‘No’: William 
Desmond and Atheism. Sophia: International Journal of Philosophy and 
Traditions 52: 637–655.
Westphal, Merold. 2017. In Praise of Heteronomy. Making Room for Revelation. 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
  SILENCE, EXCESS, AND AUTONOMY 

209
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_12
CHAPTER 12
Reactivating Christian Metaphysical Glory 
in the Wake of Its Eclipse: William Desmond 
Contra Giorgio Agamben
Philip John Paul Gonzales
Contemporary Continental discourse is everywhere riddled with religious 
themes and symbols, especially of a Christian variety. This legacy of 
Christianity is significantly manifested in a reopening of the ‘eschatologi-
cal bureau,’ which has clearly reemerged, in a non-identical way, since 
Ernst Troeltsch made his famous statement about its closure within 
Christianity in 1925. Indeed, the reason for this reactivation is largely due 
to the Hegelo-Kojèvian thematic of the end of history, the Nietzschean 
cry of the ‘death of God’ which has loosed the earth from the sun and the 
fateful emergence of Ereignis which the Heideggerian master narrative has 
appended to the end of the history of Being, understood as being’s own 
history. This reopening, in the dimmed lighting of these three intellec-
tual/metaphysical events of closure, has rightfully provoked a rethinking 
of messianic, eschatological and apocalyptic themes, a turn to the religious 
and, indeed, a thinking of a weakened and formless simulacrum of 
Christianity. The former is seen, most famously, in the work of Emmanuel 
P. J. P. Gonzales (*) 
University of Dallas, Irving, TX, USA
e-mail: pgonzales@udallas.edu

210
Levinas and Jacques Derrida, while the latter is seen in the work of Mark 
C. Taylor, Gianni Vattimo, Richard Kearney and John Caputo, to name 
some of the most prominent.1
Beyond the first layer of this formless and nebulous reactivation of mes-
sianic, eschatological, apocalyptic and Christian themes must be added a 
second layer of reengagement with such themes within contemporary 
Continental discourse. This time, however, this reengagement is marked 
by a more substantial, serious and robust engagement with the Christian 
theological tradition which sees philosophy’s reengagement with 
Christianity to be indispensable for thought today. This second wave can, 
in turn, be divided into two groups. The first consists in the theologically 
inclined yet profaning modes of philosophizing, exemplified in Žižek, 
Badiou and Agamben, while the second consists in expressly Christian 
philosophically inclined modes of theology exhibited in John Milbank, 
David Bentley Hart and Cyril O’Regan, alongside the theologically 
inclined mode of Christian philosophizing of William Desmond.
Yet the question immediately becomes, from a serious Christian meta-
physical perspective, what to make of this return of Christian symbols and 
themes, of this sourcing of Christian sources and how does one under-
stand this in the wake of the previous intellectual/metaphysical events of 
closure? Should history be read in the wake of a theogonic development 
of god, or Spirit, becoming God on the altar of time, history and becom-
ing? Or should history be read in the wake of the death of the Christian 
God, in the name of a revaluation which seeks to resurrect chthonic dei-
ties? Or perhaps history should be read in the wake of being’s own history 
which is thought in one thinker’s mystagogical thought which initiates 
thinking into the Ereignis and thus the thinking otherwise of being, coun-
ter to the Western metaphysical tradition and, especially, the Christian 
tradition? What figuration of being is to be thought in the aftermath of 
these events?
For the Christian metaphysician cannot simply ignore these three great 
master narratives (Hegelian/Nietzschean/Heideggerian), but nor can 
Christian thinking seek to entirely base itself within the dimmed light of 
1 René Girard and Benoît Chantre have rightfully spoken about the leaping of Levinas’ 
thought into eschatology (Girard and Chantre 2009, p. 107). For more on the distinction 
between eschatology and apocalyptic in relation to Levinas’ thought, in the context of a 
discussion of Girard’s apocalyptic turn, see O’Regan (2012, pp. 123–124). For Derrida’s 
apocalyptic turn see Derrida (1993, pp. 117–171).
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

211
these events, in a state of paralysis (e.g. Marion), which is unable to think 
the dynamism and pleromatic visionary truth of its own tradition and 
story. Rather, Christian thinking must read these metaphysical, yet aes-
thetic and visionary narratives, from a Christian apocalyptic point-of-view 
which sees that “it is the free thinking intellect that makes history and its 
deep decisions roll and echo down through the centuries. In this way his-
tory is the apocalypse (that is to say, the opening) of the decision of the 
intellect for or against God” (Balthasar 1989, p. 39). History, read in this 
Christian light, must read these three narratives as symptomatic of what 
von Balthasar prophetically diagnoses as the eclipse of glory in modernity 
and philosophical modernity, in particular.
Thus the question of which figuration of being must be thought today, 
from a Christian perspective, is a question of the figuration of Christian 
metaphysical glory, in response to this dramatic hour of Christian history. 
I thus propose, in agreement with von Balthasar, that the ‘epic’ style of 
the summa and the ‘lyric’ style of the spiritual treatises, understood as 
past figurations of Christian metaphysical glory, are no longer operable in 
light of the challenges of our intellectual and metaphysical history 
(Balthasar 1988, p. 42). To propose this is to claim three things: First, at 
stake in the reactivation of messianic, eschatological, apocalyptic and 
Christian themes is nothing less than the question of a profanation, dis-
figuration and, ultimately, a deactivation of the tradition of Christian 
metaphysical glory. Second, in the face of this possibility, what is needed 
today is a reimagining and reactivation of Christian metaphysical glory, 
on our twilight side of history. Third, if this reactivation is to occur  
viably, then the Christian metaphysical style needed would have to be: 
pleromatic, performative, rhetorical, aesthetic and dramatic.2 Moreover, 
this metaphysics would likewise have to critically judge and gauge the 
return of Christian themes from its own standpoint and tradition, thereby 
seeking to uncover ‘counterfeit doubles’ (Desmond) or profanations of 
Christianity which seek to deactivate Christian metaphysical glory with 
deceitful surrogates.
2 This need can be said to be the leitmotif of my Reimagining the Analogia Entis (Gonzales 
2019).
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

212
Electing Desmond and Agamben
In order to argue for the proposed reactivation of Christian metaphysical 
glory, in the wake of its eclipse and the continual possibility of its deactiva-
tion in Continental thought, I elect to treat two figures who are represen-
tative of the two standpoints, of the second wave, spoken about above: 
William Desmond and Giorgio Agamben.
Prior to giving reasons for electing these two figures, a few words must 
be said on their drastically different philosophical approaches. On the sur-
face, Desmond’s and Agamben’s narratives could not be more distinct. 
Desmond’s is an avowed Christian and theistic metaphysician after the 
‘end of history,’ the ‘death of God,’ and the ‘death of metaphysics,’ while 
Agamben is an a/theistic and profaning thinker who powerfully thinks the 
unavoidability of political theology, in connection to ontology, in the wake 
of the aforementioned events of closure. Desmond’s metaphysical mind-
fulness critically calls into question the absoluteness of the ‘linguistic turn,’ 
while Agamben’s thinking takes place within this very turn. Further, the 
intellectual figures that recur in their work could not be more different. In 
Desmond one continually encounters: Plato, Augustine, Hegel and 
Nietzsche, along with Shakespeare, Dostoevsky, Pascal and Shestov. In 
Agamben, recurring figures include: Heidegger, Benjamin, Schmitt, 
Foucault, Aristotle, Spinoza and Kafka. Nor could their styles and meth-
ods be more different. Desmond’s style and method is deeply metaphysi-
cal, with phenomenological accents of a Marcelian and thus non-Husserlian 
sort. Desmond’s thinking is a thinking between system and poetics. Which 
means it is intimately universal and storied.3 A thinking which is an enact-
ment of selving within the concrete givenness of the milieu of the between: 
a style between idiocy and communication, passing over into the rhap-
sodic with particularly Irish intonations, while Agamben’s thinking is 
methodical and archeological, in a Foucauldian sense. Moreover, his 
method is guided by an intense attention to philological details expressed 
in a rare erudition schooled in ancient rhetoric and grammar. Yet, 
Agamben’s philological erudition is not without its poetic element as seen 
in his indebtedness to the thinking—poetically—of Heidegger and 
Benjamin, hence, his engagement with Rilke, Hölderlin, and, perhaps in a 
most celebrated manner, Mallarmé.
3 See IU and also my review of this work in The American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly, 
forthcoming.
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

213
What, then, is exemplary in the respective thinking of Desmond and 
Agamben, in relation to my concern for a reactivation/deactivation of 
Christian metaphysical glory, in contemporary Continental discourse? I 
begin with the least important and, by degrees, work up to the most impor-
tant reasons for my election. First, both thinkers seek to rethink creatively, 
in a serious and nuanced manner, our relation to the history of Western 
metaphysics, in the wake of the three aforementioned intellectual events, in 
a manner which is more profound than the simplistic departure from the 
Western metaphysical heritage proposed by many a Continental thinker. 
Second, what separates Desmond and Agamben from other approaches is 
their robust engagement with the Western Christian theological tradition, 
as opposed to the weak approaches one finds in other Continental thinkers 
(Derrida, Mark C. Taylor, Vattimo, Kearney and Caputo). Third, in rela-
tion to the first part of the second wave mentioned above, Agamben’s 
engagement with the Western Christian theological tradition is the deepest 
and most comprehensive in comparison to Badiou and Žižek, while 
Desmond, in relation to the second part of the second wave, is the only 
thinker mentioned whose mode of discourse takes place on a fully Christian 
metaphysical register, in distinction to the overtly theological approach of 
Milbank, Hart and O’Regan. In light of this fact it can be argued that God 
and the Between (2008) presents a speculative metaphysical theology the 
likes of which have not be seen since Erich Przywara’s brilliant and magis-
terial work: Analogia Entis (1932).4 Fourth, Desmond’s and Agamben’s, 
respectively, deep engagements with the Western theological tradition, in 
relation to the question of the current figuration of being, are centrally 
connected with the question of Christian glory.
In order to approach the hermeneutic key of glory, it is necessary to see 
how each thinker approaches the question of the Sabbath. For both think-
ers a certain kind of sabbatical thinking is required in relation to being, in 
this historical hour. Indeed, both go so far as offering interpretations of 
being as inherently sabbatical and it is, I contend, in these respective sab-
batical interpretations of being, that their drastically different views of 
Christian glory are uncovered. Desmond’s interpretation, I argue, seeks a 
non-identical reactivation of Christian metaphysical glory which goes a 
long way in creatively developing the kind of style of Christian metaphys-
ics which I am advocating in this time of Christian history, while Agamben’s 
4 See Przywara (2014). For more on the relation between Przywara and Desmond, see 
Gonzales (forthcoming).
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

214
brilliantly provocative thought and his comprehensive engagement with 
the theological tradition, ultimately, seeks the muting and deactivation of 
Christian glory; a muting which I am concerned with diagnosing and chal-
lenging from a Christian metaphysical register.
Agamben’s Deactivation of Christian Glory
Agamben’s nine-volume Homo Sacer project, written over a twenty-five 
year period, is undoubtedly one of the most important intellectual events 
of our time. And, in my view, it is so for three primary reasons. First, 
Agamben has unmasked the fact that the violence of the ‘state of excep-
tion’ is inherently and continuously operative in the founding mythologeme 
of the modern liberal State. In so doing, Agamben shows the hidden con-
tiguity and affinity of modern liberal democracy with totalitarianism via 
the Schmittian question of the Sovereign and the ‘state of exception.’ The 
end result is, when seen from a Christian theo-political perspective, an 
apocalyptic diagnosis (Agamben would say messianic and I will deal with 
this distinction in due course) of the all-pervasive bio-political situation or 
the “camp as the nomos of the earth,” understood as the real legacy of the 
political project of modernity (Agamben 1998, pp. 166–180). Agamben, 
then, like no thinker writing today, sees the links linking the foundation of 
liberal democracies with present-day post-democratic totalitarian societies 
of the spectacle (Guy Debord) and their glorifying economizing of the 
political. The present-day manifestation of the bio-political order must 
then be seen as a “bloody mystification of a new planetary order” 
(Agamben 1998, p. 12). Moreover, Agamben’s radical and uncompromis-
ing analysis of the current political situation of the West clearly shows that 
any proposed restoration of classical politics, à la Hannah Arendt and Leo 
Strauss, is naïve and impossible. There can be no conservative restoration 
of politics. Thus, Agamben’s provocative view that “nowhere on earth 
today is a legitimate power to be found: even the powerful are convinced 
of their own illegitimacy” raises—or should raise—serious worries con-
cerning the widespread Christian accommodation within, and to, the cur-
rent bio-political and Capitalistic order (Agamben 2012, p. 40).5
5 Agamben’s radical claim about the illegitimate nature of all political power today, given 
at Notre Dame Cathedral in March of 2009, was by no means the first of its kind. For such 
a claim was first powerfully voiced, in a radically Christian register, in the 1937 prophetic 
essay of Erik Peterson, ‘Witness to the Truth.’ This time, however, the challenging of the 
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

215
Agamben’s radical critique of the power and violence unleashed by the 
planetary illegitimacy of the bio-political world order thus lends the 
Christian thinker tools to diagnose the increasingly apocalyptic and dra-
matic situation in which Christians now find themselves. In this, Agamben’s 
work can be said to offer two services to an apocalyptic Christian theo-­
political vision.6 First, it reinforces a Christian apocalyptic view of history 
as an ever-increasing intensification of evil and violence as laid out in 
related, but differing ways, in von Balthasar and Girard (Balthasar 1994, 
1998; Girard and Chantre 2009). Second, it shows the need, in light of 
the ubiquity of illegitimate political power, for the Christian metaphysi-
cian and theo-political thinker to think through the need of a theo-­political 
metaphysics of martyrdom which would Christianly refuse to participate 
in the violence of political power in the name of a theo-politics of loving 
service, rooted within a Trinitarian analogical metaphysics of kenotic love. 
This is to assert, with Peterson, that any true Christian politics needs to be 
rooted within Trinitarian doctrine and the cosmic nature of the liturgy, 
and the latter understood as the public practice of the ekklēsía, which thus 
has radically political ramifications (Peterson 2011, p.  68). Second, 
Agamben realizes in the wake of Schmitt that there are deep analogies 
between politics and the situation of metaphysics. Third, Agamben rightly 
realizes beyond the philhellenic purview of Heidegger, in the wake of the 
prophetic theo-political insights of Peterson (and in a different tonality 
von Balthasar), that in order to get to the heart of the real questions of 
Western politics and metaphysics one has to confront the legacy of 
Christian theology, concentrated in the question of glory, doxology and, 
ultimately, the Trinity.
In light of my critique, I concentrate on the ontological underpinnings 
of the Homo Sacer project, that is, Agamben’s search for a form-of-life 
where bios and zoē coincide, without remainder. I primarily focus on The 
Kingdom and the Glory where the inoperativity of the self is used to deac-
tivate Christian glory and the Christian apocalypse via a profaning praxis 
of sabbatism. In other words, I argue that the strategy of Agamben’s 
modern political order, and its illegitimacy, was done with radically Christian theo-political 
intentions in light of the political order’s rejection of the sovereignty of the royal priesthood 
of the eschatological Lamb. See Peterson (2011, pp. 151–181).
6 For more programmatic thoughts on the current place of a Christian apocalyptic theo-
politics of the martyr, in relation to the Christian analogia entis, see the last chapter of 
Gonzales (2019).
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

216
deactivation of Christian glory is centered in an immanentizing of the 
Sabbath and the Christian Parousia, in a sabbatical self that is a secularized 
profanation of Christian glory.
The ontological underpinnings of the Homo Sacer project must be 
characterized as a post-Hegelo-Kojèvian and a post-Heideggerian 
endeavor. That is, it is an attempt to think sovereignty and metaphysics in 
the time of the fulfillment of human history and Western metaphysics. The 
essential nature of this endeavor is an attempt to think ontological differ-
ence no longer as a relation of Being to being. Or in more archaic meta-
physical language, it is an attempt to think potentiality without the 
sovereignty of actuality and thus a figure of human existence where bios 
and zoē coincide. Agamben’s move of reconfiguring human existence 
beyond the Western dualism of Being/being, actuality/potentiality is 
done with the intent of freeing man, and politics, from the tyranny of the 
metaphysico-political destiny of the West.
Up until this point Agamben’s project and strategy is a largely 
Heideggerian one, politically inflected. However, the devious brilliance of 
Agamben is to no longer situate the historic destiny of the Occident within 
the forgetting of ontological difference in the withdrawing dispensation of 
Being which occurred in early Greek thinking, but rather, in the binary 
opposition of the immanent/economic Trinity which is the real determina-
tive event of the West which must be overcome. This is to say, what must 
be overcome, yet strongly acknowledged, is that that history itself, and an 
historical interpretation of Being and the West, is only possible because of 
Christianity. Christianity, and the Trinity, not Hellenic impersonal Being, 
gives rise to the historical (Agamben 2011, p. 5).7 It is this Christian legacy 
that must be overcome, not by pretending that it does not exist à la 
Heidegger, but by acknowledging it, so as to profane it by lifting the veil to 
see what lies underneath and beyond. This, for Agamben, will remove the 
apocalyptic ‘obscura verba’ (this is how Augustine describes the enigmatic 
Pauline katechon: Augustine 2000, Book X, Chap. 19) of the katechon 
(Thessalonians 2:3–9). Which is to say that the Trinitarian binary split 
between being/praxis which prevents their coinherence, in human exis-
tence, and thus a return to the messianic time of concrete anarchic escha-
tology, as opposed to the Christian apocalyptic ‘suspended time’ of delay, 
7 See also Agamben (2017, p. 26) where he says, ‘History as we know it is a Christian 
concept.’ Here Agamben affirms what Heidegger knew but refused to admit, namely, his 
thinking is not Greek but a perverse parody of the Christian narrative.
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

217
on Agamben’s interpretation enforces the Occidental Christian split, 
between being and acting, form and life (Agamben 2011, p. 8).8 Thus, in 
my reading, the Christian Trinitarian split between being/praxis, and its 
continuation in the governmental machine of the Western politics, serves 
as the famed apocalyptic Pauline katechon which is restraining, not the 
Second Coming, but a parousic messianic self (form-of-life) where bios and 
zoē coincide, without remainder. Agamben must thus remove this Christian 
katechon, and its legacy in the governmental machine, in order for his mes-
sianic version of the self and politics to be enacted.
This messianic strategy is taken up in The Kingdom and the Glory in a 
theological key, with the purpose of answering the question of why power, 
in the West, assumes the form of economy. Agamben’s turn to the theol-
ogoumenon of Christian mystery—the Trinity—seeks to show that not 
only is the modern economy a secular version of the Christian economy, 
but more importantly, that Christian theology is of its very nature eco-
nomic and that the economic is inherently Christian. This strategy takes on 
a subtle and interrelated twofold nature, as announced in the first section 
of the work. First, Agamben, in alluding to the debate on secularization in 
Germany during the 1960s, seeks to show that the real question of this 
debate is not secularization, but rather a question of philosophy of history 
and the theological legacy underpinning it (Agamben 2011, pp.  4–5). 
Thus Lowith’s thesis on secular eschatology and the conscious reopening 
of the theme of the economic Trinity in Hegel and Schelling is not possible 
8 Agamben’s seeking to return to ‘the time that remains’ is a move that is greatly indebted 
to the profound influence that Walter Benjamin has had upon his thinking. However, one 
would be remiss to not make the striking comparison between Agamben’s view of Christian 
apocalyptic being a paralysis of time, as opposed to the moving time of concrete eschatology 
which propels human action, with Buber’s view of the Jewish prophetic tradition in distinc-
tion from Christian apocalypse, especially, as seen in its Johannine provenance. Buber sees 
the prophetic tradition provoking radical decision, action and dialogue between God and 
man which always involves the possibility of turning, change and a future. This dynamism is 
lost with the worn-out Christian apocalyptic view where time and history are growing old 
and tired. Christian apocalypticists thus desire to flee and escape history instead of facing the 
demand for decisions within the historic hour of history and its concrete happening. See 
Buber (1957, pp.  192–207). Buber’s (and Agamben’s) view of Christian apocalyptic as 
enfeebling action is greatly mistaken, at least on a Tyconian-Augustinian-Balthasarian apoca-
lyptic view, which expels and denies the expectation of the reign of a thousand-year kingdom, 
thought in historical terms. Rather, this view sees every Christian age as living within and 
having a qualitative relation to the ‘end times’ which thus demands, all the more, the urgency 
of Christian dramatic action where the Mystical Body is continually under attack by the spirit 
of the antichristic lie.
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

218
if the nature of theology is not itself economic, as Agamben seeks to genea-
logically establish, in keeping with his thesis that history is itself a Christian 
category. In a word, at stake is the question of a theological interpretation 
of history and its bequeathing to modernity the task of thinking “at one 
and the same time, an infinite being and its finite history—and hence the 
figure of being that survives the economy—forms precisely the theological 
inheritance of modern philosophy” (Agamben 2011, p.  211). In other 
words, Agamben must first acknowledge the theological essence of Western 
history in order to think the profaning post-­Christian messianic moment 
which will render the Christian economy and its glory voided.
The second aspect of Agamben’s messianic strategy is to establish that 
the great debate between Schmitt and Peterson—both of whom he is con-
tending with throughout the entire text—on the possibility of political 
theology is really a debate between two Catholic thinkers who are “apoca-
lyptics of the counterrevolution,” insofar as they share the same theology 
of history which seeks to restrain the coming of the Antichrist (Agamben 
2011, p. 6).9 (This restraint occurs in Peterson by the theological delay of 
the conversion of the Jews and Schmitt by Christian Empire and its secular 
continuance in the modern State). Hence both act as delaying inquisi-
tional figures assuring that the parousia does not take place in time, 
thereby prohibiting a concrete messianic eschatology. That is, Agamben 
must establish, contra Schmitt and Peterson, that the figure of being which 
resides after the economy—after the removal of the Trinitarian katechon—
is not a Catholic apocalyptic figuration of being, but rather a post-­Christian 
messianic figuration of being or a sabbatism of praxis which deactivates 
Christian glory and its legacy in the economy of the governmental 
machine.
The two sides of this messianic strategy, as already noted, revolve 
around the question of the Trinity and glory, understood as the decisive 
event in the West, read as the location of the binary and dualistic nature 
that Christian thinking bequeathed to the governmental machine of 
Western politics. There are two Trinities, which are split: to the immanent 
Trinity belongs God’s Being in himself and to the economic Trinity God’s 
revelation. In this dualistic Trinity, Being and praxis are radically split.
9 Agamben is here borrowing a phrase which Jacob Taubes applies to Carl Schmitt. 
However, Agamben in his bizarre reading of Peterson seeks to apply it equally to Peterson. I 
have far more sympathies with Agamben’s critique of Schmitt than Peterson’s. For a splendid 
defense of Peterson contra Agamben see Schmidt (2014, pp. 182–203). For Taubes ascrip-
tion of this title to Schmitt, see Taubes (2013, pp. 1–18).
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

219
Enter glory as the way that Christian theology has attempted to recon-
cile the immanent/economic Trinity, theology/economy, being/praxis, 
Government/Kingdom. Glory thus becomes the most dialectical part of 
theology, as the mirroring and circulating place of the unity of opposites. 
Glory’s ambiguous function is seen in two ways. First, in relation to the 
three divine Person’s reciprocal glorification, Agamben thinks that the 
subordinationalist position is never done away with (Agamben 2011, 
p. 209).10 Second, in relation to man and God, man glorifies God’s Glory 
which has no need of man’s glorification (Agamben 2011, pp. 216–218). 
It thus seems implied that in some way God’s glory is increased by exter-
nal and subjective glorification. Moreover, it is not insignificant that in 
Agamben’s critique of the dialectical and circular nature of glory that he 
appeals to two protestant dialectical theologians to prove his point, namely, 
Moltmann and Barth (Agamben 2011, for references to Moltmann see, 
p. 208 and p. 210; for Barth see, pp. 211–212 and pp. 214–216). Agamben 
thus weakens an already weak critique by never addressing the Catholic 
analogical answer to glory found in Przywara and von Balthasar, which 
finds a non-identical refrain in Desmond’s metaxology. In taking the dia-
lectical position as normative of Christian thought, he flatly ignores the 
analogia entis (or metaxology) which enacts an analogization of being in 
its difference from God, thereby safeguarding the distinction between the 
immanent/economic Trinity and the distinction between God and crea-
tures. Agamben’s denial of the analogical interval allows him to read the 
Christian legacy bequeathing to Western thought the task of thinking an 
infinite being’s finite history. However, when read analogically, this ques-
tion is mute as the relation between God and creation and God and the 
economic story of salvation history is one of free loving exchange—com-
mercium—between God and man which is the consequence of the real 
analogical distance of God’s creative act of freeing creation into its other-
ness. Without this distance, love and exchange are impossible, the Christian 
Deus semper maior becomes dependent on its economic activity, and this 
is precisely what Agamben’s dialectical reading desires.
On this view, then, “the economy glorifies being as being glorifies the 
economy,” and it is in this insubstantial mirroring that the divine mystery 
lays hidden (Agamben 2011, p. 209). At the heart of the Trinitarian God 
of glory stands the unsayable void of the inoperativity of power. The theo-
logical legacy of the West, and its political continuance in the governmental 
10 For a fitting refutation of Agamben’s belief that the Trinity and glory always harbor a 
subordinationalist position, see Balthasar (1994, pp. 319–328).
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

220
machine, is symbolized in the iconography of the empty throne (hetoimasia 
tou thronou) (Agamben 2011, p.  243). Which means that behind the 
Trinitarian split between being and praxis, held together by the circular 
apparatus of glory, lies the vacant and anarchic seat of power-as-­possibility. 
The veil of Christian glory has been rent and lifted and what resides after 
the ruse of the dialectical history of glory and an infinite being’s finite his-
tory (Being/praxis) is man’s own inoperativity. The mystery of the divinity 
is profaned, because when man glorifies, it is not a glorification of God, but 
a “glorification in which human inoperativity celebrates its eternal Sabbath” 
(Agamben 2011, p. 245). At the heart of the Christian oikonomia lies not 
the Christian Trinitarian God of absolute loving surrender and abandon, 
but man: “The Sabbatical animal par excellence” (Agamben 2011, p. 246).
The figuration of being, after the Christian economy and its secular con-
tinuance in the governmental machine, is a post-Christian and therefore a 
post-Apocalyptic messianic figure of the self where bios and zoē coincide, 
without remainder. Here the fracture between being and praxis is healed. 
The Christian history of the Trinitarian katechon is removed and taken into 
a self that, in a Spinozistic and Heideggerian fashion, contemplates its own 
‘live-ability,’ its own ability to live and act (Agamben 2011, 251, for refer-
ence to Spinoza p. 249). The inoperativity of the self’s pure possibility-to-
be is a profane figuration of the peaceful rest of God’s eternal Sabbath, after 
the Christian economy of salvation is revealed to be empty. Christian 
Eternal life is immanentized, and a theology of history is replaced and deac-
tivated by a parousic self that serves its own immanent messianic function. 
By claiming that man’s contemplation of his inoperativity is what frees man 
from the apparatus of the governmental machine, Agamben thinks he is 
freeing man from the Catholic legacy of the apocalyptic belief that the par-
ousia occurs at the end of history, a belief which paralyzes concrete messi-
anic eschatology. History after Christian glory and the apocalypse that never 
was is the messianic time that remains where, in the words of Benjamin, 
“every second of time was the strait gate through which the Messiah might 
enter” (Benjamin 1968, p.  264). However, Agamben should heed the 
words of Benjamin that the “Messiah comes not only as the Redeemer, he 
comes as the subduer of the Antichrist” (Benjamin 1968, p. 255). Thus if 
the figure of the Messiah remains ­somewhat ambiguous in Benjamin, for 
Agamben, it is clear that the post-­Christian self is an immanentized parou-
sic and messianic figuration whose own conatus essendi is the operator of 
“anthropogenesis” after the profanation of Christian glory and its economy 
of salvation (Agamben 2011, p. 251).
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

221
In seeking to deactivate Christian glory, Christian history and the 
Christian self, Agamben has effectively removed metaphysical heteron-
omy, salvation as God’s free initiative and hence a view of the Christian self 
as inherently responsive and doxological. Agamben’s man, then, like 
Heidegger’s Dasein whispers to itself, it its sabbatical ‘live-ability’ and pos-
sibility, ‘I am who I am’ thus denying the heart of the Christian doxologi-
cal self, namely the loving recognition of being-a-creature.
Desmond’s Reactivation of Christian Glory
The work of William Desmond, like Agamben’s, is one of the most signifi-
cant intellectual events of our time. This is seen especially, but by no means 
exclusively, in the great trilogy of the Between: Being and the Between 
(1995), Ethics and the Between (2001) and God and the Between (2008). 
Yet how to get to the heart of the significance and fecundity of Desmond’s 
work? I have already suggested that his work must be seen as a creative 
reactivation of Christian metaphysical glory. Indeed, that his style of 
thought is an instantiation of the kind of Christian metaphysics needed 
today in light of the eclipse of Christian glory. Desmond’s style of thought, 
then, must be characterized as a metaphysical doxology in so far as his 
thinking is itself a performance, a song of praise and glorification to the 
Giver of all being and the good of the ‘to be.’ In order to show this, I 
reflect on the themes of the Sabbath and glory, suggesting that they flow 
from the very springs of Desmond’s thought and the springs from which 
his thought continually draw are, I claim, metaphysical astonishment and 
metaphysical peace. However, to think these springs means to trace the 
Source of these springs and thus what draws Desmond’s thought. For the 
Source must be ever-active and flowing forth in the very movement of the 
springs. Thus, to think the Source of this drawing, as traced in the springs, 
in relation to the Sabbath and glory, is to think performatively—along 
with Desmond—ways of reactivating Christian metaphysical glory. 
Metaphysical thinking must turn again to the wealth of the metaphysical 
poverty of creaturely existence. Which is another way of saying that exis-
tence must again become song.
The voice and thought of Desmond could not be more different than 
Agamben’s. Desmond’s work is certainly post-Heideggerian and post-­
Hegelian, but the nature of the ‘post’ is of a rare sort. Desmond’s thinking 
is anything but historicist, insofar as his thinking is in no way beholden to 
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

222
a thinking of being historically predetermined by Hegel or Heidegger.11 
In this, Desmond has bucked the trend of the majority of Continental 
thinkers, insofar as he has shifted his vision away from a seemingly all-­
encompassing nihilistic atheism in an attempt to resurrect two archaic 
words: metaphysics and God. To many, this might seem a naïve enterprise 
of an idiotic voice crying in the desert; a voice that fails to see adequately 
the autistic darkness for what it is: nothing. Yet Desmond sees the dark-
ness for what it is, because he knows that despite its power, the darkness 
has not extinguished the light. Desmond’s thinking is a thinking after 
‘postulatory finitism’ enacted by a ‘posthumous’ mind that has awakened 
after long sleep of finitude and the forgetting of being and God (GB, for 
references to ‘Posthumous mind’ see: 32, 33, 98, 184, 186, 201, 220, 
223, 249, 304, for references to ‘Postulatory finitism’ see: xi, 2, 8, 11, 
129, 312, 313). Desmond’s posthumous thinking does not refuse to look 
into darkness, but it does, like the apocalyptic martyrs of the prophetic 
Erik Peterson, refuse to utter a word against God’s creation (Peterson 
2011, p. 171).
In other words, the heart of Desmond’s thought is a metaphysics of 
creation. I further suggest that Desmond’s metaphysics of creation is best 
characterized as a postmodern form of Augustinianism. Yet to be a non-­
identical repetition of Augustine is to also be a non-identical repetition of 
Plato. This is to say that Desmond’s thinking exhibits a hermeneutic tactic, 
in the spirit of Clement of Alexandria, which sees that the old is disclosed 
in the new and the new lies hidden in the old: vetus in novo patet, novum in 
vetere latet. Plato: a pagan philosopher of astonishment and peace fulfilled 
in the Christian philosopher of astonishment and peace: Augustine. 
Desmond’s indebtedness to Plato and Augustine is nowhere more evident 
than in his unending reminder that metaphysics will always be a loving 
activity of astonishment. Desmond thus deploys this Platonic-­Augustinian 
spirit contra the conatus of self-foundation of philosophical modernity to 
show, in the words of Przywara, that philosophy is reductio in mysterium 
(Przywara 2014, pp. 181–188). That is, philosophy cannot be understood 
unless being is that mystery of otherness which cannot be mastered.
However, Desmond could not truly partake in the Platonic-Augustinian 
spirit, if he himself was not astonished at the ‘thing itself,’ that is, being in 
its abiding mystery. This is why, for Desmond, metaphysical mindfulness is 
a “being beholden”  and a being true to being’s hyperbolic over-­determination 
11 For more on Desmond’s opposition to the Heideggerian trend of current Continental 
thought, in relation to Badiou, see Gonzales (2019).
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

223
(BB 10). To be mindful, metaphysically, is to be taken up into, and by, the 
otherness of being’s abiding mystery. Thinking, in the between, is the very 
space of the communication of otherness and transcendence within man’s 
ineluctable in-between condition. Thus, thought’s dwelling space is the 
very indwelling of a mystery which, in keeping with Augustine, is both 
interior and exterior to thought’s in-between condition. Desmond’s mind-
fulness thus springs from metaphysical astonishment before being’s abiding 
otherness. Being’s mystery thus surmounts the violence of the voyeuristic 
eye of consciousness’ self-identical clarté and the polemos of dialectical iden-
tity. And it surmounts because being is itself convertible with peace, the 
other spring of Desmond’s thought.
Desmond claims that there is a Sabbath for thought and that peace 
should exist between philosophy and religion. Yet he claims that to obtain 
this peace thinking must learn to pray, that is to sing the glory of God and 
his creation. This singing glorification was rendered obsolete by Agamben’s 
circular and dialectical interpretation of glory which denied the analogical 
interval. This denial effectively cut off metaphysical heteronomy and 
God’s salvific event, in the name of a parousic self, which parodies Christian 
glory in the glorification of man’s inoperativity. Yet Desmond is a metaxo-
logical thinker, and thus he is able to secure the difference between God 
and creation. That is, Desmond secures that God is not his kingdom, 
thereby rending glory possible again. Desmond’s thinking, as a metaxo-
logical metaphysics of creation, is not bound to what Agamben sees to be 
the legacy of Christianity in the West, namely the thinking of an infinite 
being’s finite history and the figure which survives this history. No, 
Desmond’s metaphysical mindfulness is rooted in the analogical interval 
and thus he thinks a story of being which is rooted in creation ex nihilo 
and the whyless love which this event expresses and continues to express. 
For Desmond, there is always a coming to be prior to becoming. A being 
given to be which is the genuine coming to be of otherness in the meta-
physical gift of difference which creation itself is (GB 241–258). Creation 
and the self is an event of gifting which expresses the commercium of love 
and metaphysical peace between the Agapeic Origin and his creation.
Yet how to understand this peace? This peace is granted, in the Genesis 
account, on the Seventh day, the last day, the day of rest from the work of 
creation, the day set apart, made holy. However, this peaceful rest could 
not have been given if what was first made was itself not good: very good 
(Genesis 1:31). God’s restful beholding of the goodness of creation is 
the absolving consecration of creation’s otherness: an absolution which 
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

224
Agamben’s profaning mind refused to receive. God’s metaphysical creative 
beholding of creation is God’s own Amen to the created otherness of 
being. To think the peace of God’s Sabbath is thus to metaphysically reit-
erate, to repeat non-identically and perform this great creative Amen to 
being. Our creaturely beholding vision is thus a response to the call of 
communication given by God’s unspeakably generous love which, to the 
attentive questioner (Augustine 1991, Book X, 9), is everywhere present 
in the peaceful glory of the between of creation.
To think the Sabbath is not to immanentize it in the void of inoperativ-
ity, understood as the self’s contemplation of its power-as-possibility. 
Rather it is to think the creative gift of God’s peace which is the “perpetual 
re-creation of the world” (IST 356). It is to think the self as given to be: 
a passio essendi prior to the conatus essendi of power-as-possibility. To 
respond to this gift is to perform the poverty of creatureliness, where we 
become—a resounding—existing in pouring forth seraphic canticles 
(think of Desmond’s ten metaphysical cantos) (GB 281–327). In our pov-
erty lies our wealth. To think the glory of the God of the Sabbath is to 
think the Source of our creatureliness, and this is what draws Desmond’s 
thought. To do this is to dwell within the peace of metaphysical astonish-
ment of the good of the ‘to be’ of the between where the immemorial 
moment of the giving emergence of created being, out of the depths of 
God’s creative love, is communicated. To fully think this one’s entire exis-
tence must become song, thereby performatively and dramatically reacti-
vating the pleromatic tradition of Christian metaphysical glory on the 
other side of its eclipse, in an age of ever-intensifying profanity and 
counterfeiting.
Bibliography
Agamben, Giorgio. 1998. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Trans. 
Daniel Heller-Roazen. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
———. 2011. The Kingdom and the Glory: For a Theological Genealogy of Economy 
and Government (Homo Sacer II, 2). Trans. Lorenzo Chiesa. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
———. 2012. The Church and the Kingdom. Trans. Leland De La Durantaye. 
London/New York/Calcutta: Seagull Books.
———. 2017. The Mystery of Evil: Benedict XVI and the End of Days. Trans. Adam 
Kotsko. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Augustine. 1991. The Confession. Trans. Henry Chadwick. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
 
P. J. P. GONZALES

225
———. 2000. The City of God. Trans. Marcus Dod, D.D. New York: The Modern 
Library.
Balthasar, Hans Urs von. 1988. Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory: Volume 
I: Prolegomena. Trans. Graham Harrison. San Francisco: Ignatius Press.
———. 1989. The Glory of the Lord: A Theological Aesthetics: Volume IV: The 
Realm of Metaphysics in Antiquity. Trans. Brian Mc Neil, C.R.V. et  al. San 
Francisco: Ignatius Press.
———. 1994. Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory: Volume IV: The Action. 
Trans. Graham Harrison. San Francisco: Ignatius Press.
———. 1998. Theo-Drama: Theological Dramatic Theory: Volume V: The Last Act. 
Trans. Graham Harrison. San Francisco: Ignatius Press.
Benjamin, Walter. 1968. Theses on the Philosophy of History. In Illuminations: 
Essays and Reflections. Trans. Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken Books.
Buber, Martin. 1957. Prophecy, Apocalyptic, and the Historical Hour. In Pointing 
the Way: Collected Essays. Trans. Maurice Friedman. New  York: Harper & 
Brothers.
Derrida, Jacques. 1993. On the Newly Arisen Apocalyptic Tone in Philosophy. In 
Raising the Tone of Philosophy: Late Essays by Emmanuel Kant, Transformative 
Critique by Jacques Derrida, ed. Peter Fenves. Trans. John Leavey. Baltimore: 
The John Hopkins University Press.
Girard, Rene, and Benoît Chantre. 2009. Battling to the End: Conversations with 
Benoît Chantre. Trans. Mary Backer. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State 
University Press.
Gonzales, Philip John Paul. 2019. Reimagining the Analogia Entis: The Future of 
Erich Przywara’s Christian Vision. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans 
Publishing Company.
———. forthcoming. Between Philosophy and Theology: The Theological 
Implications of William Desmond’s Thought: An Interview with John Milbank. 
Radical Orthodoxy: Theology, Philosophy, Politics.
O’Regan, Cyril. 2012. Girard and the Spaces of Apocalyptic. Modern Theology 28: 
123–124.
Peterson, Erik. 2011. Theological Tractates. Ed. Michael J. Hollerich and Trans. 
Michael J. Hollerich. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Przywara, Erich. 2014. Analogia Entis: Metaphysics: Original Structure and 
Universal Rhythm. Trans. John R. Betz and David Bentley Hart. Grand Rapids, 
MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.
Schmidt, Christoph. 2014. The Return of the Katechon: Giorgio Agamben contra 
Erik Peterson. The Journal of Religion 94 (2): 182–203.
Taubes, Jacob. 2013. To Carl Schmitt: Letters and Reflections. Trans. Keith Tribe. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
  REACTIVATING CHRISTIAN METAPHYSICAL GLORY IN THE WAKE OF ITS… 

PART IV
On Wholeness, Hegel 
and Pan(en)theism

229
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_13
CHAPTER 13
The Real and the Glitter: Apropos William 
Desmond’s Hegel’s God
Sander Griffioen
S. Griffioen (*) 
VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Krina Huisman edited this article. She suggested improvements and helped repair 
a few unclear passages.
Ten years ago, on the occasion of my valedictory address at the Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, William Desmond presented me with a small-­
sized replica of a boat which is thought to show St Brendan, the Navigator, 
on his voyage across the ocean. Although the original carving points 
upwards, the replica can be hung both horizontally and vertically, with 
both dimensions giving expression to the same meaning: the church 
­ferrying the people of God to heaven through a world of difficulties. 
Interestingly enough, the backside of the replica adds a possible reading 
that will prove to be pertinent to this chapter. The text says that it may also 
be viewed as “in Jungian psychology, the psyche constellating the four 
functions in unison to voyage to wholeness”.1
1 Replica from the Kilnaruane carved pillar stone, made at the Wild Goose Studio, Kinsale, 
Ireland.

230
The longing for a ‘voyage to wholeness’ is, I think, precisely what 
Desmond’s category of the ‘counterfeit double’ is all about. His concern 
is that such striving for innerworldly wholeness, of which Jung’s psychol-
ogy is just one expression, threatens to destroy what makes human life 
human: an essential openness, or ‘porosity’, as he prefers, to the whole of 
creation. The critique of holism is central in the first part of this study, 
both in the sections on Hegel’s God and in the section dedicated to the 
notion of ‘counterfeit’. The issue remains present in the second and third 
part, albeit less prominently, where the emphasis will shift to the anonym-
ity of the good. Our main sources in the first part will be Hegel’s God (HG) 
and Is there a Sabbath for Thought? (IST), while in the second part we will 
discuss IST once more as well as The Intimate Universal (IU). A few words 
of caution to conclude this introduction. I do not want anyone to think 
that the notion of ‘counterfeit doubles’ provides a universal key for 
Desmond’s work as a whole. One salient feature of Desmond’s work is its 
multilayered and multifaceted composition. This rich texture makes it 
hard to draw straightforward conclusions in a relatively short chapter.
Hegel’s God
William Desmond confided to me in an email that the publisher preferred 
not to have ‘counterfeit double’ in the title (June 2, 2002). This was prob-
ably since it would not recommend the book to a contemporary public 
that, just as in the days of the apostle Paul, comes to philosophy “to hear 
some new thing” (Acts 17: 21) and prefers not to be reminded of thorny 
issues of falsehood and idolatry. It would recommend itself even less to 
Hegel scholars who immerse themselves so fully in Hegel’s system that any 
reference to a meta-standard of falsehood or truth becomes impossible.
In his contribution to my Festschrift, Desmond related one reaction of 
bewilderment we encountered in the summer of 1993 on travelling 
together in Japan and Korea. It was a response to his address to the Korean 
Hegel society, “a reply in German by a Korean professor who had studied 
in Germany, and who had assumed the ways of Hegel scholars who do not 
quite get the point of my apostasy from the church of Hegelian true 
believers” (Desmond 2006, p. 126). In academic philosophy, the appeal 
to meta-standards is immediately branded as external criticism, with all the 
attendant connotations of ‘biased’, ‘dogmatic’, and so on. Whereas Hegel 
himself, in fact, appealed to meta-standards again and again—most clearly 
when proclaiming in his later years to have paved the way for a reconcilia-
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

231
tion, or even a unison, of philosophy and Christian religion. One wonders 
how Hegel scholars can deal with this claim without asking themselves 
whether their patron’s understanding of Christian religion measured up to 
what Christian churches had confessed for centuries.
In assessing the reception it received in the Korean Hegel society (and 
possibly elsewhere), we have to take into account that Desmond’s work 
differs strongly from regular Hegel studies since its focus is not on much 
discussed controversies, and also because references to secondary litera-
ture are relatively scarce. Hegel’s God is least of all a work in which an 
author positions him- or herself by criticizing others. As we will see, rather 
than just criticizing, Desmond engages in a lively interchange with Hegel, 
granting strong points, showing fascination with the development of cer-
tain themes, expressing agreements with others, and so on, while consis-
tently questioning the overall direction. Hegel’s God, I suggest, is best seen 
as a study in which the interpreter openly departs from his “own presup-
positions and possibilities”, as Gadamer put it in his preface to a collection 
of essays on Heidegger.2 Part of his ‘presuppositions and possibilities’ is 
the grid of categorical distinctions. For this chapter, the categories of the 
‘erotic’ and the ‘agapeic’ will prove vital.3 He does not smuggle these into 
his discourse (as often happens) but is open about weaving his own dis-
course into that of Hegel’s. Also in this regard, he could have appealed to 
Hegel, who was frank about the need to take one’s reason along in order 
to be able to discern reason in the world.4
It is no surprise then that this book does not follow the downtrodden 
path of the sharp divisions between expository and evaluating sections. 
From the start, it engages in a lively dialogue in which exposition and 
critique go hand in hand. Let me add that its critique is never without 
appreciation. Some examples: on the theme of love in the early writings: 
2 “Es ging mir auch in allen meinen späteren Heidegger-Aufsätzen darum, von meinen 
Voraussetzungen und Möglichkeiten aus die Denkaufgabe sichtbar zu machen, der sich 
Heidegger gestellt hat…” (1983, Vorwort). The analogy is not strict: whereas Gadamer’s 
affinity with Heidegger is palpable on every page, Desmond’s relation to Hegel is one of 
proximity and distance.
3 In an earlier study, I listed two groups of basic categories: the first one comprising the 
univocal, the equivocal, the dialectical, and the metaxological; the second consisting of the 
idiotic, the aesthetic, the erotic, and the agapeic (Griffioen 2010, p. 121).
4 “Wer die Welt vernünftig ansieht, den sieht sie auch vernünftig an. Beides ist in 
Wechselbestimung” (Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte, Einleitung, Hegel 1955, 
p. 31).
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

232
“Hegel is close to the heart of the matter, and also very distant” (HG 41); 
On the theme of worship in the early writings: “Clearly Hegel understands 
the conjunction of difference and relation in worship” (HG 59); On the 
Phenomenology of Spirit: “The details of that work are fascinating in their 
own right” (HG 82); On the relativity of boundaries: the argument that 
“every limit is in principle surpassable by its being stated as a limit” is 
called ‘powerful’ and ‘persuasive’: “Hegel undoubtedly has much persua-
sive power on his side” (HG 84); On the progress of subjectivity from 
naïve self-affirmation via loss of self to mature reaffirmation: “Hegel is 
right to draw attention to these things”; adding: “I dwell on this because 
there is clearly a lot to what Hegel says. The powers of subjectivity are 
mindful and they are dynamic and they are forming’s of selving and also of 
self-transcendence, hence also relations to other-being” (HG 91).5 
However, here we arrive at a juncture where their respective roads diverge: 
in Hegel, the further development of subjectivity shows a subject endlessly 
circling within itself in a process of self-­mediation,6 whereas Desmond 
rejects this “model of inclusive self-­knowledge” (HG 92) and insists 
instead on the finiteness and porosity of the self. Here, finiteness does not 
indicate a deficiency, but rather an openness to the ‘between’. As he 
explained elsewhere: “There are forms of selving and othering that do not 
yield to Hegel’s scheme to render the way in speculative dialectic. The 
between, like the way, is an open passage. In finitude, it remains porous to 
what exceeds determination in terms of what can be immanently given” 
(Desmond 2006, p. 125). For Desmond, the essential porosity can only 
be safeguarded if and as long as the temptation to immanentize the 
‘beyond’ is resisted. Here lies the reason for “his apostasy from the church 
of the Hegelians” of which he spoke apropos his address to the Korean 
Hegel society.
If we would sum up Hegel’s God, it would be ‘God within the whole’. 
Holism is the pivot on which Desmond’s critique turns. He draws a divid-
ing line between visions of an inclusive whole that leave no room for ‘God 
5 More recently in a similar vein: “there is an important point for human existence here, 
and it is Hegel’s point too, namely, that we must adventure in otherness to come to our-
selves” (IU 324).
6 As he put it concisely in an earlier publication, when dealing with Hegel’s category of the 
Entäusserung (self-externalization/alienation): instead of a real reaching out towards the 
other as other, “there is erotic transcendence for, to put it briefly, the one itself in the one as 
othering itself” (BB 220). Compare Franz Rosenzweig on idealism as a “dreamland of self-
seeking” (“Idealismus: traumland der eigensucht”, Rosenzweig 1988, p. 394).
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

233
beyond the whole’ and of an open whole that remains porous. Whenever 
he arrives at this point, his tone tends to become passionate—for instance 
apropos the axiom ‘the truth is the whole’: “But if there is a truth here, is 
it the whole truth? Is it the truth of the whole? Hegel will say ‘yes’. But are 
there crucial omissions needed to make this claim? If so, the Hegelian 
whole will not be the ‘whole’. Why?” (HG 91). It is this holism that 
Desmond’s critique targets relentlessly. He points at asymmetries being 
absolved in an “inclusive process of holistic self-mediation” (HG 60); 
despite a “flicker here and there” of unmediated otherness, he signals a 
triumph of “holistic immanence” (HG 115). The dialectical method 
results in a “speculative self-mediating whole” (HG 183), hereby turning 
Hegel’s philosophy into a “speculative holism” (HG 196). There is no 
denying that this holism permeates Hegel’s work as a whole, from the 
early manuscripts to the great lecture series which he held in the last phase 
of his life. So in principle Desmond is right to apply his critique to the 
whole corpus.
Yet, Desmond fails to register the role of Protestantism in Hegel’s later 
political philosophy. Hegel’s early works do indeed express hostility to the 
Christian church, while, as Desmond puts it, “a Te Deum is sung to auton-
omous reason” (HG 33). In his later work, however, the Protestant church 
becomes the guardian of the public order (the realm of Sittlichkeit). The 
former subordination of religion to philosophy makes place for a mix of 
subordination and partition. What determines the composition of the mix-
ture is that religion is subordinated in one respect, while being allotted 
freedom in another: subordination because Hegel posits that religion can 
only survive under the tutelage of philosophy and freedom because he con-
cedes that this refuge stands apart from the world, and therefore cannot 
guide the development of the state and (more broadly) the public realm. 
These realms then remain dependent on a free, non-transformed religion 
(in casu protestant Christianity).7 The dual approach to the relation of 
philosophy and religion, of course, was bound to give rise to ­divergent 
interpretations. Once the emphasis falls on subordination, Desmond’s 
7 Nowhere this Janus-faced solution is drawn more sharply than in the closing paragraphs 
of his lectures on philosophy of religion. I quote from his notes (dated August 25, 1821): 
“Religion in die Philosophie sich flüchten—…. Welt ihnen ein Vergehen in ihr…. Aber 
Philosophie partiell  – Priesterstand isolirt—Heiligthum—Unbekümmert wie es der Welt 
gehen mag … Wie sich gestalte ist nicht unsere Sache” (Hegel 1987, p. 300). Only by find-
ing refuge in philosophy, religion will escape the onslaught of historical critique; yet this 
refuge is isolated from the world.
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

234
holism-critique is hard to refute. However, once it shifts to the juxtaposi-
tion, a more benign interpretation becomes possible, such as the one set 
forth by Merold Westphal, who argues that the subordination of religious 
representation (Vorstellung) to speculative concepts (Begriff) should not 
be taken as the key to Hegel’s philosophy: “I have little doubt that placing 
the question of the relation of religion to philosophy in the context of the 
relation of religion to the state will significantly change the discussion of 
the former issue” (Westphal 1992, p. 181). I do not think, however, that 
both interpretations are on a par. Note that partition is secondary to and 
dependent on subordination: the freedom of the Protestant church is a ‘let 
be’ granted from some superordinate position (as such it is the counterfeit 
double of the divine let be). Therefore, I side with Desmond’s diagnosis, 
while granting that it would have gained by considering the other position 
as well.
Counterfeits
The term ‘counterfeit’ seems to have emerged in Desmond’s work only 
around the turn of the century. As a technical term, it is absent in Perplexity 
and Ultimacy (1995), while five years later it is prominently present in an 
essay on Soloviev and Shestov (2000), republished five years later in Is 
There a Sabbath for Thought? From there on it was to retain a strong pres-
ence: a word count shows that in The Intimate Universal (2016) it occurs 
more than 150 times, against only 6 hits for ‘holism’.
The inspiration for the introduction of this category must have been 
Soloviev’s A Story of Anti-Christ (1900). In this story ‘counterfeit’ not 
only plays a strategic role, but is the defining element of the anti-Christ’s 
power. The concluding pages of Hegel’s God strongly echo this story, espe-
cially the passage about “the problem of the anti-Christ” being that he 
“appears the same as Christ and so can successfully pose as the true Christ” 
(HG 205).8 When used emphatically,9 ‘counterfeit’ is synonymous with 
‘idol’, a relation made explicit in The Intimate Universal: “Idols, or what 
I call the counterfeit doubles of God” (IU 345). The assumption is that 
8 A footnote refers to the essay on Soloviev and Sjestov mentioned above. We’ll return to 
this statement on introducing the second type of counterfeits.
9 Which is not always the case—so for instance on the development of the French 
Revolution: “The brothers have become the hindering others, the counterfeiting com-
rades…” (IU 145).
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

235
an idol deceitfully duplicates something that is good, deriving its power 
from this deceit.10
A further assumption is that evil is to be understood primarily from this 
vantage point. It does not mean that there would be no evil outside of this 
connection, but without exception, texts relevant to the subject matter of 
my contribution do link evil and counterfeits. The road to evil is paved 
with glittering falsehoods, for instance the promise of homecoming for 
mankind and a final liberation of creativity: In truth, this ‘saving’ of imma-
nence is a return to evil, though it announces itself as humanity finally at 
home with itself (Hegel’s zuhause sein), or the final liberation of creativity 
(Nietzsche).11 More specifically, regarding counterfeits: could one say that 
an idol is nothing more than a glitter losing its power once the fraud is 
discovered? That the spell is broken once the glitter is washed off? This 
conclusion is stated in so many words in Soloviev’s Story. At the end of the 
story, the narrator—introduced as ‘Mr. Z’—answers questions from 
bystanders to whom he had just related the story of an apocalyptic battle 
between the Pope and the Last Emperor (representing the anti-Christ). 
When asked whether the Emperor is essentially evil, he answers with a 
proverb: “All that glitters is not gold”, adding: “You know too well this 
glitter of counterfeit gold. Take it away and no real force remains—none” 
(Soloviev 2012, p. 36).
The same question is more difficult to answer in Desmond’s case. Some 
of the pertinent texts suggest indeed a situation in which no force remains 
once the glitter is removed, while others suggest that the hold of idols is 
more tenacious than Soloviev’s Mr. Z assumes.12 By distinguishing two 
different types of counterfeits I will try to obtain a clearer understanding 
10 In Timothy Keller’s Counterfeit Gods (2010), ‘counterfeit’ and ‘idol’ are also synony-
mous. However, the theme of ‘perplexity’ is without parallel in Keller.
11 The ‘saving of immanence’ refers to Hegel’s claim, reiterated by Nietzsche, that a ‘holis-
tic immanence’ would rehabilitate the phenomenal world (allegedly reduced to a mere chi-
mera by transcendent religion) (HG 204).
12 I doubt though whether Mr. Z. fully represents Soloviev’s ‘message’. If I had been 
among the bystanders, I would have asked the narrator to explain the obvious discrepancy 
between his solution (“Take it away and no real force remains”) and what he related earlier 
about the struggle between Emperor and Pope, a story climaxing with Pope Peter’s anath-
ema: “By the authority of Christ, I, the servant of the servants of God, cast you out forever, 
foul dog, from the city of God, and deliver you up to your father Satan!” (Soloviev 2012, 
p. 28). Mr. Z.’s opinion comes closer to Thomas More’s Utopians, who “wonder how any 
Man should be so much taken with the glaring doubtful Lustre of a Jewel or Stone, that can 
look up to a Star or to the Sun himself…” (Moore 1743, p. 73).
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

236
of Desmond’s ideas. My demarcation runs between two forms of dou-
bling: a one-to-one correspondence of original and counterfeit and a dou-
bling of functions rather than of things, not implying by necessity a likeness 
all across the board. The distinction is my explication of what remains 
implicit in the text.
A prime example of a counterfeit of the first kind is the illustration 
Desmond himself offers on occasion: the false money dropped in England 
by German warplanes in order to upset the money circulation. The resem-
blance the false money bore to the real was so perfect that it evoked suspi-
cion. It was the true money that showed wear and tear because of use, 
whereas the false money glittered from being unused.13 Desmond’s com-
ments on Hegel’s changed attitude towards Protestant religion provide us 
with another instance of the first type of counterfeit. Remember, I sug-
gested that this change presented a turn to the good compared to his 
earlier hostility. Desmond, however, views the same development as a 
token that “the mature Hegel” became a more “mature counterfeiter of 
God”:
The mature Hegel became a more mature counterfeiter of God; became so, 
because he rightly sees more in the original than he is trying to match and 
double with concepts. His maturity as counterfeiter, in that regard, is more 
open and true to the original—and this is the source of the persuasion he 
exerts on many. (HG 205)
Note the assumption of a strong resemblance, nothing short of a one-to-­
one correspondence of all salient features. Of course, once the falsehood 
is discovered, the spell is broken.14
An example of the second type of counterfeit is to be found in the 
immediate context of the previous quote. The resemblance now appears 
13 “During World War II German counterfeits of British currency were very successful in 
sowing confusion, until it was noticed that the notes of the counterfeits were ‘perfect’, while 
the notes of true currency always had a small flaw. The true with flaws were backed by cred-
itworthiness, the perfect and false by nothing trustworthy” (IU 447n; in similar wordings in 
IST 148–149).
14 I do not imply that ‘counterfeit’ in Hegel’s God is only used in this sense. I cannot imag-
ine that Desmond would hold that the ‘absolute idea’ (or ‘absolute spirit’) is a spitting image 
of the biblical God. Hegel’s contemporaries certainly did not think so. When Hegel (as 
mentioned earlier) proclaimed the reconciliation of speculative philosophy and Christian 
religion, the public’s reaction was sceptical and unbelieving: some took it as a proof of dis-
honesty, others as an early symptom of dementia (Rosenkranz 1844, pp. 400–401).
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

237
to be a (deceiving) similarity between ways of functioning: a matter of sub-
stitution in which something arrogates a position while seemingly carrying 
on with the functions pertaining to that position:
But—once again—what if the dynamic of spiritual energy is not the same as 
the original, perhaps even runs counter to it? Do we not then have exactly 
the problem of the anti-Christ who appears the same as Christ and so can 
successfully pose as the true Christ? How then do we distinguish the true 
original and the counterfeit? (HG 205)
As indicated before, the passage has a distinctly Solovievian touch—con-
sider for instance that ‘counterfeit’ is taken as the defining element of the 
anti-Christ’s power. By looking closely at the text, however, we can dis-
cern relevant differences. It turns out to be not simply a matter of some-
thing real being replaced by a glittering but inherently fake surrogate. The 
text speaks of a dynamic of spiritual energy that differs not just from the 
original, but possibly runs counter to it. Apparently, it is a basically whole-
some development that is deflected to serve another goal, yet in such a 
way that an appearance of similarity is kept up. In Desmondian terms: an 
erotic curving of a basically agapeic dynamic. The substitution then is not 
a substitution of one thing for something real (false money etc.), but 
involves a change of direction effected by a dissimulated change of func-
tion. Think of Augustine’s (as well as Luther’s) definition of sin as a cur-
vatus in se, that is, a process in which a reaching out for something good 
is curved backwards towards some self-serving purpose.
The dissimulation may be the work of specific individuals (philoso-
phers, for instance) but may also be the effect of group dynamics or cul-
tural shifts, possibly even of epochal dimensions. In fact, it is possible to 
adduce illustrations of both possibilities. The Intimate Universal, for 
instance, offers this instance of a ‘curving backwards’ at an individual level: 
“This is where affirming the good of the ‘to be’ as my self-affirming begins 
a turn into evil. The selving is seduced, seduces itself to absolutize its own 
self-affirming” (IU 220).15 On the other hand, the passage on the ‘prob-
lem of the anti-Christ’ quoted before points to changes on an epochal 
scale. Apparently, Desmond’s position is that individual idolatry always 
affects the larger community, while epochal changes on the other hand do 
not absolve individuals from their personal responsibility.
15 Compare: “A closure of the conatus essendi on itself” (IST 295).
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

238
Perplexity
It may suffice to show that the second type of counterfeits belie Mr. Z’s 
claim that once their glitter is taken away, no real force would remain. A 
directional change is likely to create its own historical continuity; it may 
take generations to undo the consequences (if at all). Hence the almost 
audible bewilderment in the very last sentence of Hegel’s God: “I often 
wonder if we have not woken yet, though we have denied Hegel, or 
rebelled, times out of number” (HG 207).
This bewilderment, or perplexity, is the theme to which we turn now. 
The Augustinian idea of evil as a privatio boni will provide us with a key to 
decode a number of statements on good and evil that seem contradictory 
at first glance. Comparing the texts that speak about perplexity, bewilder-
ment and so on, one finds many references to a confusing symbiosis of 
good and evil. So, for instance, in these passages from Perplexity and 
Ultimacy: “All being is good, even the evil” (PU 241); “We fail to under-
stand an unconstrained gift” (PU 221); “This means that God’s generos-
ity is horrifying, since it seems to suggest: All is permitted. Freedom means 
all is permitted” (ibid.). Jumping to The Intimate Universal, written two 
decades later, we find similar expressions of bewilderment, for instance 
concerning the soothing effect of beauty. Apropos Keats’s adage ‘a thing 
of beauty is a joy forever’, Desmond relates a story about a tyrant with 
blood on his hands being entertained by lovely music: “This is the per-
plexity the story poses for us: Is this what beauty is—music wrung from 
hell, concealing hell as it is, and making it look like a heaven?” (IU 312)16; 
“Backstage of beauty we see the mechanisms of hell. Recall Nietzsche: we 
need the ‘lies’ of art to save us from the ‘truth’” (IU 312–313). It seems 
we are left in a permanent state of confusion, with little light to guide us. 
Light is good—yes!—but the false glitter of counterfeits also participate in 
the light: “The daimon and the angel are intermediaries, but the daimonic 
can become diabolical, and the first angels fell. (…) By what light tell this 
counterfeit light, since it too is in the light? How could light counterfeit 
light?” (IST 147). No use seeking one’s inner light through a voyage 
inward:
16 Compare the almost identical wordings in ISB 51, the only difference being that here 
the contrast is more explicitly put as one between surface (the musical beauty) and the deeper 
reality of violence: “The surface of the beautiful hides the working of hell” (ibid.). I will 
return to this quote below, when dealing with the ‘incognito’.
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

239
It is just in the desert that the torment of the counterfeits of God makes 
itself most felt; for it is in our deepest emptiness that idols seem to appear as 
from nothing, and tempt us with their different salvations. Who will show 
us the difference between salvation and salvation, salvation and perdition? 
This is another side of the radical perplexity the issue of the anti-Christ 
raises. (IST 191)
The key to rightly understanding the “all is permitted” is the assump-
tion of a fundamental goodness, the “goodness of creation” (Desmond 
1995, p. 221), coupled to a peculiar application of the Augustinian priva-
tio boni. ‘Goodness of creation’ only rarely occurs in so many words in the 
texts I consulted. We encounter ‘being given to be’ or simply ‘given to be’, 
always with the connotation of a good gift, far more frequently. Over 
against current postulates of self-creation, Desmond posits “a ‘being given 
to be’ that is prior to striving” (IST 330). But note that this ‘striving’ 
potentially goes awry from the start. The idea that freedom implies that all 
is permitted must be taken in this light, as meaning that ‘given to be’ as 
such does not pose a restriction on what is permitted. As quoted above: 
the ‘given to be’ is an ‘unrestrained gift’ that does not dictate or prescribe 
any proper use. Although Desmond subscribes to the Augustinian defini-
tion of evil as a privatio boni, meaning literally that evil has ‘to take away’ 
from the good to do its corrupting work, hardly any limits are set to the 
‘taking away’.17 This is why statements such as those quoted above leave 
the impression (wrong as it may be) that good and evil are equiprimordial. 
Nothing characterizes Desmond’s philosophy more, I believe, than the 
combination of a basic trust in the goodness of creation and the affirma-
tion of a perplexing potency of human freedom, with no restricting power 
to prevent it from running the whole gamut of possibilities, even to the 
point where, as Hegel’s God puts it: “There will be no other god but our-
selves to remind us of our hubris, now dancing around itself and flattering 
itself with intoxicating and holy names like ‘creativity’” (HG 204).
17 In this respect Desmond’s philosophy differs strongly from the tradition from which I 
stem, neo-Calvinism with its stress on structures and norms holding for and protecting the 
good creation. As I said elsewhere of Herman Dooyeweerd, the foremost philosopher in this 
milieu: he “had an unyielding trust that the creation order can be bent but never broken or 
by-passed. He held that hypostatizing one aspect of the normative order at the expense of 
other norms cannot but lead to the normative order bouncing back in the course of his-
tory—a reaction interpreted as immanent justice” (Griffioen 2015, pp.  196–198). 
Understandably, ‘perplexity’ in his thought lacks the intensity it has in Desmond.
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

240
Thus far only two types of counterfeits were distinguished. In fact, we 
encountered already instances of idols that cannot be subsumed under 
either one. Take for instance our last quote: “There will be no other god 
but ourselves to remind us of our hubris” (HG 204). Can this ‘god’ still 
be called a ‘counterfeit double’? If this god can at all be called a counter-
feit, it is not in the sense of a copy bearing a close resemblance to an origi-
nal, be it in appearance or in its functioning. The hubris mentioned in the 
text does not pose as a force to good, dissimulating its will to power. 
There is no keeping up of appearances while hell is causing havoc behind 
the façade.18 Instead, the pose is one of a brutal “I am, and there is none 
beside me”,19 without even attempting to make itself acceptable by mim-
icking something else.
When we compare The Intimate Universal to Hegel’s God and other 
texts from that time, we perceive a shift towards the ‘third type’. One 
indication is the increased frequency of terms like ‘secret’, ‘hidden’, and 
especially ‘incognito’ (occurring almost 60 times), all of which signal a 
retreat of the good, be it as real presence or as counterfeit (first and second 
type). Concomitantly, perplexity displays a paralleled differentiation. In 
texts we considered before, it refers to similitudes that were so close as to 
be utterly confusing. In contrast, the perplexity linked to the incognito 
appears to be caused by a blatant disconnection. What Desmond has reg-
istered is an increased indifference in our culture to any pre-given stan-
dards. The prevailing attitude in much of modern life is one of ni dieu ni 
maître. The flipside to this is that there is little need to counterfeit those 
standards.20 However, the ‘given to be’ remains constitutive, also once the 
relation to present-day culture has become tenuous. This is borne out by 
the following passages: “There is relation even in what is separate. It is 
impossible to confine agapeic service to any one space or sphere—even 
though it is more than happy to abide as incognito” (IU 55); “Still Caesar 
18 Remember the earlier example of music “wrung from hell”: “The surface of the beauti-
ful hides the working of hell” (Section 4.1).
19 “This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is 
none beside me…”: Zephaniah 2: 15, KJV, compare Isaiah 47: 8: “Therefore hear now this, 
thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and 
none else beside me…” (KJV).
20 For simplicity’s sake, I express myself in terms of ‘standards’. I trust it has become clear 
already that these standards should not be conceived as transcendent and invariable. Instead, 
for Desmond, the source of normativity is the Logos, the ‘intimate universal’, expressing 
itself as the ‘agapeic dynamics’ mentioned above.
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

241
and his empire come second, are derivative from the incognito of the aga-
peics” (IU 363).
Sure enough, the agapeic is “more than happy to abide as incognito”, 
but what about the ordo cognoscendi? How do we, who “do not see our 
signs” (Psalm 74:9), know that the good is present, albeit incognito, and 
will prevail in the end?
From this, one can gather that the tone of The Intimate Universal must 
seem rather sombre, if not pessimistic. This is not the case, however, as the 
book ends on a positive note. It speaks of “the heart purged of its idols”, 
and of “the porosity of the soul unclogged” (IU 418). The final part deals 
as a whole with the praxis pietatis within the bounds of the family. It is 
here that “the incognito divine is mixed in with the family” (IU 417). So, 
what is due to remain incognito in the public realm may yet become tan-
gible in other forms of communal life! The message is definitely not that 
hope will survive in private niches only. It is not a home sweet home. 
Rather, the family is viewed as a bridgehead for redirecting other domains 
of communal life—provided its piety stays intact:
The incognito divine is mixed in with the family. We have seen here an inti-
mate piety and in this elemental form of sociality, if this piety is not guarded, 
it is made all the more difficult that proper reverence for divine measure will 
flourish outside the family in other public commons. The intimate is not only 
in the familial commons, but if its piety is not there, there are repercussions 
in other forms of community, social, political, and religious. (IU 416–417)
To be redirected in this sense would mean for public life to become porous 
both in its horizontal and vertical relations—recall the double use of the 
replica of St Brendan’s boat. It means living under an open heaven, yet 
remaining finite. This is, of course, what Desmond captures as the between. 
The distinctions between three types of counterfeits are mine, not 
Desmond’s. I trust they will help to appreciate the depth and richness of 
his texts.
Bibliography
Desmond, William. 1995. Perplexity and Ultimacy. Albany: SUNY.
———. 2006. On the Way: Travelling with Sander Griffioen. In Sander Griffioen, 
Een weg gaan. Budel: Damon.
  THE REAL AND THE GLITTER: APROPOS WILLIAM DESMOND’S HEGEL’S… 

242
———. 2016. The Intimate Universal: The Hidden Porosity Among Religion, Art, 
Philosophy, and Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gadamer, H.G. 1983. Heideggers Wege. Studien zum Spätwerk. Tübingen: Mohr.
Griffioen, Sander. 2010. Towards a Philosophy of God: A Study in William 
Desmond’s Thought. Philosophia Reformata 75: 117–140.
———. 2015. Action & Reflection, II. Philosophia Reformata 80: 178–203.
Hegel, G.W.F. 1955. Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte. Ed. 
J. Hoffmeister, Band I. Hamburg: Meiner.
———. 1987. Vorlesungsmanuskripte I (1816–1831). In Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 
Hegel. Gesammelte Werke, ed. Walter Jaeschke. Band 17. Hamburg: Meiner.
Keller, Timothy. 2010. Counterfeit Gods: When the Empty Promises of Love, Money 
and Power Let You Down. London: Hodder & Stoughton.
Moore, Thomas. 1743. Utopia or the Happy Republic [1516]. Trans. Robert 
Foulis. Glasgow: Gilbert Burnet.
Rosenkranz, Karl. 1844. G.W.F. Hegels Leben. Berlin: Dunker & Humblot.
Rosenzweig, Fr. 1988. Der Stern der Erlősung. Frankfurt: Bibliothek Suhrkamp.
Soloviev, Vladimir Sergaevitch. 2012. A Story of Anti-Christ [1900]. Trans. 
Unnamed. Lexington: Kassock Bros.
Westphal, Merold. 1992. Hegel, Freedom and Modernity. Albany: State University 
of New York Press.
 
S. GRIFFIOEN

243
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_14
CHAPTER 14
Transcendence in Metaxology 
and Sophiology
Josephien van Kessel
The first time I came across metaxu as a philosophical notion was in the 
social philosophy, or better Sophiology, of Sergei Bulgakov (1871–1944). 
Bulgakov points to the origin of the term from Plato’s Symposium, meaning 
the ‘in-between’ or ‘middle ground:’ “In creating the world, God put a 
gran’ (border) between himself and the world, which unites and separates 
the one from the other (a kind of metaxu in the sense of Plato)” (Bulgakov 
1999, p. 193). Bulgakov names this metaxu Sophia, God’s Wisdom, Love 
and Providenie (Providence).1 In my search for this term on the Internet, it 
was not for long that I discovered William Desmond’s metaxology. It struck 
me as more than a coincidence that both Bulgakov and Desmond call their 
philosophical projects, Sophiology and ­metaxology, after this ‘between’ of 
God and world, that is, of transcendence and immanence.
1 The Russian and English words have the same Latin stem. Sophia is a common female name 
and often endowed with a feminine nature in Russian Sophiology. I write Sophia and Sophiology 
with a capital letter, but ‘it’ when referring to Sophia in order to stress its nature as a principle. I 
write a lower-case initial letter when it is used as an adjective, for example, sophiological or sophic.
J. van Kessel (*) 
Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands

244
A short but intensive perusal of Desmond’s works only confirmed my 
intuition that metaxology and Sophiology are similar projects. In the first 
place, in the broadness of their fields of application: sociology, philosophy 
(i.e. metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics etc.) and religion or theology. In the 
second place, because their explicit task is to understand Sophia/metaxu 
in all these realms. I found further confirmation in Desmond’s article 
‘God Beyond the Whole: Between Solov’ëv and Shestov’ in which he 
compared his thought with that of two important Russian religious phi-
losophers, Vladimir Solov’ëv (1853–1900) and Lev Shestov (1866–1938).
Solov’ëv is considered to be the father of Russian Sophiology, although 
he never called his own philosophy Sophiology (Bulgakov would be the 
first to call it as such), but ‘theosophy,’ nor did he write openly on Sophia 
in his philosophical works, only in his poetry. Lev Shestov is a contempo-
rary of Bulgakov and belonged to the same class2 of Russian religious 
intelligentsia in the Silver Age (1890–1920) that was occupied with the 
interpretation of Solov’ëv’s legacy. Some were, like Shestov, critical of this 
legacy, others, like Bulgakov, felt themselves the spiritual heirs of Solov’ëv, 
and tried to develop his philosophical thought further. In his article, 
Desmond positions himself and metaxology “[B]between Solov’ëv and 
Shestov” regarding the subject of “God Beyond the Whole” (IST 
167–199).
In this chapter, I will initially try to answer the following questions: 
whether Desmond’s interpretation of Solov’ëv’s philosophy is correct and 
whether he is right in positioning himself between Solov’ëv and Shestov. 
My further question concerns the implications of Desmond’s interpreta-
tion of Bulgakov’s Sophiology, when I speak of Sophiology and metaxol-
ogy as analogous developments or similar projects. To answer these 
questions, in the first section, I will give a short overview of Bulgakov’s 
Sophiology in the context of Russian religious philosophical thought, with 
specific attention to his characterization of Sophia as metaxu of God and 
world. In the second section, I will turn to Desmond’s criticism of 
Solov’ëv’s presumed holism, idealism and rationalism, which will high-
light the position of both metaxology and Sophiology with regard to these 
-isms. In the third section, I will try to answer Desmond’s six questions at 
the end of his article, regarding “the limitations of the holistic God,” from 
Bulgakov’s sophiological perspective. This will make clear whether 
2 The Russian intelligentsia is often called a ‘classless class’ consisting of people with similar 
education. The religious intelligentsia is a relatively small subgroup.
 
J. VAN KESSEL

245
Desmond’s criticism of Solov’ëv holds in case of Bulgakov’s Sophiology. 
In the fourth section, I present metaxology and Sophiology as similar phil-
osophical projects, not only in content, subject matter, formal aspects, 
presuppositions and so on, but also in legitimation and objectives.
Sophia as Metaxu
For Bulgakov, Sophia is the hidden order of creation that reveals itself in 
this world, for example, as beauty in art and in nature, as truth in science 
and philosophy and as good in society. As Bulgakov writes in his posthu-
mously published autobiographical notes: “Yes, here3 I took into my heart 
the revelation of Sophia (otkrovenie Sofii),4 here into my soul was put the 
jewel that I looked for in the course of my whole blind and troubled life” 
(Bulgakov 1946, p. 13). He would be occupied with the study of Sophia, 
that is, Sophiology, throughout his professional career: from its start in the 
late 1880s as young Marxist political economist, who denied all religious 
experiences, during his reorientation into an Idealist social philosopher in 
the early 1900s, and into a Christian religious philosopher and Christian 
socialist ‘publicist’ (publitsist5) in the late 1900s and early 1910s, as an 
ordained priest from 1918 on, and as a theologian during his subsequent 
career in exile in Paris from 1924 until his death in 1944.
Sophiology is, furthermore, an attempt to acquire positive knowledge 
of Sophia, which is not in line with the Orthodox tradition of apophasis, 
and which is also the reason that both Bulgakov and Solov’ëv were often 
accused of gnosticism (Vaganova 2011, p. 64ff).6 The same reproach can 
be made at the address of Desmond’s metaxology, since this also tries to 
find a logos of metaxu. In the course of his work, Bulgakov gave many 
characterizations (or identifications) of Sophia. Sophia is Slava (Glory), 
Krasota (Beauty), Mudrost’ (Wisdom), Tserkov’ (Church), to name only a 
3 He was baptized in the parish church of Livny.
4 Bulgakov writes ‘otkrovenie Sofii’ and ‘Sofiia otkryvaetsia’: Sophia is an agent that can 
reveal itself. On the other hand, Russian grammar allows an interpretation of a God who 
reveals his Sophia.
5 Publitsist and publitsistika are untranslatable like many Russian terms. It is a kind of politi-
cal journalism. See also Schrooyen (2006, p. 7).
6 Sophiology is therefore cataphatic, and not apophatic as traditional Orthodox philosophy 
and theology that deny the possibility of positive knowledge of God, who is absolutely tran-
scendent to human thought. On apophasis as a characteristic of Orthodox spirituality, see van 
den Bercken (2011, p. 125).
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

246
few of its identifications. One of Sophia’s central qualifications, however, 
is gran’ (border) and sviaz’ (connection) between transcendence and 
immanence, between Divine and human worlds: Sophia is the ultimate 
metaxu (between/mezhdu) (Bulgakov 1999, p.  193), both absolutely 
transcendent to created order as its source and fully immanent in created 
order as its ontological root and principle.
For Bulgakov, the between of God and world has the important con-
notation of and, which is an antinomic7 reality: Sophia is both God and 
not God, earthly and Divine, created and uncreated. According to 
Bulgakov, an antinomy is a “contradiction for rational thought,” and the 
main antinomy of religious consciousness is the simultaneous absolute 
transcendence and immanence of God (Bulgakov 1999-I, p.  100). 
Desmond likewise signals a metaxological ‘not’ that “separates and allows 
communication” (p. 172) and is part of “hyperbolic thought.” Desmond’s 
theory of creation is also consonant with Bulgakov’s theory of creation 
from ‘nothing’ (mè-on, not ouk-on). Sophia is exactly the between (metaxu) 
of transcendence and immanence, and is both the relation and the distinc-
tion. This metaxic quality of Sophia is also the ultimate precondition of 
the ideal form of human sociality/community, that is, Orthodox sobornost’ 
(Bulgakov 2003, p.  119).8 This sense of community is crucial for 
Desmond’s metaxology as well.
Desmond’s Criticism of Solov’ëv’s Holism 
and Rationalism: What About His ‘Sophia-Doctrine’?
In his article, Desmond criticizes Solov’ëv’s philosophy via Shestov.9 At 
first, he seems to agree with Shestov’s criticism of Solov’ëv’s holism and 
abstract rationalism.10 Further on, however, Desmond repeatedly defends 
Solov’ëv against Shestov’s attacks, and does this in a ‘negative’ way, that is, 
by attacking Shestov’s position as having no sense of “God beyond the 
7 Bulgakov derives his use of antinomy from his friend and Orthodox priest Pavel Florenskii 
(2004 [1914]).
8 See also Van Kessel (2010) on Bulgakov’s interpretation of sobornost’.
9 Desmond uses Shestov’s article on Solov’ëv: “Speculation and Apocalypse The Religious 
Philosophy of Vladimir Solovyov,” first published in Sovremeniye zapiski, nrs. 33–34 
(1927–1928).
10 This was a frequent criticism of Solov’ëv’s philosophy by Russian religious philosophers 
of the Silver Age, amongst others by Bulgakov, who confesses he is more inspired by 
Solov’ëv’s poetry than by his philosophy (Bulgakov 2008, p. 70).
 
J. VAN KESSEL

247
Whole” (IST 181) and being unable to “distinguish between Christ and 
anti-Christ” (IST 192). He, furthermore, asks, whether Solov’ëv in this 
respect can do more and, more specifically, his “doctrine of Sophia.” (IST 
181).
Desmond’s main aim in the text is to explore some of the philosophical 
and religious ambiguities that are attached to “the idea of the whole” 
especially in relation to God (IST 167). He uses Solov’ëv and Shestov with 
this aim in mind and more, in particular, the “nonnegotiable differences 
between the two” (ibid.). The first difference is that Solov’ëv wants philo-
sophically to affirm an ‘All-unity’ (vseedinstvo), while Shestov protests 
against All-unity in calling it ‘omnitude’ (vsemstvo), “on behalf of the free 
singularity of the human, and the personalism of the creator God” (IST 
168). Another difference is Solov’ëv’s presumed rationalism versus 
Shestov’s irrationalism.
Referring to an early work of Solov’ëv, Lectures on Divine Humanity 
(1995), Desmond concludes that there are indeed “idealist currents in 
Solov’ëv’s thought” (IST 177) and “resonances of this holistic God in 
Solov’ëv” (IST 169) because in idealism God is the ultimate whole of 
wholes. According to Desmond, this is also the reason for idealism to 
favor emanation to creation. Emanation suggests the continuity of the 
world and God, and the immanence in the world of the divine and of the 
world in the divine, whereas creation suggests the transcendence of the 
divine, hence the non-divinity of the world: “The holistic God stresses the 
sameness of world and God, the God of creation the difference” (IST 
170). The holistic God assimilates, whereas the God of creation “keeps 
open an essential difference” (IST 172): “As with idealism, opposition and 
fragmentation are not denied, but they are situated within the compass of 
a more inclusive unity” (IST 178). This unity ultimately is the telos of dif-
ferences and many-ness. Desmond allows that Solov’ëv’s All-unity is “not 
the block unity or absorbing God,” for he tries to “grant some qualified 
independence to the members of the ‘All-unity’” (ibid.). He, however, 
also stresses Solov’ëv’s negative attitude to the self-assertion of difference 
and singularity over against the whole, that is, to egoism.
The deeper kernel of Shestov’s criticism of Solov’ëv (and of Desmond’s 
criticism of Sophiology) is the connection of rationalism and necessity, and 
thus the un-freedom of the singular (IST 172–173). Shestov pleads for 
the freedom of creation and of revelation. Every revelation comes from 
beyond the whole, from transcendence, but every rationalization tries to 
include this beyond into the whole, to make it immanent (IST 175). 
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

248
Furthermore, Desmond follows Shestov’s criticism of the rationalism con-
tained in Solov’ëv’s idealism, and calls for a meta-logical logic, that is, a 
logic that is not univocal. The problem is more specifically rationalistic 
universalism, which ends up hostile to the intimate singularities of life. 
However, already in his master dissertation Crisis of Western Philosophy 
Against the Positivists (1874) and continuing in his doctoral dissertation 
Criticism of Abstract Principles (1877–1880), Solov’ëv criticizes the 
abstract principles of rationality and strives for integral knowledge (tsel’noe 
znanie), a notion he took from the Slavophiles (Zenkovskii 2011, p. 461).
Furthermore, according to Desmond, Solov’ëv continues the more pro-
gressive historical teleologies such as we find in idealist thought (i.e. in Plato, 
Plotinus, Kant, Hegel and Schelling) and identifies Compte’s Grand-Être 
(p. 179) with his own divine-human ‘All-unity,’ that is, with Bogochelovechestvo. 
This ‘absolutization of humanity’ is compared by Shestov with idolatry, that 
is, with being the counterfeit double of God. Bulgakov would defend 
Solov’ëv’s Bogochelovechestvo against this accusation of being an idol, but he 
attacks Marxism and populism in exactly this vein because it puts mere 
humanity—and even the individual human being—in this position of idol. 
Desmond, in this respect, likewise does not agree with Shestov: not 
Solov’ëv’s Divine humanity is the idol, but Comte’s Grand-Être.
As Desmond, furthermore, confirms, Solov’ëv’s thought about ‘com-
munity’ is essentially different from thoughts of Hegel, Spinoza and 
Schelling, despite “idealistic resonances” (IST 179). He starts to suspect 
that “participation in the intimate universal of a worshipping community 
puts brakes on the temptation to render the ‘All-unity’ in terms closer to 
a homogeneous, neutral, impersonal universal,” and “it is closer to this 
that his [Solov’ëv’s] heart lies rather than to the idol of rational necessity 
or indeed the holistic God of idealistic philosophy” (IST 179).
Sophia and Anti-Christ
According to Desmond, Solov’ëv started to suspect these problems of a 
counterfeit double of the absolute whole/God and related these to the 
problem of the anti-Christ: “The holistic god usurping the God beyond 
the whole” (IST 180). Desmond points to “the doctrine of Sophia which 
gives some sense of the God beyond the whole” of idealist holism, and 
which “might be seen as intending to keep open the ontological difference of 
Creator and creation” (IST 181): “Is not the doctrine of Sophia a pointer 
to a middle between utter transcendence and an otherwise godless imma-
 
J. VAN KESSEL

249
nence?” (IST 181). Even if Shestov would call this Sophia an idol, why not 
consider it as “a name for a community of wisdom and love between the 
God beyond the whole and the divine-human community coming to be 
within the finite whole” (IST 181).
Furthermore, according to Desmond, the maternal and feminine meta-
phorics of Solov’ëv’s Sophia are as intimately personal as the dominant 
“paternal metaphorics of the Old Testament transcendence” that Shestov 
prefers, and love of the mother is “more a fleshed bond, hence has an 
incarnational dimension,” than love via the father (IST 182, italics 
Desmond). In his spirituality, Solov’ëv “had an intensely aesthetic, embod-
ied sense of the feminine Sophia.” (IST 182), and his Sophia-doctrine, 
according to Desmond, seems more the result of theia mania, than of 
idolatry of the rational concept of which Shestov accused him. Desmond’s 
last ‘reproach’ to Solov’ëv regards trying to make sense of this fire and 
madness in the idealistic language of the ‘All-unity’. The reproach regards 
not ‘trying to make sense’ as such, which is the task of philosophy, but of 
Solov’ëv doing this in the wrong language: “The language of the whole is 
not adequate to this beyond” (IST 182). In my view, this is exactly the 
reason that Bulgakov developed his ‘sophiological language,’ which fol-
lows Desmond’s recommendation “to find a better language may be as 
much a task for philosophy as it is a matter of willingness to listen to the 
sacred languages of holy scripture” (IST 182).
The deeper problem of idealism is, according to Desmond, the prob-
lem of the anti-Christ and the dualism of worldly and spiritual power. 
Power as superbia is the usurpation of spiritual power (IST 183).11 The 
God beyond is a god beyond this power “claiming ‘nothing beyond’” 
(ibid.). Those, who do not bow for the anti-Christ, do this in name of the 
one that is beyond. Here, Desmond refers to the three temptations of 
Christ. The temptation of the anti-Christ is the third temptation of spiri-
tual pride. The first of bread is the temptation of economics and of worldly 
comfort. The second is that of autocracy and worldly power. The third is 
of spiritual power, which is also Nietzsche’s great temptation, according to 
Desmond (IST 184), the same Nietzsche, who was so admired by Shestov.
Solov’ëv’s anti-Christ is saved by the counterfeit double from this last 
temptation of superbia, and not by a power of God. As Desmond acknowl-
edges, “there is a difference between the City of God and the City of Man 
11 This connects to the political philosophical meaning of Sophiology, see van Kessel 
(2012).
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

250
(Augustine)” (IST 185, italics by Desmond). Time, according to 
Desmond, is the mixture (or the medium/between of that mixture) of the 
two cities. A counterfeit double of God is an idol “made by man for man.” 
Idols are social ideals that are “inwardly corrupted by the will-to-power of 
superbia” (IST 186). From the outside, the anti-Christ looks like the God-­
man, but, inwardly, he is corrupted. As Desmond admits, Solov’ëv’s super-
man (sverkhchelovek) and Nietzsche’s Übermensch “seem to be very like 
doubles of each other. Yet, while seeming very close, they are entirely 
opposed: in the refusal of God in the second, and in the impossibility of 
the first without God” (IST 187). Although Nietzsche “is said to have 
brought us to the twilight of the idols, but did he? Or did he manufacture 
a new idol?” (ibid.). Desmond answers these rhetorical questions in the 
affirmative.
Furthermore, even Nietzsche “seems (in Will to Power) very sympa-
thetic to a new pantheism” (ibid.). This is, however, not “the rational 
whole of idealism, but the rhapsodic Dionysian whole of will-to-power 
and Amor fati” (IST 189). Both are counterfeit doubles of God: it is a 
“war among pretenders to prophecy” (IST 191), in which Solov’ëv and his 
short story of anti-Christ are of more help than Shestov, who “seems 
unable to distinguish between Christ and anti-Christ” (IST 192). Shestov 
is right in demanding ‘singular finesse’, but Solov’ëv is also right in 
demanding systematic understanding, that is, philosophy (IST 190).
Six Questions to Sophiology and Holism
Desmond’s six questions to holism concern what he calls the limitations of 
the holistic God, which address: the origin of difference, the fall in time, 
the necessity of the arising of the many, the space for freedom, the status 
of the singular individual and the character of the community of God and 
creation (IST 193–199). To exactly these questions, Bulgakov gave an 
ideal-realist answer by means of Sophiology.
Regarding the first point, Bulgakov agrees with Desmond that to see 
difference only as the result of the fall is to see it too negatively: both want 
to affirm plurality as positive. Furthermore, according to Desmond, the 
fall degrades the temporal, instead of elevating it: speaking in these terms 
of the good of the plural and the temporal “is not adequate to the good” 
(IST 193). Being in the between “does not fall; it arises into being” (ibid.). 
In Desmond’s metaxology, the origin of difference is not the fall in time, 
but an arising in time: time is supported on the love of eternity, which 
 
J. VAN KESSEL

251
cannot be an erotic love, but only an agapeic love. He suspects in Solov’ëv’s 
interpretation of love in Smysl liubvi (The Meaning of Love, 1991) more 
eroticism than agapeism, as important emphases are lacking in Solov’ëv’s 
conception of love: the agapeic release of finite creation as other, the 
‘nothing’ between god and world, the community within creation and 
between creation and God (IST 194). In his theological Sophiology, 
Bulgakov would develop exactly this criticism of Solov’ëv’s overly erotic 
love for Divine Sophia, as well as these emphases: the empirical world is 
created by God from ‘nothing,’ which is not the absolute ouk-on, but the 
relative mè-on,12 and it is not the result of emanation; the act of creation 
was a voluntary act, not a necessary act; the central importance and abun-
dance of God’s love as love for Its other, that is, Sophia and so on.
Desmond’s third question on the necessity of the arising of the many is 
a basic question for Bulgakov as well, as it undermines both the freedom 
of God as creator and of human freedom as created, that is, the possibility 
of “the contingency of finite beings in the between” (IST 195). If neces-
sity rules creation, mankind does not have to do anything, and, concern-
ing Desmond’s fourth question, there is no “space for freedom,” that is, 
for the unfinished and the open, in view of the holistic God (ibid.). 
According to Bulgakov, the question of creaturely freedom can only be 
answered in a Philosophy of Economy,13 because economy is this fight, and 
synthesis between freedom and necessity (Bulgakov 2000, p. 196ff).
Desmond’s agapeic God, furthermore, “loves the idiotic, and delights 
in the sweet singularity that dances or dares before it” (IST 195). This 
formulation strongly reminds of both Solov’ëv’s and Bulgakov’s Sophia, 
who is the “love of Love, i.e. the eternal object of Divine Love,” “enjoy-
ment, joyous feeling and play” (Bulgakov 1999-I, pp. 193–194) and who, 
according to Proverbs 8: 30–32, “was His delight day by day, Frolicking 
before Him at all times.”14 This characterization strongly connects Sophia 
with singularity, and with Desmond’s fifth question on the status of the 
singular individual, that is, the ‘person’ in Russian religious philosophy. In 
holism, this idiotic singularity should vanish into the more encompassing 
whole, or is estranged from the whole, and in some cases is seen as the 
12 See Bulgakov (2000, p. 328), Glossary of Greek Terms; Bulgakov (1999-I, pp. 170–171).
13 Philosophy of Economy, in which Bulgakov introduced Sophia as a social principle, is both 
his doctor’s dissertation in and goodbye to political economy as a science.
14 Bulgakov (2000, pp. 57, 69, 99). See also Kornblatt (2009, p. 36), who stresses the 
connection of Sophia with laughter in Solov’ëv’s Sophia-poems (p. 91).
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

252
center of evil. Desmond connects this point of the singular individual as 
the source of evil also with Solov’ëv’s philosophy. Although it is true that 
Solov’ëv is very negative about egoism of the individual in Smysl liubvi 
(1991, p. 170), he is also very negative of any egoism à deux (and more). 
Furthermore, Solov’ëv would never consent to make idiotic singularity 
disappear into a more encompassing whole, nor is this his definition of a 
successful love relation between two or more persons, or in a successful 
love relation between man and God. According to Solov’ëv (1991, 
p.  179), in their ideal form, all relations are characterized by syzygia 
(conjunction).
Love allows the difference of self and other, and even demands it. 
Desmond sees the singular as a particular whole in itself but also tries to 
articulate a “community of open wholes” in the between, beyond the 
dialectical language of parts and wholes (IST 197). This resembles what 
Desmond calls Solov’ëv’s “ecumenical community,” and what Bulgakov 
calls sobornost (catholicity), which is the ideal form of Orthodox (ecclesias-
tical) society (ibid.). Furthermore, Bulgakov sees willful self-assertiveness, 
what he names ‘heroism,’ as the wrong attitude of the individual.15 He 
would agree fully with Desmond’s assertion: “Such willful self-assertive 
humanity is not the truth of singularity. To come anew to the porosity of 
being it must pass through a penitential un-selving” (ibid.). This “peni-
tential un-selving,” Bulgakov (1997, p. 114) called poslushanie (obedi-
ence) and identified with Weber’s inner-worldly asceticism.
According to Bulgakov, as well as Augustine, evil is not a quality of 
the world itself, nor is the plurality or contingency of being after the fall 
in history. Evil is only in the choice of the individual against God or its 
refusal of community with God. Regarding Desmond’s sixth question 
on the character of community of god and creation, Bulgakov would 
agree with his disapproval of the holistic model of community as self-
communication. A holistic community seeks to reconcile oppositions, 
“But all otherness is not opposition,” as Desmond affirms, and some 
othernesses “are not merely provisional,” but essential (IST 198). 
Bulgakov tried to understand this difference in an antinomical, and not 
in a dialectical, way.
15 In his famous Vekhi-article “Heroism and Asceticism,” published in 1909.
 
J. VAN KESSEL

253
Metaxology and Sophiology
On the one hand, both Desmond’s metaxology and Bulgakov’s Sophiology 
attack ‘pure idealism’ for its abstract holism, which Bulgakov called 
‘monism,’ and its abstract rationalism. On the other hand, both try to save 
from idealism what is valuable. Sergei Khoruzhii (in Florenskii 2004, 
p. 215) not without reason calls Florenskii, Solov’ëv and Bulgakov ‘reli-
gious materialists.’ Likewise, Bulgakov in his doctoral speech on September 
21, 1912, called his own approach “mystical or religious materialism” 
(Bulgakov 2009, p. 373). Both Desmond and Bulgakov engage in dia-
logue with Hegelian dialectics. Bulgakov would find an alternative in 
‘anti-nomism,’ while Desmond tries to replace univocal logic, that is, dia-
lectics, with a meta-logical, that is, a metaxological approach. Both in a 
similar sense try to keep us open or make us open up to the “porosity of 
being” in the between.
In my opinion, Desmond accuses Solov’ëv too lightly of a tendency to 
holism, and too lightly identifies the ancient Hen kai pan (One the All, 
IST 169) with Solov’ëv’s and Bulgakov’s vseedinstvo (All-unity). Bulgakov 
speaks of his own ‘holism’ as pan-en-theism in opposition to pan-theism 
(Zenkovskii 2011, p. 821), while Desmond identifies the two from the 
start (IST 168). According to me, in this way, Desmond allows for less 
difference in the whole, that is, only addresses the reductive whole of ide-
alistic holism. Desmond’s response to Solov’ëv resembles a rhetorical 
device, that is, the straw man argument. Through Shestov’s criticism of 
Solov’ëv, Desmond criticizes something or someone else, and this some-
thing has to do with ‘contemporary panentheism’ (IST 170), and “a par-
ticular formation of the dialectical way of thinking” (i.e. Hegelian ‘univocal 
logic’), all forms of “modern Eleaticism, followed in the essentials by all 
the major thinkers” (IST 174), referring to Spinoza, Solov’ëv, 
Schleiermacher, Kant, Hegel and Schelling, and forms of postmodern 
thought, that is, Nietzsche and his followers (IST 187).
Clearly, Desmond singles out the doctrine of Sophia as pointing to the 
possibility of a language that is adequate to this beyond. It is perhaps sig-
nificant that Solov’ëv did not openly speak about Sophia in his published 
philosophical works,16 but he did evoke her and was in communication 
with her in his poetry. Interestingly, Bulgakov valued Solov’ëv’s poetry 
16 He did so only in his unpublished work La Sophia, which he wrote before his published 
philosophical dissertations, and in his published poetry.
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

254
more than his philosophical works, where Solov’ëv used Hegelian dialec-
tics in a rather strict way. Bulgakov developed instead an antinomical way 
of thinking and speaking about Sophia. For Bulgakov, Sophia is not God, 
even though God at times may identify with his Sophia, nor is Sophia a 
hypostasis or ‘person,’ which she clearly is for Solov’ëv, and which is highly 
valued by Desmond. In my opinion, Bulgakov is the least personalistic of 
‘Sophiologues,’ as his Sophia is not a hypostasis or person, although some-
times coming close to this qualification, for example, in Svet nevechernii 
(1917), but the principle of ‘hypostas-ity,’ Sophia is not a woman, but the 
principle of femininity, is not Jesus-Logos, but his bride, that is, the 
Church. For Bulgakov, clearly, Solov’ëv’s too personal interpretation of 
Divine Wisdom is a problem: if Solov’ëv is serious about his personal 
‘love-affair’ with Sophia, what does this reveal about his self-evaluation? 
Did he see himself as a prophet? As Christ? Did Solov’ëv himself discern 
between Christ and anti-Christ? These are important questions, which 
Bulgakov wanted to answer in his Sophiology, in which Sophia is not an 
individual person, but Church, and the community of sobornost’, a meta-
physical Divine-human relationship, to be realized in this world, and as 
such very similar to Desmond’s description of metaxu and ‘ecumical 
community.’
Conclusion
Both Desmond and Bulgakov try to think the metaxu, and their philo-
sophical projects are very similar, although their historical positions are a 
century apart. Whereas in Bulgakov’s lifetime, Christianity still seemed an 
eligible alternative, in our lifetime this choice seems archaic, and needs 
more defense. This, in my view, accounts for Desmond’s criticism of 
Solov’ëv by way of a straw man, but maybe also for his impersonal descrip-
tion of metaxu. In his criticism of Solov’ëv, Desmond clearly fights his 
own demons, that is, Hegel’s rationalism and idealism but more, in par-
ticular, the modern ‘equivocal’ ethos.
Bulgakov, however, would have agreed for the greater part with 
Desmond’s criticism of this ‘equivocal’ ethos of the philosophy of moder-
nity. In his own Sophiology, although a further development of Solov’ëv’s 
‘Sopia-thought,’ Bulgakov criticized Solov’ëv’s too intimate relation with 
Divine Sophia, and what this implied for Solov’ëv’s self-evaluation. 
Bulgakov would agree, however, with Desmond’s admiration and criti-
cism of Hegel’s absolute idealism. Bulgakov is closer to developing his 
 
J. VAN KESSEL

255
own sophiological language in sociology, philosophy and theology than 
Solov’ëv was, who was only able to express his “Sophia-doctrine” in his 
poetry. Bulgakov proposes the language of antinomy, which enabled him 
to transcend the univocal logic of dialectics, which is also Desmond’s 
greatest enemy.
As I argued above, Desmond incorrectly positions himself between 
Solov’ëv and Shestov. In fact, he is much closer to Solov’ëv, and clearly 
expects more from him, than from Shestov, more in particular from his 
‘Sophia-thought’. I demonstrated as well that Desmond’s metaxology and 
Bulgakov’s Sophiology share important characteristics, goals and even 
enemies, that is, abstract rationalism, holism and idealism, in name of 
‘God beyond the whole.’ Both try to develop another philosophical lan-
guage which is not univocal nor dialectical, but antinomical or hyperbolic. 
In short, despite a difference of almost 100 years, metaxology and 
Sophiology are indeed analogous developments in philosophy, pointing to 
the importance of a possible ‘beyond,’ including a beyond of dualistic 
‘either/or’ thinking, by way of concentrating on the between/Sophia.
Bibliography
Bulgakov, Sergei. 1946. Avtobiograficheskie zametki (Autobiographical Notes). Ed. 
L.A. Zander. Paris: IMKA.
———. 1997. Dva grada. Issledovanie o prirode obshchestvennykh idealov (Two 
Cities. A Research into the Nature of Social Ideals). Ed. V.V.  Sapov. Sankt 
Peterburg: RKhGI (Originally Published Moskva: Put’ 1911).
———. 1999. Pervoobraz i obraz (Proto-image and image). Tom 1. Svet nevechernij. 
Sozertsaniia i umozreniia (Vol. I: The Unfading Light Observations and 
Reflections). Moskva: Iskusstvo/Sankt-Peterburg: Inapress (Originally pub-
lished in 1917 as Svet nevechernii. Sozertsaniia i umozreniia. Moskva: Put’). 
Tom 2. Filosofiia imeni. Ikona i ikonopochitanie (Vol. II: Philosophy of the Name. 
The Icon and the Veneration of Icons).
———. 2000. Philosophy of Economy: The World as Household. Trans. Catherine 
Evtuhov. New Haven: Yale University Press. (Originally Published in 1912 as 
Filosofiia khoziaistva. Chast’ pervaia Mir kak khoziaistvo. Moskva: Put’).
Bulgakov, Sergii (Prot.). 2003. Muzhkoe i zhenskoe v bozhestve (The Male and 
the Female in the Deity), 343–364; Muzhskoe i zhenskoe (Male and Female), 
365–388. S.N. Bulgakov: Religiozno-filosofskii put’. Mezhdunarodnaia nauch-
naia konferentsiia, posviashchennaia 130-letiiu so dnia rozhdeniia 5–7 marta 
2001 (S.N.  Bulgakov: Religious Philosophical Way. International Scientific 
Conference in Memory of the 130th Anniversary of His Birthday). Ed. 
A.P. Kozyrev. Moskva: Russkii Put’.
  TRANSCENDENCE IN METAXOLOGY AND SOPHIOLOGY 

256
———. 2008. Tikhie dumy: ėtika, kul′tura, sofiologiia (Quiet Thoughts: Ethics, 
Culture, Sophiology). Izdatel′stvo Olega Abyshko. First Published as Tikhie 
dumy: iz statiei 1911–1915-gg. (Quiet Thoughts. Essays 1911–1915). 1918. 
Moskva: Leman i Sakharov.
Bulgakov, Sergei. 2009. Filosofiia khoziaistva. Moskva: Institut russkoi tsivilizatsii. 
[First Published in 1912. English Translation by Catherine Evtuhov, see 
Bulgakov, 2000a].
van den Bercken, Wil. 2011. Christian Fiction and Religious Realism in the Novels 
of Dostoevsky. London-New York-Delhi: Anthem Press.
Florenskii, Pavel. 2004. The Pillar and Ground of the Truth: An Essay in Orthodox 
Theodicy in Twelve Letters. Trans. Boris Jakim. Princeton University Press. 
Paperback Edition. Originally Published in Russian in 1914 as Stolp i utverzh-
denie Istiny: Opyt pravoslavnoi feoditsei v dvenadtsati pis’makh.
van Kessel, Josephien H.J. 2010. Sophia and Sobornost’: Cement and Organizing 
Principle of Orthodox Society. In Sofiologiia, seriia ‘Bogoslovie i nauka’, ed. 
Vladimir Porus, 208–220. Moskva: BBI.
———. 2012. Bulgakov’s Sophiology: Towards an Orthodox Economic-­
Theological Engagement with the Modern World. Studies in East European 
Thought 64: 251–267.
Kornblatt, Judith Deutsch. 2009. Divine Sophia. The Wisdom Writings of Vladimir 
Solovyov. Including Annotated Trans. Boris Jakim, Judith Kornblatt, and Laury 
Magnus. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
Schrooyen, Pauline. 2006. Vladimir Solov’ëv in the Rising Public Sphere. A 
Reconstruction and Analysis of the Concept of Christian Politics in the publitsis-
tika of Vladimir Solov’ëv. PhD thesis at Radboud University Nijmegen, 
Nijmegen, PrintPartners Ipskamp.
Solov’ëv, Vladimir. 1991. Smysl liubvi: Izbrannye proizvedeniia. Editor 
N.I. 
Tsimbaeva, 
Moskva: 
Sovremennik. 
Smysl 
liubvi 
(1892–1894), 
pp. 125–182; Trans. Jane Marshall as Solov’ëv, V. 1985. The Meaning of Love. 
Trans. Jane Marshall. 1945. Revised by Thomas R. Beyer, Jr., 1985.
———. 1995. Lectures on Divine Humanity. Trans. and Ed. Jakim, Boris. 
Lindisfarne Press. (Translation of Chteniia o Bogochelovechestve (1877–1891). 
Also Translated as Lectures on Godmanhood by Peter Zouboff. 1948.
Vaganova, N.A. 2011. Sofiologiia protoiereia Sergiia Bulgakova (The Sophiology of 
Archpriest Sergii Bulgakov). Moskva: Izd-vo PSTGU.
Zenkovskii, Vasilii. 2011 [1950]. Istoriia russkoi filosofii. Moskva: Akademicheskii 
Proekt.
 
J. VAN KESSEL

257
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_15
CHAPTER 15
Panentheism and Hegelian Controversies
Philip A. Gottschalk
William Desmond is a well-known Hegel scholar. As such, he has engaged 
other Hegel scholars who are panentheistic in their interpretation of 
Hegel. We will focus our discussion on the theme of pan(en)theism and 
examine Desmond’s engagement and interaction with two who advocate 
this view, specifically Peter C. Hodgson and Sergei Bulgakov, an inheritor 
of Vladimir Solov’ëv. The first section will focus on Desmond’s treatment 
of Hegel and Hodgson on the issue of pan(en)theism. In the second sec-
tion we will consider Desmond’s interaction with Solov’ëv and introduce 
the panentheism of Sergei Bulgakov, who is an inheritor of Solov’ëv. In 
conclusion we will entertain differences between Desmond’s ‘Between’ 
and the dipolar god of panentheism (GB 225–240).
Hodgson Versus Desmond: The Clash 
of the Hegelians
The debate between Peter C. Hodgson and Desmond about Hegel’s view 
of religious community can be seen as an illustrative encounter between 
Desmond and his others. Hodgson has translated Hegel’s Lectures on 
P. A. Gottschalk (*) 
Tyndale Theological Seminary, Badhoevedorp, Netherlands
e-mail: pgottschalk@tyndale-europe.edu

258
Philosophy of Religion into English. In a commentary volume to his 
­translation of Hegel’s work, Hodgson has taken issue with Desmond’s 
interpretation of Hegel.
Hodgson’s main claim is that Desmond’s understanding of Hegel in 
terms of pantheism (or panentheism) is not subtle enough. According to 
him, Hegel is not, as Desmond suggests, a ‘totalizer’ who “cannot count 
to two” (Hodgson 2005, p.  157). Hodgson maintains that Hegel’s 
‘holism’ does, in fact, include a robust sense of otherness and difference. 
Secondly, Hodgson claims that Desmond is a follower of Kierkegaard in 
that he cannot abide or understand dialectical thinking. Hodgson does 
not believe that Desmond does justice to Hegel’s subtle dialectic, but 
rather flattens it into a merely totalizing force. Hodgson supposes that 
Hegel’s view of kenosis, the descent of God into humanity, can be read 
differently and more generously towards Hegel’s view than Desmond’s 
reading allows. Thirdly, Hodgson repeatedly ripostes Desmond as simply 
a Christian thinker, that is, that Desmond is merely a theist and is limited 
in his ability to appreciate differences within the Christian theological 
community.
Hodgson maintains that Hegel’s God is not monistic or pantheistic, 
but holistic. For Hodgson, holistic means that God encompasses the 
whole, but is not the whole. In Hodgson’s view the sublation of humanity 
into Godhood is not a totalizing of the One reducing the other into itself, 
but rather means that God gives himself to community. God comes into 
community and is realized through community. Without both God and 
the other, there is no community. Hodgson sees no problem with God 
and community being one without God subsuming or sublating commu-
nity into himself. Desmond, on the other hand, believes Hodgson’s con-
cept of religious community to be Hodgson’s own interpretation of 
Hegel. Desmond believes that Hegel’s dialectic is much more erotic (to 
use Desmond’s term) than agapeic. Hegel’s God, on Desmond’s reading, 
is realizing himself, creating himself, by sublating community. Desmond is 
not sanguine about Hegel’s God desiring to be a part of community. 
Desmond drives this wedge further by showing how left-wing Hegelians 
were perhaps more honest than Hodgson in seeing religious community 
as giving way to a kingdom, in their view a social democracy (HG 179; 
BHD 170–172). Right-wing Hegelians, on the other hand, saw this final 
community as the Kingdom of Prussia. Desmond’s point is that Hodgson’s 
generous reading of Hegel owes more to Hodgson himself than to Hegel.
 
P. A. GOTTSCHALK

259
Desmond is at pains to maintain that God must be an overdetermined 
other (someone who exceeds our concepts and can inform us). God must 
also be agapeic. God must be free to create others for themselves and not 
for his own self-aggrandizement or self-development. It is true that 
Desmond mentions Aquinas in regard to God, but this does not mean 
that Aquinas informed Desmond’s critique of Hegel, but rather that 
Desmond is aware that Aquinas has a similar view: “A god that creates 
itself would have to be itself to create itself” (2005, p. 197). Desmond 
believes God must be ‘beyond’ the whole. Desmond’s desire is to protect 
both the independence (transcendence) of God and the independence 
(freedom) of the individual. God must be free to create, and the individual 
must be free to renege or make good on his or her promise; the individual, 
in Desmond’s system, is “freely given to be with a promise”. Desmond 
also desires free individuals who can choose to do good or evil as they will 
without coercion. Hodgson somehow supposes that there is freedom 
from coercion in Hegelian dialectic (Hodgson 2005, p. 159). However, 
Desmond does not read Hegel so. Desmond does not believe that Hegel’s 
sublation is as generous as Hodgson does. Desmond sees the final subla-
tion as reducing the Same and Other to the Same. Desmond’s critique of 
Hegel is not merely a Christian or theistic one; rather, he has developed a 
subtle system of metaxology, which includes a finesse, which surpasses 
Hegel and Hodgson.
Hodgson accuses Desmond of being a follower of Kierkegaard and 
similar in his view of Hegel to Feuerbach. Kierkegaard and Feuerbach can-
not accept dialectic. Kierkegaard ends with a Christian personalist view 
that rejects dialectic and mediation. Feuerbach rejects Hegel’s intermedi-
ated whole with its Spirit and settles for a materialism which is this worldly. 
Hodgson accuses Desmond of projecting his own (theistic) view onto 
God, while refusing Hegel’s more subtle approach.
Desmond repudiates this simplistic identification with Kierkegaard. 
Desmond is sympathetic to Kierkegaard’s personalism and his defense of 
the freedom of the individual, but Desmond’s metaxological approach is 
more than a return to mere univocity and binary oppositions (equivocity). 
The issue with regard to Hegel is whether Desmond has understood 
Hegel correctly and surpassed him or whether Hodgson’s interpretation 
of Hegel is the correct one. Hodgson argues that Desmond does not do 
justice to Hegel’s views of intermediation or sublation/dialectic. Desmond, 
on the other hand, argues that Hodgson is guilty of ‘hermeneutical 
naïveté’ with regard to Hegel’s language (Desmond 2005, p.  190). 
  PANENTHEISM AND HEGELIAN CONTROVERSIES 

260
Hodgson is far too generous to Hegel. Hodgson is entirely convinced by 
Hegel’s arguments, while Desmond remains dubious. According to 
Desmond, despite Hegel’s language of intermediation, dialectic leads 
finally to the sublation of the other into the One. Desmond’s metaxologi-
cal system is intended to incorporate the best of dialectic, while admitting 
dialectic’s failure with regard to Sameness and Otherness. Hegel’s thought 
is unable or unwilling to accept that which it cannot absorb or compre-
hend. Metaxological thought admits that thought is not able to compre-
hend the other. Metaxology does not need to absorb or comprehend or 
incorporate the other to know the other. The other, whether another or 
God, gives itself to be known. Others are overdetermined. In other words, 
in Desmond’s system, individuals always exceed what is known of them. 
Hegel’s system seeks to incorporate all into a whole. According to 
Desmond, Hodgson’s whole, which includes God and parts, is Hodgson’s 
own panentheistic reading of Hegel. The logic of Hegel’s system, accord-
ing to Desmond, is not so ‘open’. If one accepts Hegel’s own logic, finally, 
art and religion are sublated into philosophy (thought thinking itself). 
Hodgson does have some worries on this score. Desmond agrees that 
there is something to be worried about and that Hodgson’s emendations 
of Hegel show that there is more of Hodgson in them than Hegel. 
Desmond also argues that if Hodgson may emend Hegel, then so may 
Desmond. Desmond, though, would argue that Hegel cannot be so 
emended, but that we must go beyond Hegel and dialectic to 
metaxology.
Hodgson accuses Desmond of promoting a “dualism of classic theol-
ogy” (2005, p. 153). Hodgson says that Desmond “brings the criteria of 
Christian doctrine” to bear when critiquing Hegel (2005, p.  155). 
Apparently, Hodgson believes that this is sufficient to rule Desmond’s 
view out of court. The question remains: Has Desmond developed a phil-
osophical system which accounts for Hegel and goes beyond him? Either 
Desmond’s metaxological approach accounts for community and interme-
diation, and origins and creation, or it does not.
Two further issues can be considered: creation and evil. In either read-
ing of Hegel, God others himself in creation to come to himself. Whether 
God finally sublates or encompasses the others in or into himself is a point 
of difference. Hodgson does not wish to see a final sublation of religious 
community into political community or indeed of religion into philoso-
phy. Desmond agrees with Hodgson that this is a bad sort of sublation. 
Hodgson, though, believes one can read Hegel more generously and 
 
P. A. GOTTSCHALK

261
allow for a religious community, which is not sublated by either the body 
politic or philosophy. Desmond disagrees. Dialectic leads to sublation; the 
true is the whole. Desmond, then, offers with his metaxological view the 
creation of others by God who are genuinely free from God. They are not 
created to help God realize himself. They are ‘for itself’, not modes of 
another being coming to itself through these modes. Hegel’s world is one 
of teleology. All things move inexorably toward their goal, their telos. 
Desmond dislikes such teleology. God is agapeic in Desmond’s view. He 
creates others for their own good. He gives them being (existence) and 
possibility. God is the “possibilizing possibility” (BB 335–339). He not 
only gives being but also gives a ‘promise’, not a teleology, but a germ, a 
possibility, which they may freely realize or renege on. Hodgson argues 
that God creates ex Deo rather than ex nihilo. Desmond, on the other 
hand, argues that God must remain other, though he can relate to his 
creation. Creation must be ex nihilo, insofar as it is not from God’s essence, 
and it does not lead back to fulfilling itself by becoming one with God or 
becoming enmeshed and included in a greater whole, in which God and 
the world are now one. Desmond’s concern is to maintain a Christian 
personalism, but if he is to be believed, his commitment to personalism 
comes as a result of his overall system.
The question of evil is a central point in the Hodgson-Desmond debate. 
If God is realizing himself in the world, then evil must be a part of God. 
This would seem to be an honest interpretation of Hegel. Other panen-
theists have embraced this idea wholeheartedly. One must hold an aes-
thetic theodicy and make evil only apparent. If only we had the right 
perspective, God’s perspective, we would see that our suffering is inconse-
quential and is a part of the overall “plan of God”. Desmond keeps evil 
outside of God (2005, p. 197). Hodgson believes that God takes evil into 
himself and redeems it kenotically. Desmond disagrees. A god who cannot 
overcome evil but becomes one with the community and can only work 
within it without guarantee of success is no God. For Hegel, evil can be 
sublated and made sense of. Desmond, following Kierkegaard and Lev 
Shestov, sees some evil as radical and impossible of being sublated into 
community, much less into God (EB 114ff). In Desmond’s view, God as 
an agapeic origin can also come independently from outside the between 
to offer redemption and reconciliation.
Desmond has developed a system, his metaxological system, by which 
he has advanced a view that God is beyond the whole. He has given a 
philosophical exposition of Hegel and responded from a philosophical 
  PANENTHEISM AND HEGELIAN CONTROVERSIES 

262
position (his metaxological approach) to Hodgson. Desmond argues 
against Hodgson disputing Hodgson’s panentheistic emendation of 
Hegel. Desmond maintains the independence of God and creation. He 
rejects Hegelian dialectic. He is unsatisfied with an aesthetic theodicy.
Panentheism in a Russian Key: Solov’ëv and His 
Inheritors
In ‘God beyond the whole: Between Solov’ëv and Shestov’, Desmond 
treats several issues with regard to Vladimir S. Solov’ëv, which are reminis-
cent of Desmond’s treatment of Hegel. (IST 167–199). Desmond uses 
Lev Shestov, the Russian fideist and anti-systematician, as foil to Solov’ëv, 
who is, in a Russian way, a systematician (1998, pp. 45–80). Desmond is 
correct to criticize Solov’ëv for his panentheism. Solov’ëv’s panentheism, 
though, is tied to his Sophiology, that is, his belief that in effect Sophia, 
the eternal feminine, is the world soul. Though Solov’ëv’s panentheism 
can be seen as an outgrowth of his reading of Hegel, it is also a result of 
Solov’ëv’s own experience, his ‘vision’ of the ‘eternal feminine’, the divine 
Sophia. Desmond is right to focus on Solov’ëv’s attempt to reconcile 
humanity and Godhead. Solov’ëv is seeking a bridge, it seems a meta-
physical bridge, between creation and the Creator. Desmond notes also 
that Solov’ëv’s concept of All-unity or Total-unity (всеедиство vseedin-
stvo) has difficulties (Valliere 2000, pp. 333–336). When attempting to 
think everything together, there is a tendency to diminish the individuals 
in favor of the one or the whole. As Desmond points out, there is a loss of 
‘open wholes’ and even with the idea of Godmanhood (Богочеловечество 
Bogochelovechestvo), which supposedly allows humanity to grow into the 
likeness of God. One senses a reabsorption of the individual into the deity. 
The concept of deification (обожение obozheniie in Russian and θεωσις 
theosis in Greek), which is supposed to exalt humanity, raising it from fall-
enness to a semi-divine state, seems questionable, since it depends on the 
neo-Platonic idea of participation.
One of Solov’ëv’s heirs was Pavel Florensky. Florensky was a Russian 
Orthodox priest known for his large work The Pillar and Foundation of 
Truth. Florensky was the teacher of another Russian Orthodox thinker, 
Sergei Bulgakov (Lossky 1951, p. 192). Florensky, in his attempt to sys-
tematize Solov’ëv’s ideas, advanced the idea that Sophia was a ‘fourth’ 
hypostasis (person) of the Godhead (Zenkovsky 1953, p. 888). The moti-
 
P. A. GOTTSCHALK

263
vation to deify Sophia is for Sophia to become a metaphysical bridge 
between the creation and the Godhead (Lossky 1951, p.  215). This 
­argument was not accepted by the Russian church at that time (Gottschalk 
2004, p. 175).
Bulgakov sought to develop Solov’ëv’s and Florensky’s Sophiology. 
Bulgakov saw that a simple pantheism would not be acceptable (Valliere 
2000, p. 335). He sought to emphasize Sophia and her role, and yet to 
maintain a distinction between God and the world. He accepted the term 
panentheism for his view (Lossky 1951, p. 229; Zenkovsky 1953, p. 905). 
Andrew Louth in Modern Orthodox Thinkers notes that panentheism is 
being considered again, even by Bishop Kallistos Ware (Louth 2015, 
p.  347). Bulgakov’s Sophiology was condemned by the Russian 
Metropolitan in exile, Sergius. This condemnation was the result of an 
examination of Bulgakov’s views by Vladimir N. Lossky, who had pro-
duced a booklet called The Argument about Sophia in 1936 (Lossky 1936). 
Aside from the claim about Sophia being the ‘fourth’ hypostasis, which 
Bulgakov denied, the issue of Bulgakov’s panentheism was a key problem 
(Valliere 2000, pp. 333–336). V.N. and N.O. Lossky held to the Patristic 
(Athanasian) concept of deification (“God became man, that man might 
become god”.). Still they saw Bulgakov’s panentheism as compromising 
both the nature and the individuality of created beings, and individuality 
of God. In the view of N.O. Lossky, a critic of Bulgakov, the entire world 
must be such a concretely real being or concrete consubstantiality for it to 
exist at all (Gottschalk 2004, p. 266, 267). Still N.O. Lossky himself also 
subscribed to a revised form of Sophiology. That is, he believed that the 
world is a consubstantial being governed by a head substantival agent or 
soul (similar to Plato’s world soul), whom some of the Russian thinkers 
identify with Lady Wisdom or Sophia (or the Virgin Mary) (Lossky 1951, 
p. 266).
Though N.O. Lossky maintained that the entire world is an ‘organic 
whole’ due to this consubstantiality, he did not subscribe to the panenthe-
ism of these other Russian thinkers, for example, Solov’ëv, Florensky or 
Bulgakov. Rather N.O.  Lossky maintained that panentheism cannot 
answer three important questions, which a theistic view can answer. That 
is, panentheism cannot explain the freedom of individual agents, it cannot 
explain the existence of evil and it is logically unfounded.
With regard to the first point, N.O. Lossky attempted to maintain a 
strong personalism. Despite Bulgakov’s panentheism, Bulgakov himself 
also wished to maintain a strong sense of the individual. Bulgakov believed 
  PANENTHEISM AND HEGELIAN CONTROVERSIES 

264
in deification or обожение obozheniie in Russian or θεωσις theosis in Greek, 
as noted above. Both Bulgakov and N.O. Lossky believed in deification as 
the final goal of all individuals. Though both also believed in apocatastasis 
or universal salvation, N.O. Lossky felt that Bulgakov’s approximation of 
the entire creation to the Godhead through the Divine Sophia allowed no 
real personalism. In his History of Russian Philosophy, N.O. Lossky refers 
to this as Bulgakov’s “Sophian determinism” (Lossky 1951, p.  222). 
Bulgakov’s panentheism, entailing as it does a telelogy of the whole or the 
All-unity, does not really allow individuals freedom. In Desmond’s terms 
each individual is given to be in the Between as a “for itself”, which is 
“given to be with a promise” (BB 377ff.). The Creator does not foreor-
dain the choices of each individual. He gives a potential, a ‘promise’, 
which the individual is free to own and strive to attain this promise. The 
individual can also renege on it and fail to achieve all that he or she could. 
Perhaps in Bulgakov’s panentheism, similar to Hegel’s, there is no indi-
vidual in the end. Still to be fair to Bulgakov, he wishes there to be both a 
community (соборность sobornost’ in Russian) of free worshippers and an 
organic world whole. Desmond’s criticism of Solov’ëv’s All-unity seems to 
haunt all of Solov’ëv’s heirs. Though they wish to have free and robust 
individuals in the whole, the whole seems to become a closed whole, 
rather than a whole of ‘open wholes’, which Desmond advocates. Bulgakov 
saw God as the possibilizing possibility, as Desmond does. Despite his 
desire to have a metaphysical bridge, Sophia, between humanity and the 
Godhead, Bulgakov could not help but see individuals as given for them-
selves with a promise. However, Bulgakov and N.O. Lossky were unwill-
ing that any should be lost. Apocatastasis or universal salvation, it seems, 
must in the end remain an insult to the individual. Due to the neo-­Platonic 
idealism under which both labor: ‘to be is to be good’, no individual can 
exist who does not have some good within (even Satan). Since there is 
good within, all must eventually return to oneness with God. However 
kind or expansive this goal of recovering all individuals might seem, it does 
not allow ultimate freedom to the individual. Desmond, on the other 
hand, points out there is radical evil in the world, evil which is not redeem-
able, evil which is irrational. Solov’ëv, Bulgakov, N.O. Lossky and other 
heirs of Solov’ëv are unwilling to endorse such awful freedom (Lossky 
1951, p. 225; Lossky 1949, p. 81).
 
P. A. GOTTSCHALK

265
The Question of Evil
As concerns the question of evil, Solov’ëv’s and Bulgakov’s panentheism 
cannot explain either the origin of evil or the existence of radical evil. 
Panentheism does not allow real freedom to the individual. It is also 
impossible to explain how evil arose in a panentheistic world. However, 
the larger issue, as far as evil is concerned, is that there is no reason for evil 
to arise at all. Why would God give a fallen Sophia to be the organic whole 
of the earth? Why does creation occur at all? Individuals may have more 
robust individuality in Bulgakov than in Hegel, but it seems in the end to 
be only an apparent individuality. Perhaps the Sophiologists could not 
escape the Hegelian origins or other German idealist origins of their meta-
physical system. The Russian Orthodox tradition is quick to assert that the 
deification of humankind does not mean that humans become God, that 
is, part of the Godhead. Yet, it is hard to understand how deification does 
not in some sense lead to oneness or even Oneness. Relying on the meta-
physics of (Pseudo-)Dionysius, the Eastern Church tends to fall into a 
“return to the One”. As Desmond has pointed out with regard to Hegel, 
if one assumes a panentheism, there seems to be a necessity to maintain an 
aesthetic theodicy. In other words, evil is only apparent. There is no real 
evil, but that it will be redeemed and brought back into the Whole. It is 
difficult to imagine how the crimes of genocide through the twentieth 
century could be included in an aesthetic theodicy (EB 378 n10). Humans 
are demiurges and can do real, irredeemable evil. Unfortunately, this is a 
part of what being a free being means.
Desmond’s engagement with Solov’ëv and Shestov show his interest in 
these two particular Russian thinkers and their form of philosophical 
engagement: Solov’ëv’s more metaphysical approach and Shestov’s more 
“Lutheran fideistic” or “Kierkegaardian”, irrationalist approach (Maia 
Neto 1995). While Desmond’s engagement with Solov’ëv in the afore-
mentioned article is quite interesting and engaging, it would be interest-
ing to see Desmond engage some of Solov’ëv’s heirs like Pavel Florensky, 
Semyon Frank and, particularly, Sergei Bulgakov. Since there is currently a 
renewal of interest in Bulgakov’s thought, it would be very interesting to 
see how Desmond would understand Bulgakov’s creation à la Sophia and 
his All-unity. Bulgakov spends a lot of time defending and expounding his 
version of personalism. Desmond also believes in a strong personalism. If 
Desmond would show just how or where Bulgakov goes wrong, it would 
be instructive. Bulgakov, like Solov’ëv, seeks a robust form of ecumenism. 
  PANENTHEISM AND HEGELIAN CONTROVERSIES 

266
Bulgakov seeks to explain real connections between worldly wholes, which 
Desmond explains through his ‘Between’, a space for worldly wholes of 
‘open wholes’ to be fostered. Tracing a line from Solov’ëv to Florensky to 
Bulgakov in terms of metaphysics would be a worthwhile task.
Conclusion
At the outset of this chapter, our goal was to analyze Desmond’s engage-
ment with panentheism by focusing on his replies to Peter C. Hodgson 
and Vladimir Solov’ëv. We expanded our purview to include Sergei 
Bulgakov, an inheritor of Solov’ëv, to show how Russian thinkers have 
developed Solov’ëv’s thought and to show how Desmond could further 
entertain their thought.
With regard to Solov’ëv and his inheritors, there would seem to be a 
wide space for Desmond’s further exploration of Russian heirs of Hegel or 
German Idealism. Desmond’s interest in the idea of community would be 
a good comparison to Bulgakov’s ideas of sobornost’ (community) and his 
view of the world as an organic whole. Desmond’s concern for a whole of 
‘open wholes’ could find good counterexamples or helpful foils. Desmond’s 
own understanding of the interplay of religion, philosophy and literature 
would be further sharpened by a few more Russian encounters. Bulgakov’s 
attempts to explain and foster a generous ecumenism would be fruitful 
ground for Desmond’s explorations. One could ask: How far off is 
Bulgakov’s personalism from Desmond’s, which would allow for open 
wholes? What might Desmond gain by this interaction? Desmond has 
shown his willingness to engage with other Hegel scholars. He has also 
been open to cross-pollination from other fields, for example, art, litera-
ture and religion. He has also been a persistent critic of panentheism, 
questioning its overly imminent god and panentheism’s ability to deal 
with the problem of evil.
Bibliography
Desmond, William. 1998. Philosophical Audacity – Shestov’s Piety. Lev Shestov 
Journal 2: 45–80.
———. 2005. Response to Hodgson. Owl of Minerva 36 (2): 198–200.
Gottschalk, Philip A. 2004. Between Fideism and Dogmatic Rationalism. PhD the-
sis, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.
 
P. A. GOTTSCHALK

267
Hodgson, Peter C. 2005. Hegel’s God: Counterfeit or Real? Owl of Minerva 36 
(2): 153–163.
Lossky, Vladimir N. 1936. Spor o Sofii (Argument About Sophiia.). Paris: YMCA 
Press.
Lossky, Nicholas O. 1949. Resurrection of the Body. Anglican Theological Review 
XXXI (2): 71–82.
———. 1951. The History of Russian Philosophy. New  York: International 
Universities Press.
Louth, Andrew. 2015. Modern Orthodox Thinkers: From the Philokalia to the 
Present. London: SPCK.
Maia Neto, Jose. 1995. The Christianization of Pyrrhonism: Scepticism and Faith 
in Pascal, Kierkegaard, and Shestov. New York: Springer.
Valliere, Paul. 2000. Modern Russian Theology: Bukharev, Soloviev and Bulgakov: 
Orthodox Theology in a New Key. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.
Zenkovsky, Vasilii V. 1953. The History of Russian Philosophy. Vol. II. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
  PANENTHEISM AND HEGELIAN CONTROVERSIES 

PART V
Creation, Embodied Being 
and Beauty

271
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_16
CHAPTER 16
The Gift of Creation
Richard Kearney
It is an honor to pay homage to the work of William Desmond in this 
volume. I have known William for almost 40 years as both friend, col-
league and fellow Irish philosopher. We have had many exchanges over 
four decades of intellectual conversation including pieces in the William 
Desmond Reader and After God, not to mention numerous reviews and 
critical papers in learned journals and conferences on both sides of the 
Atlantic. In what follows I will revisit some of these past conversations as 
they pertain to Desmond’s philosophy of religion as well as addressing 
some of William’s most recent thinking on the subject. In doing so I will 
be paying particular attention to what I see as a series of critical productive 
paradoxes ‘between’ apparent opposites—divine creation and human cre-
ativity, gift and imagination, theology and philosophy, ethics and poetics, 
othering and selving. I offer these few reflections as a set of appreciative 
meditative commentaries on Desmond’s poetic-metaphysical pondering 
of the sacred.
Let me begin with some introductory remarks on Desmond’s approach 
to the question of God. Desmond speaks of a ‘companionship of religion 
and metaphysics’ which resists the secularist framework of much contem-
R. Kearney (*) 
Philosophy Department, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA, USA
e-mail: kearneyr@bc.edu

272
porary philosophy. He challenges the sway of what Charles Taylor calls 
‘exclusivist secularism’ which dismisses religion as an eligible subject for 
serious philosophical consideration or, at best, consigns it to the realm of 
private conviction (Taylor 2014). Desmond equally obviates the ‘phenom-
enological reduction’ of religion, carried out by Husserl, Heidegger and 
most of the French existential phenomenologists, which ‘suspended’ or 
‘bracketed’ the question of faith as an interference with the pure question-
ing of Being. (Heidegger goes so far in the Introduction to Metaphysics, as 
to declare that ‘a Christian Philosophy is a round square and a misunder-
standing’.) And Desmond also chaffs at the methodological neutralism of 
certain current trends in Biblical studies which reduce sacred scriptures to 
philological tracts or historical-sociological data with little appreciation of 
their spiritual, theological or metaphysical truth claims. Against such per-
vasive ostracizing of religious faith from philosophical discussion, Desmond 
offers a deep metaphysical engagement with religion as an experience of 
‘passion and compassion’ (a passio essendi and a compassio essendi).
But if Desmond circumvents the modern embargos on philosophizing 
about God, what does he actually say about reason and faith? In what fol-
lows, I propose to look at five specific texts where I believe Desmond posi-
tively addresses the liaison between philosophy and religion. I want to 
suggest that this affirmative kinship ‘between’ (metaxu) the questions of 
Being and God is a central leitmotif of Desmond’s metaxology, albeit 
often discreet and poetic in its articulation.
I
In chapter eight of The Intimate Strangeness of Being (2012), entitled 
“The Confidence of Thought: Between Belief and Metaphysics”, Desmond 
calls for a new form of thinking about the sacred. He writes: “The confi-
dence of thought asks a willingness to hearken to what is worthy in the 
beliefs of religion. Once again an old companionship calls for renewal, 
after the great divorce of modernity” (ISB 204–205). He goes on to state 
the need for “a new postmodern porosity between the religious and the 
metaphysical. Of old in modernity we knew the self-understanding of the 
philosopher as a scientist or technician or revolutionary and latterly as 
perhaps even a poet after his or her own fashion. But the more archaic 
companionship of the philosopher with the religious and its vocation is 
worth new thinking and renewal” (ibid.). Later in the same chapter, 
Desmond links this new thinking to a special kind of ‘affirmation’ or 
 
R. KEARNEY

273
­‘confidence’ in the metaphysical nature of Being itself—a certain “onto-
logical love that is present in being truthful” (ISB 225).
Such a rethinking of the kinship between faith and metaphysics entails 
a series of important affirmations across a broad existential spectrum. It 
involves a fundamental ontological confidence expressed as much
in religious faith as in the trust in reason itself, as much admonitory of the 
overreaching ambitions of human power as in solidarity with human pov-
erty, as much rejoicing in the excellence of human nobility as compassionate 
in sight of the tragedies of failure, as much tender to human limitations as 
laughing with its folly. (ISB 225)
Desmond even goes so far as to name this consoling affirmation of the 
spirit a “mysticism of deeper communication … in love with the good of 
mortal things because secretly the divine love of mortal things has been 
confided to them” (ISB 226). Striking this mystical note, Desmond dares 
realign the perennial questions of Being and of God under the guidance of 
the unmentionable word ‘love’. Confidence in Being, he implies, is ulti-
mately expressed as caritas. And the consequences of this primacy of love 
are real and multiple for our lived existence. They express the great mys-
tery of what Desmond calls the intimate universal:
We would be infinitely loved. In our most idiotic intimacy, we live ourselves 
never as a neutral replaceable something but as intimately singular. God is 
the endowing source of the intimate universal. Only the personal, transper-
sonal God could endow the trusted singular with the universal as the inti-
mate universal. Bist du bei mir: the air quickens our confidence, heartens it, 
but it is love that the air consecrates. (ISB 230)
In this same text Desmond makes what I take to be a powerful distinction 
between divine ‘investiture’ and human ‘investment’ (ISB 207). The first, 
he explains, operates according to a sacred economy where a reserve of 
enabling power is passed over from a source to a recipient. Thus, we find 
ourselves invested with certain powers as gifts, as grateful recipients of 
prior ontological investitures, before we ever invest our own powers in the 
world of give-and-take, before we subscribe to a finite material economy 
of credit and debit. Our very being, as Desmond puts it, our very esse or 
‘to be’ may be seen as an endowment. “There are enabling powers, re-­
sources, first given before they can be invested in something further” 
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

274
(ibid.). Desmond is at his theopoetic best, I find, when writing about the 
gift of investiture as a form of divine agape, an enabling power or resource 
which is invested in us before we reinvest it in anything else:
It is the generosity of the endowing God who calls to agapeic return. This is 
not a surplus in the sense of adding this or that to a determinate store. It is 
simply generosity and thankfulness lived as both self-enabling and more 
than self-enabling. It is participation in the overdeterminacy of a surplus 
good which in being given away is not depleted but augmented. (Ibid.)
And is there a return on such divine investiture? Yes. The return is
to give away the gift, in the sense of passing on the endowment with the 
generosity fitting to the gift. We own nothing and we are most profitable 
when we make no profit for ourselves, but pass on the increase in generosity 
that cannot be increased, and that is itself nothing but increase of participa-
tion in the good of the ‘to be’. (ISB 207)
This divine circle of endless kenotic giving is an excellent answer to the 
anthropology of the gift explored by Marcel Mauss and Maurice Godelier. 
And one might add to the neutral impersonality of Heidegger’s es gibt. By 
contrast, it serves as a fitting gloss on the Pauline notion of kenosis as an 
act of endless self-giving, an act powerfully captured in Andrei Rublev’s 
famous icon of the three persons of the Trinity, called the ‘The Hospitality 
of Abraham’. The image of divine perichoresis par excellence. Father giving 
to Son giving to Spirit in an open circle of inexhaustible generosity and 
gratuity.1
II
The second text I wish to look at deals with the notion of divine creation 
as ‘possibility’ or posse. This particular discussion is part of an ongoing 
critical conversation with Desmond, begun in a number of journal reviews 
and culminating in his piece, “Maybe Maybe Not: Richard Kearney and 
God” published in After God: Richard Kearney and the Religious Turn in 
Continental Philosophy (2006). Here, Desmond offers a constructive cri-
tique of my philosophical exploration of God in The God Who May Be 
(Kearney 2001), most specifically as it pertains to the idea of creation as 
1 See my essay ‘Making God: An essay in Theopoetic Imagination’ (Kearney 2017).
 
R. KEARNEY

275
posse or ‘possibilization’. Questioning my eschatological take on posse as 
being too future oriented, Desmond offers a more archeological interpre-
tation of the act of creation:
This is the giving to be of finite being by the origin (arche). Creation can 
refer to an activity or an outcome of activity, and I refer here primarily to the 
‘act’ of creating rather than the ‘product’ created. This is a possibilizing, but 
it is more than that, since it is not just the reduction of possibility to actual-
ity, but the bringing to be of actuality and possibility. (Desmond 2006, 
p. 68)
And there is something ‘hyperbolic’ here about creative possibilizing, 
“since without this nothing finite would be or become” (ibid.).
Invoking the traditional doctrine of creatio ex nihilo, Desmond reads 
creative possibilizing as a response to a prior and primordial giving of an 
originating gift. A giving which, he insists, is closer to archeological agape 
than eschatological eros. The origin is not creating itself in creating finite 
being: it is bringing to be the finite other as genuinely Other, endowed 
with promise, ontological, aesthetic, ethical and religious. He suggests 
that
creation is best thought in terms of the hyperbole of agapaeic bringing to 
be. We might respond to this suggestion by saying ‘may be, may be not’. 
Very fair, since we glean something of this agapeic bringing to be from the 
finite creation as already given. In that given creation, we are always tested 
between a maybe and a may be not. (Desmond 2006, pp. 68–69)
Desmond appears to suspect the eschatology of Maybe of a latent activism 
or voluntarism which underestimates the anterior givenness of the gift. 
But I do not think this is the case. My notion of divine creation speaks of 
a possibilizing from the future understood as the loving act of a deus 
adventurus, a perpetually coming and becoming God, a theopoetic calling 
of and by posse toward esse, the eventual task being the co-creation of the 
Kingdom of Possest, as Nicholas of Cusa put it. Such a divine May Be (or 
Peut-Etre) deconstructs the old scholastic concept of God as First Cause 
or Pure Act (actus purus non habens aliquid de potentialitate, as Aquinas 
put it)—a concept which become known in continental philosophy as the 
Omni-God of ontotheology (Heidegger, Vattimo), the logocentric meta-
physics of Presence (Derrida, Caputo) and the totalizing ontology of the 
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

276
Same (Levinas, Irigaray). Desmond boldly defends metaphysics against 
these descriptions, which he sees as caricatures, and against what he sees as 
the lure of an overly dynamic God of becoming (the divine posse having its 
roots in the Greek term dunamis)—where God possibilizes and humanity 
actualizes. I think he would say: too much conatus and not enough passio. 
Or as he himself puts it, we need to construe creation with reference to a 
“primal givenness of being … a passio essendi, prior to the becoming of any 
and all conatus essendi” (Desmond 2006, p. 69).
While I would defend the eschatology of posse as a mediation between 
conatus and passio, I do agree with Desmond’s resistance to the idealist 
trends of much modern philosophy where an ‘anthropological reduc-
tion’ (to use Martin Buber’s phrase) seeks to confine creation to a purely 
human/humanist activity. In such an exclusively ‘immanent frame’, as 
Charles Taylor notes, the sacred transcendence of the Other is overshad-
owed, if not ostracized. Here Desmond and I find ourselves on common 
ground, both acknowledging the creative life of Posse in terms of Gift 
and surprise, a divine creation calling out for human re-creation in its 
turn. In this respect, both Desmond’s metaphysical God of agape and 
my eschatological God of eros—working from the past and future, 
respectively—reject the modern Cult of Constructivism, where the other 
(human or divine) becomes little more than a projection of our finite 
consciousness, an idea that we produce out of our own autonomous 
projections. (Think here, e.g., of the influential constructivist lineage 
running from Hegel, Marx and Feuerbach down to Freud, Sartre and 
Ernst Bloch).
Desmond proposes the idea of God as creative Gift as a bridge between 
our respective positions, and I think he is right. He writes accordingly of a
sense of the possible emergent beyond the self-becoming in which the other 
possibilizes a freedom released beyond our own powers of self-­determination. 
This enabling of release makes possible a transfiguration of our own efforts 
and claims to be self-determining. Since the openness to the other comes to 
form for us here in this release, there emerges a more radical possibilizing of 
self-becoming that is creatively there for the other in an ethical and religious 
mode. (Desmond 2006, p. 71)
 
R. KEARNEY

277
But Desmond rightly insists, this possibilizing is not first what we do—rather
it is received by us as a gift from the other’. He elaborates on this point thus: 
‘The surprise of the generous other is in this gift—itself calling forth our 
‘being generous’. It is here, more than anywhere else, that I think Kearney’s 
notion of the eschatological ‘may be’ finds its opportunity of greatest 
moment. (Ibid.)
And he asks: “What here emerges as possible and possibilizing?” (ibid.) To 
which he responds: “The most intimate and often incognito creativity 
which does not insist on itself, in that it is in the image of the origin and 
the first creation. This is the communicative creativity whose generosity of 
being is agapeically released beyond itself, making way for the other” 
(ibid.). Here is no closed circle, but rather a dialectical between of re-­
creation defined as a ‘space of porosity’. A metaxological openness where 
“communication is enabled, possibilised, sparked between humans, and 
between humans and God” (ibid.). And he concludes, tellingly, with a 
discreet nod to confessional practice: “Prayer happens in the intimacy of 
this porosity” (ibid.).
III
The third text I wish to address is Desmond’s first chapter of The Intimate 
Universal: The hidden porosity among Religion, Art, Philosophy and Politics 
(2016), entitled “Religion and the Intimate Universal”. Here, Desmond 
works from the inside out, locating the openness to the sacred in the gap 
or cleft of ‘nothing’ at the very heart of the human self. He returns to his 
central notion of the gap between self and other as a porous between-­
space where the finite and infinite can cross and commune (while never 
collapsing into each other). He sees this experience of the nothing-gap as 
a call beyond the reign of “erotic sovereignty” which dominates in our 
modern age, to a loving experience of “agapaeic service” (IU 52). 
Reflecting also on the internal ‘nothing’ between oneself and oneself, 
Desmond makes the intriguing claim that in the solitude of such intimacy 
there is, in fact, no solitude. Raising the question “what is the nothing 
here?”, he affirms that it the between-space where the “enabling commu-
nication of the power of being gives us to be what we are and are to be” 
(IU 49). There is, he insists, an ‘inward otherness’ marking one’s deepest 
intimacy to oneself. And this is where we may find the
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

278
communication of the incognito God in the deepest ontological porosity of 
one’s soul, so deep that it seems like nothing, since the porosity is itself 
nothing—the open between space in which communication of the power to 
be is given and different selvings take determinate form. One is never alone 
even when one is alone. (Ibid.)
Developing this quasi-mystical theme of the ‘luminous dark night’—
reminiscent of both John of the Cross and Augustine’s discovery of the 
divine in the interior intimo meo (Confessions)—Desmond contrasts the 
prevalent modern turn from the other toward the self (think of the mod-
ern idealist movement running from Descartes, Kant and Hegel to Husserl 
and Sartre) with the “religious turn toward porosity to the divine in the 
intimate universal” (IU 50). But Desmond vigorously resists the tendency 
to separate the individual experience of intimacy from the public commu-
nity at large, especially insofar it concerns our social and ethical responsi-
bility to others. On the contrary, he boldly suggests that “religious 
community alone is able truly to reconcile the singular and the universal” 
(IU 51). The Beatitudes whisper while never being directly invoked. (This 
is philosophy after all.) And he goes further still to claim that religion, like 
love, is the most intimate thing for the human being—more intimate to 
me than I am to myself but with an intimacy that is not narcissistic or 
autistic but serves, paradoxically, as a rich resource for “communication 
and communicability” (IU 51). In this sense, pace Kierkegaard in Fear 
and Trembling, the intimacy of the Single One is deeply compatible with 
the universal in its deepest sense. In Desmond’s philosophy the mystical, 
the ethical and the religious are not competing either/or stages on life’s 
way, but mutually interanimating spheres of dwelling between the singular 
and the absolute. In authentic religion the most intimate interiority recon-
nects with the most far-reaching exteriority of the ‘whole’; not to exert 
some kind of totalitarian hegemony over our lives, but to foster a disposi-
tion of openness to the all, in a spirit of ‘agapeic service’ to the community 
(IU 52). This exchange between the singular and the absolute occurs at 
the level of our most “primal porosity” and requires an active-passive 
response to the sacred—both a commitment to service for others and a 
fundamental “patience of being” (IU 57).
This double fidelity is not always easy to sustain and may earn the name 
of ‘sacred idiocy’; it is a primordial ontological metaxu between apparent 
opposites (the most interior immanence and the most ulterior transcen-
dence) which exemplifies Cusanus’ mystical notion of the coincidentia 
 
R. KEARNEY

279
oppositorum, though Desmond rarely cites Cusa or indeed any of the great 
mystics by name. But if the mystics go largely incognito in Desmond’s 
work, they continue, I suspect, to ghost his pages and guide his steps. He 
always observes a certain discretion of naming in his meditation of the 
mystical—the unnamability of the sacred serving its multinamability. And 
he is also aware of potential misreadings and misdemeanors. Experiencing 
the mystical ‘nothing’ at the heart of Being can lead to a liberating inter-
pretation of the teaching—“Blessed are the poor in spirit”—in terms of an 
“essential poverty of the human spirit”—but the same nothing, if we are 
not careful, can be a gateway to the demonic. To nothingness as an absence 
of the good (privatio boni). Or to put it in another way: the gap in Being 
may express itself either (1) as a ‘fertile void’ of sacred idiotic intimacy, 
where the self experiences an ‘ecstasis’ of kenosis and self-emptying mov-
ing beyond itself toward the other or (2) as a plunge inward to a darkness 
that curls up in itself (similar to Luther’s notion of ‘self-incurvature’). The 
best can also be the worst, and vice versa. There is a drama of choice and 
freedom here. Desmond’s metaphysics of the void is never sanguine or 
rosy-eyed. It never forgets the medieval adage ‘corruptio optimi pessima’.
IV
The fourth passage I wish to comment on is in chapter seven of The 
Intimate Strangeness of Being (2012), which bears the title “Pluralism, 
Truthfulness and the Patience of Being”. Here, we find one of Desmond’s 
most sustained and dramatic treatments to the sacred as it pertains to the 
distinction between creation and construction. Human creativity is at its 
best, he argues, when it construes itself not as a willful act of homo faber 
but as a re-creation of a prior creation, a creative mimesis expressing a 
second yes in response to the primary yes of divine genesis—an act we 
experience existentially as call and gift. It is interesting to note that here, 
as elsewhere, when engaging with the sacred, Desmond rarely, if ever, cites 
the authority of sacred scripture—any more than the great spiritual mas-
ters or church fathers. He seems resolved to remain within a philosophical 
idiom of discourse. Or to be more exact, he writes as a philosopher of 
religion rather than a theologian or biblical scholar. (This is an important 
distinction which I have sought to articulate in my own writing and think-
ing, especially in recent works like Anatheism (Kearney 2010) and 
Reimagining the Sacred (Kearney 2016).)
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

280
Addressing the phenomenon of artistic creation, he describes art as the 
receipt of a gift before it becomes a construction of human will. “Gift is 
prior to construction”, he insists, as “[t]here is a call of truth on us that is 
coeval with our being … It releases us into a certain freedom of seeking, 
but this freedom and release are not themselves self-produced” (ISB 189). 
Let’s be clear: Desmond is not denying the importance of human inven-
tion and imagination; he is simply resisting the relativization of efforts to 
absolutize the claims of human productivity in conformity with the domi-
nant cult of homo faber. He is not against human action per se, only a self-­
inflated activism which denies that our conatus essendi is always preceded 
ontologically by a passio essendi. And, here, Desmond returns to the idea 
of ‘gifted’ humans as “creatures of an absolute source that gives us to be 
and give us to be as good”. This is the good of the ‘to be’ (esse) in which 
we participate and which empowers us to create and re-create in turn. A 
view which depends on our recognizing an “otherness more original than 
our own self-definition”. We are only self-defining, Desmond argues, 
because we are originally given to be as selves. Our selving is preceded by 
our othering, so to speak, giving a new connotation to Rimbaud’s maxim, 
“Je est un autre”. As Desmond pithily sums up: we are “only creative 
because created; only courageous because encouraged; only loving because 
already loved and shown to be worthy of love” (ISB 196). In this sense 
one might say that being patient is not an ordeal but an invitation to par-
ticipate in the patience of being itself, understood as the intimate giving 
and givenness of creation. The highest action of philosophy is thus revealed 
to be isomorphic with the greatest passion of religion in the common 
experience of ‘wonder’. Ontology becomes donatology: being as gift.
In an ontological patience before the surplus happening there is for us the 
offer of an agapeic astonishment…. Wonder, marvel, reverence all reveal 
something of what is good and worthy of affirmation in the patience of 
being, even apart from any construction or further mediations by our own 
endeavor to be. (ISB 197)
Desmond can thus conclude that the best kind of metaphysics is a “mind-
ful love of being” which expresses itself as movement beyond the passio 
essendi to a fuller form of compassio essendi: a compassion of existence 
which “communicates a sign of what a more divine love might be for mor-
tals” (ISB 201). Again, one senses a proximity here to the great Abrahamic 
mystics and Buddhist Bodhisattva, without any ever being cited by name. 
 
R. KEARNEY

281
But what does become explicitly evident, at this juncture of ontological 
compassion, is that Desmond’s poetics of creation embraces an ethics of 
care. “We become witnesses to the compassio essendi”, he writes, “in the 
care we take of the other for the sake of the other. In this care, we may be 
released beyond ourselves in a minding of the other potentially agapeic” 
(ISB 201). Desmond intimates that such ontological empathy with finite 
others is traversed by the infinite Other. The passion of patience yields to 
the action of compassion in laying us “open to secret sources of strength-
ening that make us porous to the religious intermediation with the divine” 
(ISB 201). Abraham, Jesus, Hafiz and the Buddha would concur.
V
The fifth and final text I wish to address is a recent essay named, felici-
tously, ‘Godsends’ (Desmond 2016). Perhaps more than any other text, 
we find here Desmond, the poet of the everyday, taking his rightful place 
beside Desmond, the philosopher of religion. The very title itself suggests 
a compelling, engaged reflection on the connotations of ‘ordinary lan-
guage’ for the relationship with the divine—the colloquial term ‘godsend’ 
being a typical example.
Godsend conjures up multiple everyday epiphanies of gifting and grac-
ing expressing the mystical truth that the world is a theophany. This is 
something, as Desmond notes in a rare invocation of names, that his com-
patriots, John Scotus Eriugena and George Berkeley, have both attested—
Eriugena with his notion of the divine as a deus currens, running like a tide 
of genesis through the flesh and blood of the natural universe and Berkeley 
with his theory of perception—esse est percipere aut percipi—as an empiri-
cal sign language of God (Desmond 2016, p. 12). Here ‘revelation’ ceases 
to be a proposition, thesis or syllogism, but expresses itself in quotidian 
acts of creation. These godsends can run from the most simple epiphanies 
of the everyday—as attested in the poems of Gerard Manly Hopkins cel-
ebrating the ‘pied beauty’ of the sacramental universe (viz ‘Glory be to 
God for dappled things’)—to the great Revelations of Abraham, Jesus and 
the prophets (to mention just the Judeo-Christian tradition). Citing the 
latter in an unusual moment, Desmond muses whether Christ might be an 
“absolute godsend—the single absolute, absolutely intimate with the 
absolute sender, and yet absolute as sent … through a kenotic intermedi-
ary absolutely porous to the sending source” (Desmond 2006, p. 13). A 
musing which he translates into a claim for an “absolute community” of 
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

282
God and Godsend (Father and Son) which in no way signals a diminishing 
of the “transcendent mystery of the source, even while revealed in ­absolute 
immanence” (ibid.). Desmond concludes his meditation with this double 
hypothesis: “The prophets: singular godsends of the absolute? Christ: the 
absolved and absolving godsend?” (ibid.). While hinting here at his own 
personal Christian commitment, Desmond retains his position as a phi-
losopher of religion rather than a proponent of dogmatic theology in leav-
ing us with Christ as a question.
It is telling, I think, that in this most recent sortie into the God ques-
tion—as a godsend combining the work of philosophical reasoning and 
spiritual revelation—Desmond returns to a key insight about the meta-
physics of the gap. Expressing the opinion that the word ‘gap’ need not be 
treated as a bad word, he retrieves the idea of a cleft or fracture in being as 
a potential breaching of the ‘immanent frame’. He speaks of “chinks in the 
closure of immanence on itself” (Desmond 2016, p. 21), echoing Leonard 
Cohen’s famous lyric—“there is a crack in everything that’s how the light 
gets in”. Harking back implicitly to the nihil at the heart of the Judeo-­
Christian creatio ex nihilo, and explicitly to the ancient Greek word ‘chaos’, 
Desmond speaks of how the “giving creativity of the origin can often be 
most striking in this between space—in this gap” (Desmond 2016, p. 21). 
And he pursues this central metaxological intuition as follows:
A gap is a medium of openness, a middle of communication. In and across 
such gaps, godsends may be sent. There need be nothing otiose about such 
a ‘gap’ at all. And especially so if our too solid world is actually subtended 
by the more original porosity of being. Godsends happen in the medium of 
this porosity. (Desmond 2016, p. 21)
If space permitted, it would be interesting to engage here in a deeper criti-
cal reflection of how one might relate this porosity of the godsend to the 
four ‘hyperboles of being’ outlined by Desmond in God and the Between, 
namely, the idiocy of being, the aesthetics of happening, the erotics of 
serving and the agapeics of communication (GB 22). But that is work for 
another day. Suffice it to end this meditation on ‘godsends’ with a nod to 
Desmond’s compelling final suggestion that the giving of the intimate 
universal in the godsend is basically a ‘birthing with’—a co-natus. This 
particular notion reminds me of Eckhart’s beautiful notion of the divine 
birthing itself in and through each human being, as well as Maurice 
Claudel’s idea of poetics as a perpetual co-naissance between the human 
 
R. KEARNEY

283
and the divine—an idea taken up by Merleau-Ponty in his later writings. 
But, as I have already remarked, Desmond is not prone to the ­hermeneutic 
penchant for philosophizing with proper names and prefers to speak boldly 
in his own words with his own voice. He thinks in personal insights not 
quotes. And for this originality of thinking, as for much else, we can be 
grateful.
Conclusion
I would like to conclude my modest commentary on Desmond’s philoso-
phy of religion, with a final word on his metaxology understood as a 
“mindful love of being” (ISB 226). I believe that while Desmond is essen-
tially discreet in his mentions of the divine—one often has to weasel them 
out of his ingeniously intricate metaphysical speculations—the ultimate 
task of metaphysics remains for him a ‘patient mindfulness’ of the metaxu 
as openness to the absolute. But I repeat: patient here has nothing to do 
with supine passivity or subordination to some Supreme Omni-God or 
Sovereign Cause. It has to do with a passion of being-between which 
acknowledges that all our most creative acts are themselves responses to a 
prior and original gift of creation. Creation is this two-way com-passion 
which runs from sacred genesis down to our ordinary acts of making and 
praying, doing and thinking. This is finally where philosophy can reenter a 
dialogue with faith, reason with revelation—a robust and productive dia-
logue for so long censored in the modern prejudice of what Taylor calls 
‘exclusivist secularist humanism’. Addressing the vocation of the meta-
physical thinker of being between light and darkness, Desmond pens this 
quintessentially metaxological credo:
Patient mindfulness must open itself again to this passion of thinking—pas-
sion as an undergoing and a receiving—passion, one might also say, as an 
inspiration that already carries us in an arc of transcending, unchosen at first 
by us and rather choosing us before we, always late(r) choose for it. This 
confidence is ecstasis into a darkness that is not grim but listening’. (Ibid.)
It is precisely here that we see the ‘family resemblance to religious faith’. 
Desmond clarifies this paradox thus: “This is no univocal light but a trust 
that comes to hold steady, to be held steady in the light and darkness, in 
the equivocal twilight, or dawn, that marks our metaxological condition” 
(ibid.). In the final analysis, Desmond gives the last word to ‘love’ as a 
  THE GIFT OF CREATION 

284
primordial confiding in being. Love is faith because fides is, at bottom, 
con-fidens. The truth of love is troth—trust:
When all things are considered, this mystery is what, in our heart of hearts, 
we love as ultimate. Love is in confiding. We are loved when another takes 
us into his or her confidence. We love another when we are taken into con-
fidence. We are by our very being taken into confidence. The call on our 
being is to take what is given into our own confidence. (ISB 226)
It would be hard to find a more fitting philosophical hymn to the caritas 
of creation.
Bibliography
Desmond, William. 2006. Maybe, Maybe Not: Richard Kearney and God. In 
After God: Richard Kearney and the Religious Turn in Continental Philosophy, 
ed. John Manoussakis. New York: Fordham University Press.
———. 2016. Godsends: On the Surprise of Revelation. Ephemerides Theologicae 
Lovanienses 92: 7–28.
Kearney, Richard. 2001. The God Who May Be: A Hermeneutics of Religion. 
Evanston: Indiana University Press.
———. 2010. Anatheism: Returning to God After God. New  York: Columbia 
University Press.
———. 2016. In Reimagining the Sacred: Richard Kearney Debates God, ed. Jens 
Zimmerman and Richard Kearney. New York: Columbia University Press.
———. 2017. God Making: An Essay in Theopoetic Imagination. Journal of 
Aesthetics and Phenomenology 4: 31–44.
Taylor, Charles. 2014. A Secular Age. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 
R. KEARNEY

285
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_17
CHAPTER 17
On Speaking the Amen: Augustinian 
Soliloquy in Shakespeare’s Metaxu
Renée Köhler-Ryan
R. Köhler-Ryan (*) 
The University of Notre Dame Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: Renee.Kohler-Ryan@nd.edu.au
In Shakespeare’s Scottish play, mired as it is in evil that refuses to abate, 
there is a moment, after the Macbeths have murdered the king, when the 
main protagonist is on the stage alone. His act of soliloquy not only meets 
the standard of theatrical convention.1 At the same time, he carries out 
the philosophical act of Augustinian soliloquy in reverse. Macbeth ques-
tions himself, and reveals how closed off he is to his moral community, 
how impermeable to divine communication. He cannot even pray, having 
found that when he tried, ‘Amen’ stuck in his throat. This is but one of 
the forms of what Desmond calls ‘sticky evil’ in the play. Desmond’s anal-
ysis of equivocity in that work draws from his development of a philoso-
phy of the metaxu. When that concept of equivocity is seen for its 
indebtedness to Augustine’s insistence on self-reflection, it brings to light 
1 For more on the definition of soliloquy, see Stock (2010, 2011, 2017), Fox (2003), 
Arnold (1911), Hirsch (1997), and Skiffington (1985).

286
that the true tragedy of Macbeth is that because Macbeth has harmed his 
kin, he can know neither himself nor God.
Read in light of Desmond’s statement that Macbeth is a play “saturated 
with equivocity” (BB 112), the murderer’s few lines of thwarted soliloquy 
illuminate the pathway of Augustinian journey both forwards and back-
wards. At the same time, such analysis accentuates the importance of self-­
reflection as an antidote to tragedy. Macbeth’s downward spiral into 
further, stickier, evil (he is “in blood stepped in so far” that he cannot stop 
(3.4.142)), inverts the Augustinian order of knowledge of God and soul. 
Desmond’s articulation of this shows how mired humans can be in evil 
when they refuse, in word and deed, divine communication. According to 
Augustine, when one journeys from the exterior to the interior, the self 
expands so as to move further, from the inferior to the superior. For 
Augustine and Desmond, both moments of movement are needed: pro-
gressing from exterior to interior requires a sound and humble relation-
ship to the world; extending toward God intensifies self-knowledge. At 
that point, possibilities for communication of transcendence, in a com-
munity with God and others, become possible. Macbeth forfeits all this 
with a murder; his refusal to stop there and to repent, retracing fully a 
journey toward his maker, is the source of tragedy in the play. Macbeth 
knows what he is at this moment, but he refuses to change. All this and 
more is better known when Macbeth is considered in light of the features 
of Augustinian soliloquy and of Desmond’s articulation of equivocity.
Augustine’s Soliloquies
While the term ‘soliloquy’ is associated with some of the most profound 
and self-reflective words spoken by Shakespeare’s characters on stage, it has 
specifically philosophical, Augustinian roots. Augustine coins the word 
because he needs something to describe a very particular way of speaking 
to oneself while in the presence of God. The freshness of this approach is 
highlighted by Augustine’s astonishing moment of self-discovery at the 
beginning of the text of the Soliloquies. Laboring to find the answers for 
many philosophical questions directly related to Augustine’s understand-
ing of himself, he hears a voice. Where it comes from, he does not really 
know. Is it inside him or outside? Is it him or “someone else”? (2000, 
I.1,1) That voice reveals itself as Reason, which then makes certain demands 
on Augustine: he must write down his discoveries so that an audience of a 
few can later read them. There can, however, be no such intrusion now. 
There must be no one to whom Augustine will dictate his thoughts; he 
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

287
alone must be the scribe. For the moment, there should be only one other 
listener. At this point, three are involved in the dialogue—all listening, 
porous to each other; but the audience only hears the words of two—
Augustine and Reason. God’s presence is constantly inferred, known by a 
degree removed, through the words of those speaking. Nonetheless, that 
divine proximity makes all the difference. Augustine truly knows himself 
only when he first opens himself up in prayer; philosophical investigation 
depends upon openness to God. As the text proceeds, Reason lays out the 
demands that are at the same time the agenda for the remaining work: first 
will come prayer that Augustine will have the stamina to find what he is 
looking for; then he must write down what he finds, “that [his] confidence 
may be increased by what [he has] done” (2000, I.1,1). Finally, he will 
need to record conclusions. Augustine’s answers will not only be for him; 
they will also speak to “a few … fellow citizens” (2000, I.1,1) who, like 
him, are porous to divinely inspired reason.
These ‘fellow citizens’, as we know from his later work, City of God, will 
be defined by their inner life of caritas, which is characterized by properly 
ordered desire.2 Community thrives only when its members are able to 
love well. Augustine makes clear that a soliloquy can only achieve its inte-
grative aims if it begins with prayer that orientates one’s desires. Otherwise, 
the soliloquist goes mad, being out of synch with reality. This raises a 
major theme in the Soliloquies, which is that God heals the soliloquist’s 
disordered appreciation of reality. The one who lacks such knowledge is 
unhealthy or, in Latin, ‘insane’, where insanity refers to sickness of physi-
cal, psychological, and spiritual dimensions. Reason’s role in the work of 
becoming healthy is to reveal, rather than conceal, any improper loves or 
desires. Disordered love thereby equates with incapacity to explore and 
know the self with the powers of reason, which means that when Reason 
falters, or turns itself to the work of deception rather than illumination, it 
is an accomplice in foul play. It becomes destructive double-speak, turning 
to the darker side of equivocity, which obfuscates, instead of finding and 
considering the potencies of selfhood.3 Equivocity at its best discovers 
mystery, rather than skips over what one must honestly consider.
In other words, avoiding the pitfalls of equivocity means seeing things 
as they really are in their ineffability. To achieve this is the work of a life-
time, undertaken first with faith and then hope and love (Augustine 2000, 
2 See, for instance, Augustine, City of God, XIV, 28.
3 See ISB 51–56, where Desmond speaks of the possibility of double-speak to be both 
revelatory and duplicitous.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

288
I.5 and I.6,12–I.7,14). Such vision entails true health of the whole per-
son, directed by that person’s mind (Augustine 2000, I.13). As alluded to, 
Augustine’s use of terms for ‘health’ slips into equivocity within the Latin 
text so that health, while referring to physical well-being, more often 
emphasizes what happens when health of the mind is no longer present. 
In Book I in particular, such health (sane) is a central theme. For instance, 
within his first longer prayer, Augustine invokes God as the one who nei-
ther drives his people mad, nor allows anyone else to do so (Augustine 
2000, I.3). Then, Augustine asks that God purge him of any madness 
(insaniam)4 and instead make him healthy (sanis). In order to become 
‘sane’, Reason reminds Augustine that his focus must be on heavenly, 
more than earthly, delights. In other words, love can no longer be cupidi-
tas (Augustine 2000, I.19) driven by a soulless desire for that which will 
one day cease to be, shrouding the deceived lover in darkness, and leading 
to spiritual sickness. By contrast, the one with caritas is illuminated from 
within, by Reason that is virtuous—that is, well directed—toward its 
proper purpose. We see things as they are when we view their inner wis-
dom, which is their participation in God’s love (Augustine 2000, 
I.13,22–23). This heals us from an illness that Augustine thinks of as a 
kind of madness whereby reason cannot see what it must. Thus, the jour-
ney toward such sight begins with faith; one may not yet be able to fully 
see but must believe that there is something there to see—a Beauty beyond 
all, which, when discerned, heals completely (Augustine 2000, I.7,14). 
Hope is also essential so that one does not despair at ever achieving such a 
state. Finally, and most importantly, caritas infuses the entire person, turn-
ing him away from darkness and leading him toward an eternal cure; only 
this love never leaves, even when faith and hope are no longer necessary.
This is the quest for comprehensive understanding, where the eyes of 
the body are but a beginning point. Only with eyes that work, or are 
healthy, can we look—but Augustine emphasizes that looking is different 
from seeing (Augustine 2000, I.6,12). To see God is to understand him. 
This, finally, brings true health. Thus, the eyes look to the exterior so as to 
inform the inner man, who then sees what is above: God. This means that 
knowing and loving are the work of constant integration; health cannot be 
4 The Latin terms can be found in the original text published by James J. O’Donnell at: 
http://faculty.georgetown.edu/jod/latinconf/latinconf.html. I am referring to these 
throughout, to emphasize the way in which Augustine is playing on the double of mental 
and physical health.
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

289
gained in what is excessively abstract. In particular, there can be no sanity 
when self-deception is at play. Augustine finds quite quickly how mistaken 
and hubristic it is to think that the mind alone can save. Under interroga-
tion by Reason, Augustine proclaims that in particular the pleasures of 
sexual intercourse mean nothing to him: he is so much enraptured with 
the pursuit of wisdom that he has transcended these trappings of concu-
piscence. The next day, however, he is forced to admit otherwise, acknowl-
edging what Reason is right to point out: that while he now experiences 
differently the imagined pleasurable activities of the flesh, they are not 
completely removed from his horizon of desires. This realization through 
experience, says Reason (Augustine 2000, I.6,12), is God’s way of treat-
ing his patient—by showing Augustine that there are still significant ves-
tiges of what he needs to abandon in order to be truly virtuous, motivated 
by more holy love.
Augustine is devastated by what has been brought to light. In the dark-
ness, he found something in himself that he would want purged. In the 
light, he can acknowledge this, but it is painful. He begs: “Why do you 
probe and pierce so deeply?” (Augustine 2000, I.14,26) This moment of 
porosity enables greater closeness to God. Brought to nothing,5 he pro-
claims himself no longer capable of either taking for granted or making 
promises. He thought he knew himself, but now he knows otherwise: that 
he utterly relies upon God to show him what he is. Until he truly sees the 
Beauty that is God, he cannot pretend to know himself. This is at the same 
time perhaps the most personal moment of the text: Augustine realizes 
that in this vision of himself, he is the one at stake; he will be lost if he 
refuses to acknowledge what he would rather ignore, before Reason and 
in the presence of God.6 This is a moment very much like that in the 
Confessions, where he sees himself for what he is (1997, VIII.7,16). As 
such, it reminds that the work of self-reflection is at the heart of much-­
needed continual conversion. This, then, is a moment of self-reflection 
and orientation. He had been so certain the day before that he had 
achieved a purity of spirit that enabled him to rise up completely above 
physical pleasure. Realizing otherwise, he is thrown back upon God, 
reminded of his need for the restoration of health. God’s healing will make 
5 For the implications of being brought to nothing, or zero, see in particular: GB 28–30 
and 33–35; Köhler-Ryan (2017).
6 For a similar moment, see Augustine (1997, VIII.12,28).
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

290
him sound in mind and body; it will make him sane but only if he has the 
humility to work with God to achieve that healing.
Such sanity is brought about by divine illumination. Acknowledging his 
creaturely dependence on God, Augustine can know himself; he can 
emerge into the light. Thus Reason admonishes him to turn away from 
shadows and toward his true self—which is imperishable, unlike his body 
(Augustine 2000, II.19,33). Furthermore, to find the self is at the same 
time to find God; true self-knowledge only occurs in knowing at least 
something. In turn, seeing the self depends upon humility. Healing relies 
on us first acknowledging our darkness, our nothingness in the face of 
God. Again one finds the Augustinian order of movement: from the exte-
rior to the interior; the inferior to the superior. As Augustine soliloquizes, 
he looks with his physical eyes, before seeing, realizing that he needs to 
focus on what is within. Such introspection helps him to realize what he 
is, in face of the infinite light and love of God. The more Augustine can 
honestly reflect, the more he knows himself as creature, as well as the debt 
of love that he has to God and to the world in which he lives.
Crucial to all this is Augustine’s view that forgiveness and healing are 
only possible when one is honest with oneself. As is even more evident in 
Macbeth, without the healing balm of divine forgiveness, some morally 
significant, evil actions have the power to destroy every imaginable aspect 
of selfhood, including self-knowledge. This insight deepens awareness of 
the need at every point of movement, from exterior to interior, and infe-
rior to superior, to be porous to the divine. As a general principle, this 
entails having the humility to place God first in the order of love. Practically 
speaking, it necessitates honest and rigorous self-reflection, and knowing 
when one has breached a moral law and stands in need of forgiveness. 
One needs to think prayerfully and pray thoughtfully, as prayer and 
thought mutually disclose. At the same time, such prayer and thought are 
affected by the exterior. A rich matrix of interrelationships is at play, such 
that a rupture at any one point affects the whole person in relationship to 
God, self, and world. Ignoring this risks one’s overall well-being—or 
one’s ­sanity, taken in Augustine’s broad scope of meaning. At the same 
time, it jeopardizes the health of the society in which one lives. For, as 
Shakespeare’s Macbeth illustrates, an evil deed pollutes when it goes unac-
knowledged and unrepentant. Macbeth realizes this sooner than his wife, 
when he is unable to pray—to speak ‘Amen’. At this moment, Macbeth 
seems to glimpse himself as he must look in the sight of God. He has the 
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

291
opportunity to undo what he has done, but instead chooses for an equiv-
ocity that closes off possibilities of communication. He is lost.
Equivocity and Being at a Loss
Macbeth’s being at a loss can be explained in philosophical terms devel-
oped by William Desmond, who emphasizes that equivocity refers to the 
manyness and the flux of reality, which derives from the overdeterminacy 
of being.7 That is, being always exceeds what we can find, or determine, 
about it. We can therefore experience excess that occludes our ability to 
express and communicate. Positively understood, equivocity reminds that 
the world is so rich in meaning that no matter how much we discover, 
there will still be more to appreciate. Our use of language reminds us of 
this. “Words”, Desmond points out, are “overdetermined; they mean 
more than they say explicitly, and carry around within themselves unac-
knowledged origins. Words are excess: they express reserves of meaning 
but also reserve recesses” (ISB 181). Put otherwise: precisely the strength 
of equivocity—the richness of its overdeterminacy—can be exploited, so 
that words can only seem to mean what they say, and the listener is left to 
guess the intention behind an act of speech. More troubling is that the 
speaker might hide from himself through equivocation; further still, that a 
political climate can be so oppressive that the self is lost along with inabil-
ity to speak freely. Here, equivocity can be as harmful, as tyrannical, as 
univocity, as the self becomes infected; words and reality cannot harmo-
nize. Equivocity descends into oppressive double-speak. This is decidedly 
the world of Macbeth.
Again, such despotic equivocity has its counterpart in tyrannical uni-
vocity. It should be remembered that doubleness in speech is not, per se, 
harmful. Dialogue explicitly relies on such doubleness, whereby two 
speakers each present their perspectives. As is being argued, a prior dou-
bleness is necessary to such healthy dialogue, in soliloquy, where the self 
questions and reflects upon the self. Thus the difficulty of recognizing 
oneself is emphasized precisely by indicating doubleness. In contrast, a 
dictatorial thinker can willfully overlook ambiguity and decide on one 
meaning alone where more than one is actually at play. This is where tyran-
7 For the significance of overdeterminacy, see in particular: EB 163–177; GB 35–40 and 
128–134; BB 63–75; ISB 38–43; IU 400–404.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

292
nical univocity becomes realized. Desmond considers how dialectic can 
become dominated and consumed by a modern rational (Hegelian) uni-
vocal voice: the “dia” becomes univocalized to the point that the voice of 
doubleness is ruled out (ISB 46). The difference inherent in doubling 
plays into an overarching synthesis that is then absorbed into oneness.
Dangerous in a different way is the refusal to acknowledge the doubles 
upon which the ethical dialectic rests. That is, Macbeth finds himself 
not beyond but instead between good and evil (Desmond 2002, p. 146). 
Shakespeare’s presentation of Macbeth’s world, Desmond argues, could 
actually form a response to Nietzsche’s refusal of this ethical dialectic. 
Rejecting all systems, Nietzsche settles on the necessity of flux. In such a 
vision, all is equivocal—nothing is settled except what the striving will 
ordains. The relativism of the will to power refuses to find good and evil at 
play in the overdetermined metaxu. Nothing is determined already, and no 
action is determinable as either good or evil. Nietzsche offers us the unstable 
footing of Macbeth, who wants to be right that being sovereign in subjec-
tive power is all. Standing there with the murderer though, something else 
is apparent. Nietzsche detests the notion that the sovereign master should 
sometimes seek forgiveness and repent. Macbeth voices the despair of some-
one who knows, deep down, that he has “most need of blessing” (2.2.32). 
Listening to Lady Macbeth as well as to his fear at having breached the 
boundaries of ethical community, he dare not look on what he has done. 
The contrast with Augustine at his lowest point in the Soliloquies is stark 
(Augustine 2000, I.14.26). A Nietzschean might interpret this as the cow-
ardice of someone unable to look into the abyss.8 Is it not instead the case 
that Macbeth knows all too well that reality is not a state of flux overcome 
by acts of an amoral sovereign? This moment of ethical awareness is possibly 
the most honest in the whole play. Macbeth will not listen, and without the 
help of an ethically aware companion—let alone of God—he is too afraid to 
look. He cannot see nor can he repent. And yet, he knows himself bereft.
This brings to bear that dialogue, which relies on openness to the other 
and commitment to state as clearly as possible what one means, implodes 
when conversants withhold the real import of the words being used or 
8 As Desmond points out, Nietzsche has “contempt for the criminal who cannot live up to 
his deed” (2002, p. 146). The unrelenting Nietzsche demands self-knowledge that is at the 
same time knowledge of the deed. Simultaneously, he leaves no possibility for repentance. 
This is another way of thinking about a closure to transcendence, and at the same time to 
Augustinian movement.
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

293
when they misunderstand or misinterpret what is being said. A two-sided 
conversation in quest for what is true becomes a disunity parading as 
robust discourse. Dialogue can in this way become monologue without 
the porous characteristics of soliloquy. The disjointed exchanges between 
Macbeth and his wife, in Act II, Scene ii, sound out what happens when 
dialogue is not porous to the self-reflective work operative in soliloquy. 
Out of tune with the ethical dialectic between good and evil, all forms of 
intercommunication break down. Destructive equivocity usurps meaning-
ful dialogue. Augustine, Shakespeare, and Desmond all emerge here as 
thinkers porous to the ways good and evil announce themselves in the 
metaxu. Human action and reflection strive to respond to such 
communications.
Macbeth, Equivocity, and Soliloquy
Essentially, these three thinkers emphasize the power of language and the 
significance of words. In the overdetermined matrix of the metaxu, there 
is a real difficulty to strike a balance between univocity and equivocity. 
Overdetermination does not constitute disharmony and meaninglessness, 
but mystery and plenitude. Augustine theorizes about the importance of 
words and communication, and shows what happens when words open to 
all forms of transcendence work well. Shakespeare’s Scottish play gives 
existential depth to the perils of miscommunication, of univocalized 
equivocity.9 The playwright is acutely aware that when words lose their 
facility to resonate, all we are left with is an empty echo that defies mean-
ingful interpretation. Macbeth is a fragmented self. Unable to discern 
meaning, he cannot become integrated. This, the result of the Augustinian 
journey in reverse, affects not only Macbeth and those who immediately 
surround him. His actions influence the kingdom and, he acknowledges, 
the whole created order, reminding that what we say and do always affects 
more than the self alone; such is the interconnected nature of reality. 
Reading Macbeth with an Augustinian framework in the background, and 
with the possibilities and potential perils of an equivocal milieu in view, 
throws into relief the implications of Macbeth’s introspection. A close 
reading of this now illustrates the implications of refusing to move from 
world to inner self, from lesser self to God.
9 See also Garber (2004, pp. 700–771), on details of equivocation in Macbeth, and in par-
ticular on the use of ‘double’ in the play.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

294
It is illuminating to consider that equivocity in its more destructive form 
is at work throughout the various social dimensions of Macbeth, blocking 
possibilities for self-understanding. James Shapiro’s analysis of the year in 
which the play was written underscores Shakespeare’s personal awareness 
of how communities fracture when communication is impossible. The year 
1606 in Jacobean London was a climate of fear; it was also the year during 
which a shift occurred in the meaning of the term ‘equivocation’. From 
meaning simply ‘ambiguous’, equivocation moved to signify “concealing 
the truth by saying one thing while deceptively thinking another” (Shapiro 
2015, pp. 178–179). Constantly in fear of capture, torture, and death, 
Jesuits attending to the spiritual needs of Roman Catholics still living in 
England argued that one could use words with the intention that they be 
understood one way by the human listener and another by God. A secret 
treatise at the time listed four kinds of deception, the last of which argued 
that a lie was not essentially a lie “if you believed that God knew your 
thoughts, even if the person questioning you could not” (Shapiro 2015, 
p. 182). The very notion of lying is here contested, forcing a gap between 
what is (intention of the speaker, known only to him and God) and what is 
presented to others (what the hearer understands, based on the words 
used). This concerns far more than ambiguity and creates fissures where 
there should be continuities—between intention and deed (here, the words 
spoken), and more fundamentally, between self, others, and God.10
The milieu of Macbeth, like that in London of 1606, could not be in 
greater contrast to that of Soliloquies. In the latter, Augustine deliberately 
opens up a space in which one can freely and openly articulate one’s 
thoughts, beliefs, and even fears. There, in the presence of God, he strives 
for increased aptitude to say what he truly means. As a case in point, this 
is where Lady Macbeth systematically refuses to go. She chides her hus-
band, telling him not to think beyond a calculus of who to kill, when, and 
how, in order to gain power. She severs her imagination, refusing to see 
blood for what it is. She declines to recognize the true nature of her acts, 
as homicide and regicide. These are the ruptures in the potencies of hos-
pitality and community, into whose gaping wound she descends. All this is 
done in the name of reason and power—and of a love of her husband so 
disordered that it cannot be love at all. The lady speaks in tones of spousal 
10 For some of the political implications of saying ‘Amen’ in a religious context in the time 
that Shakespeare was writing, and with particular discussions of Richard III, see Targoff 
(2002).
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

295
affection but raves with a lust for power, whose consequences she cannot 
grieve in the open. Her guilt, nonetheless, is revealed to others when she 
does not know it—in her manic, restless sleep.
As she pines and wails, the truth of what she has done emerges and 
engulfs. The Macbeths are both bogged in what Desmond calls ‘sticky 
evil’: the crime may have seemed simple in thought—something that once 
done could be forgotten and referred to as a ‘deed’ or ‘business’ or ‘enter-
prise’ but not as murder. The reality is otherwise: the murder is primal and 
messy, and it leads to more and more letting of blood. Right after the deed, 
Macbeth is the one who realizes this, knowing that his hands will never be 
clean again (2.2.61–62). Lady Macbeth sees this only later. At the time of 
the murder she nonchalantly chides her husband, “A little water clears us 
of this deed. / How easy it is then” (2.2.68–69). Later, in the night, when 
conscience pricks, her underlying alarm can speak: “Who would have 
thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?” (5.1.39–40) We 
cannot see the blood on Lady Macbeth’s hands, but it stays. Such sticki-
ness, in sleep, brings with it nightmares of hell (5.1.36)—a form of non-
sleeping—for Macbeth, the clinginess of evil is obvious far sooner—but 
then even more systematically ignored. His is the stickiness of an ‘Amen’, 
lodged in his throat and now unspeakable (Desmond 2002, p. 153).11 In 
both cases, a deed has closed off all passage of communication, but the 
porous passages of disclosure had already become partially clogged. In the 
face of equivocity, where fair and foul are indistinguishable, Macbeth has 
opted for what he wants, rather than what is. Sharp indeed is the difference 
between Macbeth’s inability to speak ‘Amen’ and Augustine’s outbursts of 
prayer and praise. Macbeth cannot pray because he has refused to let the 
exterior speak in unison with interior—by violating the moral order, mur-
dering his king and guest, but above all, another human person—and 
because he cannot acknowledge his own inferiority before the divine gifts 
of life, freedom, and goodness. In other words, now lacking his bearings, 
he can only be confused by what is otherwise the gift of equivocity.
The play thus demonstrates the problems of univocity when it is taken 
too far, thereby illuminating the balance that it is necessary to maintain 
between univocity and equivocity. Univocity is true to being when it 
reminds of the importance of forms of certainty, which can be spoken and 
lived. However, it is potentially dangerous, when it leads to one voice 
11 Also see BB 254n.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

296
speaking, drowning out all others, demanding to be taken as the only 
determination possible on a given matter. This, one might say, is mono-
logue without the characteristics of soliloquy. The Macbeths are in this 
way univocal tyrants—unwilling to listen to innocent, truthful, and warn-
ing voices, they silence through violence. The root of their univocity is in 
the reversed Augustinian trajectory already indicated. Macbeth’s univocity 
is most evident in that he thinks himself superior; inattentive to the 
nuanced expressions of others and in particular of the witches, he reads 
signs in the way that he wants to: his intention overrides any other possible 
motivations behind the words of others. Macbeth thinks he is able to out-
run the supernatural; he prioritizes what seems over what is, to such an 
extent that no human life is anything more than “a tale / Told by an idiot, 
full of sound and fury / Signifying nothing” (5.5.25–27). The emptiness 
results from Macbeth’s loss of self, which is first indicated very early in the 
play, after the moment of the murder. It is in these lines, when Macbeth, 
alone for just a moment, speaks, that he is most aware of what he has 
done, and of how he is now separated from God and the whole of cre-
ation. He describes after the killing that he had overheard a servant laugh 
in his sleep, whereupon another called out ‘murder’. Thus awake, the 
young men prayed together—one saying “God bless us” and the other 
“Amen” (2.2.27). It is as if, Macbeth says, they had seen his bloody hands 
and called for supernatural aid. Macbeth is terrified by this incident because 
he found himself, in the moment, unable to pray. He asks his wife: “But 
wherefore could I not pronounce ‘Amen’? / I had most need of blessing, 
and ‘Amen’ / Stuck in my throat” (2.2.32–34). Lady Macbeth demands 
that such stickiness, the result and counterpart of his earlier “screwing his 
courage to the sticking place” (1.7.61) and murdering Duncan, must not 
be thought about. If they dwell too deeply on such thoughts, they will go 
mad. Tragically of course, Lady Macbeth does lose her sanity. Here, an 
unwillingness to recognize the full import of their deeds leads to madness. 
A healing double-speak is missing. She succumbs to the insanity that 
Augustine explicitly seeks to avoid. Where Augustine is willing to find and 
imbibe a bitter medicine, Lady Macbeth refuses to acknowledge her 
illness.
Also in contrast to Lady Macbeth, Macbeth can acknowledge immedi-
ately what he has done, and he realizes the effects of murder. The implica-
tions of his deed can be readily analyzed by examining his few moments of 
theatrical soliloquy in Act II. For just a few lines, Macbeth is alone on 
stage, and what he says can be analyzed in light of Augustine’s main points 
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

297
in the Soliloquies and Desmond’s metaxological philosophy. Thereby, 
Macbeth comes into focus as having reversed the Augustinian movement 
of self-knowledge. At the moment in the play in question, Lady Macbeth 
has just left the stage to smear the sleeping grooms (possibly those who 
had prayed earlier12) with blood. Macbeth speaks as follows:
Whence is that knocking? 
How is’t with me, when every noise appals me? 
What hands are here? Ha: they pluck out mine eyes. 
Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood 
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather 
The multitudinous seas incarnadine, 
Making the green, one red. (2.2.58–64)
In these brief lines, several considered themes are evident. First, while 
Macbeth’s soliloquy meets some of the formal criteria of that form of 
speech on stage, it neglects the Augustinian dimension, whereby one 
questions oneself in the presence of God. Macbeth cannot pray. God is 
missing, and so Macbeth cannot find himself. Second, Macbeth is afraid 
that he will go mad. Finally and decidedly, interior and exterior, inferior 
and superior, are all decoupled, because equivocity in its more sinister 
form has taken hold.
These few lines articulate that when members of a political community 
cannot pray and really be heard when they speak the truth, stabilizing self-­
knowledge is impossible. Macbeth interrogates both interior and exterior 
worlds, trying to find and make links where he experiences only discon-
nections. The knocking at the door, the blood on his hands, the sight of 
the hands he wants to be clean, the image of a green sea turning red if he 
were to wash his hands there: all bombard his senses. What he wants to be 
the case simply is not. The contrast between how he feels—pale, literally 
‘appalled’ by every sound—and the red blood on his hands is striking, 
12 Editors of the Arden Shakespeare edition of Macbeth note that while some assume those 
who cried out to be Malcolm and Donalbain, “it is more likely that they are the sleepy 
grooms referred to later [at 2.2.51], and subsequently made Macbeth’s scapegoats” 
(Shakespeare 2015, p. 180). If this is the case, and these are the sleepy grooms, then a break-
down of community is even more evident here. While they can pray, the inability of another 
to echo their prayer, or pray with them, is a foreshadowing of the violence that will be done 
to them by that same outsider.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

298
indicating disjunctions between what he wants (to be cleansed of sin) and 
what appears (evidence of his evil actions).13
Then comes Macbeth’s moment of true self-realization. In a gradual 
process of self-analysis, he knows that he is severed from God, and from 
creation. The greenness of the sea would not take away the taint of the 
murder. Putting his hands in “all great Neptune’s ocean”, no washing 
would occur. Instead, the blood on his hands would discolor every ocean. 
A few lines later, Lady Macbeth glibly declares “a little water clears us of 
this deed” (2.2.68). She demands her husband not be lost in thought. 
Right now, Macbeth can still think the deed for what it is. The moment 
passes and becomes a rejection of guilty self-knowledge. This is the deci-
sive moment when he closes off porosity between introspection and tran-
scendence: “To know my deed, ’twere best not know myself ” (2.2.74). 
To think about what he has done, in the exterior world, is to acknowledge 
what he is. He would rather not know himself now. Fully aware of the 
intrinsic connection between what he has done and what he is, Macbeth 
at this point decides not to be aware. He will do everything that he can to 
distance himself from the deed, and thereby from himself. The violence 
with which this invention occurs will, of course, only bring him further 
toward its inner source: his severance from God and Reason.
Conclusion
This moment of Shakespeare’s soliloquy, read via Desmond’s analysis of 
equivocity in relation to sticky evil, grants depth to the age-old philo-
sophical maxim: know thyself. Such knowledge involves not only the self, 
but creation, and depends upon a relationship with God that witnesses to 
the fecundity of equivocity. It is the foundation of a metaxologically 
grounded community, and the source for all moral action. Again, 
Macbeth’s inability to say ‘Amen’ is crucial when considered from 
Augustine’s main points in the Soliloquies and Desmond’s metaxological 
philosophy, in turn influenced by Augustine’s anthropology. For 
Augustine, the root of spiritual illness is the inability to acknowledge the 
order of being. Derived from this is the incapacity to pray and to listen to 
Reason. Further, the unhealthy one cannot define or communicate what is 
13 Macbeth’s dramatic situation could be compared with Augustine’s use of the structures 
of theater in the Soliloquies. For a discussion of the latter, see Foley 2014.
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

299
real and true. This inability to speak bleeds too upon those surrounding 
the unhealthy. One thinks of Lady Macbeth’s doctor, who “thinks” but 
“dare[s] not speak” (5.2.5) about the evidence he has seen of sticky evil. 
Unequivocal honesty with the self, before God, is necessary for ‘sanity’ 
and the health of an entire community at the same time. It is, then, crucial 
to this analysis to recognize that having reversed the Augustinian journey, 
Macbeth can neither pray nor listen to reason in its fullest, most porous, 
sense. This enables a fuller understanding of reason’s role in self-­
knowledge, and thereby facilitates a deeper appreciation of what reason, in 
its more ancient, metaxological roots, entails.
Namely, Reason in Augustine’s Soliloquies is both univocal and equivo-
cal—a richly metaxological interlocutor. Augustine does not know whether 
to think of Reason as himself or someone else, as interior or exterior. As a 
dramatis persona, Reason uncompromisingly drives Augustine to state as 
clearly as possible what he means and what he wants; at the same time, 
Reason is compassionate and patient. Reason is porous to otherness, and 
particularly attentive to the desires of the whole person, as well as the com-
munications of the divine. Reason helps Augustine to think clearly about 
who he is and what he wants. With Reason, his speech has focus and is 
directed toward God, whose presence illuminates what he most desires to 
know. He is porous to what he knows; it affects him as he receives it, and 
it changes him within. This is best articulated in his prayers—at the begin-
ning his prayer is long-winded, looking for the point. Later, he can speak 
succinctly to God what he wants to know: only two things, God and the 
soul, ‘nothing more’. Following Reason’s direction, he prays: “God, who 
is always the same, may I know myself, may I know you. This is my prayer” 
(Augustine 2000, II.1,1). Thus, knowledge of God coincides with self-­
realization. This short prayer, the result of much labor, states clearly what 
Augustine intends. His speeches in the Soliloquies run in the opposite 
direction to Macbeth’s language in Shakespeare’s play, which becomes 
increasingly difficult to decipher.
Tragedy has thus developed out of a failure of self-knowledge that rec-
ognizes the ethical space between good and evil. This is a domain where 
transcendence constantly announces itself. Augustine’s trajectory, taken in 
reverse, is applicable to dramatic tragedy only in a secondary sense. When 
Augustine, Shakespeare, and Desmond indicate the interdependencies 
and communications between self, world, others, and God, they empha-
size a deep mystery within the primal Judeo-Christian story of the lure of 
evil and the destructive nature of sin. Macbeth and Lady Macbeth are like 
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

300
another Adam and Eve.14 As such, they remind that self-reflection porous 
to transcendence and ethical knowledge is important for each and every 
human person. Only in learning from what I have been given, as it com-
municates to me, can I know myself, and only then can I see myself as I 
am—quintessentially desiring God. Two things only are necessary to know 
the potencies of being human: God and the soul. Such knowledge, 
though, is forged using the fire of an ethical life that depends upon open 
communication. Tragedy occurs when saying what one means, in the pres-
ence of God, cannot happen in either exterior or interior dimensions.
Bibliography
Arnold, Morris LeRoy. 1911. The Soliloquies of Shakespeare: A Study in Technic. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Augustine. 1997. The Confessions. Trans. Maria Boulding, OSB. Hyde Park, NY: 
New City Press.
———. 2000. Soliloquies: Augustine’s Inner Dialogue. Trans. Kim Paffenroth. 
Hyde Park, NY: New City Press.
Colston, Ken. 2010. Macbeth and the Tragedy of Sin. Logos: A Journal of Catholic 
Thought and Culture 13 (4): 60–95.
Desmond, William. 2002. Sticky Evil. In God, Literature and Process Thought, ed. 
D. Middleton, 133–155. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Foley, Michael P. 2014. A Spectacle to the World: The Theatrical Meaning of St. 
Augustine’s Soliloquies. Journal of Early Christian Studies 22 (2): 243–260.
Fox, Robin Lane. 2003. Augustine’s Soliloquies and the Historian. In Studia 
Patristica XLIII: Augustine and Other Latin Writers, ed. F.  Young et  al., 
173–189. Leuven: Peeters.
Garber, Marjorie. 2004. Shakespeare After All. New York: Anchor.
Hirsch, James. 1997. Shakespeare and the History of Soliloquies. Modern 
Language Quarterly 58 (1): 1–26.
Köhler-Ryan, Renée. 2017. Thinking Transcendence, Transcending the Mask: 
Desmond Pondering Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. In William Desmond 
and Contemporary Theology, ed. Christopher Ben Simpson and Brendan 
Thomas Sammon, 191–216. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Shakespeare, William. 2015. Macbeth, Bloomsbury: The Arden Shakespeare, ed. 
Sandra Clark and Pamela Mason. London: Bloomsbury.
14 This is evident in several ways. There is a parallel between Lady Macbeth and Eve as 
temptress; the way that sin infects the whole world, about which Macbeth is very aware, as 
discussed, is another parallel idea. For more on this, see Colston (2010).
 
R. KÖHLER-RYAN

301
Shapiro, James. 2015. 1606: William Shakespeare and the Year of Lear. London: 
Faber & Faber.
Skiffington, Lloyd A. 1985. The History of English Soliloquy: Aeschylus to Shakespeare. 
Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Stock, Brian. 2010. Augustine’s Inner Dialogue: The Philosophical Soliloquy in Late 
Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2011. Self, Soliloquy, and Spiritual Exercises in Augustine and Some Later 
Authors. The Journal of Religion 91 (1): 5–23.
———. 2017. The Philosophical Soliloquy. In The Integrated Self: Augustine, the 
Bible, and Ancient Thought, 98–126. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.
Targoff, Ramie. 2002. ‘Dirty’ Amens: Devotion, Applause and Consent in Richard 
III. Renaissance Drama 31: 61–84.
  ON SPEAKING THE AMEN: AUGUSTINIAN SOLILOQUY IN SHAKESPEARE’S… 

303
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_18
CHAPTER 18
Metaxology and Environmental Ethics: 
On the Ethical Response to the Aesthetics 
of Nature as Other in the Between
Alexandra Romanyshyn
William Desmond’s diagnosis of ethical problems that arise in modernity 
is applicable to some of the current issues in environmental ethics. In this 
chapter, I will concentrate primarily on Desmond’s account of the devalu-
ation of being, which leads to instrumentalization. I will apply the loss of 
perceived value of the ‘other’ to environmental ethics, with nature being 
the ‘other’. I will also explain modernity’s misuse of nature in light of 
Desmond’s views of the devaluation and instrumentalization of nature. 
Finally, I will argue that Desmond’s metaxological metaphysics provides 
the basis for a more appropriate view of nature, which will promote a more 
ethical treatment of the environment.
Environmental philosophy has a number of challenges, some of which 
Desmond’s metaxological metaphysics can assist in answering. One such 
problem is that of anthropocentrism—namely, a tendency within Western 
thought to view human beings as the only possessors of intrinsic value, 
while all else has merely instrumental value (Brennan and Lo 2016). 
A. Romanyshyn (*) 
Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO, USA
e-mail: alexandra.romanyshyn@slu.edu

304
Desmond’s metaxological worldview combats such anthropocentrism, 
first, because it counteracts the belief that we possess absolute power over 
nature, and second, because it defends the transcendence and intrinsic 
value of nature. In this chapter, then, I will elucidate the portions of 
Desmond’s philosophy that will explain the rising mistreatment of nature 
and that will help us motivate a better attitude towards nature.
Agapeic Origin and Ways of Wondering
Mankind begins in a state of astonishment at the goodness of being. Imagine 
the wonder of a baby, discovering for the first time commonplace items that 
adults take for granted: a door swinging on its hinge, the sound of a rattle, 
a splash of water. Yet with age and experience, the innocence of the wonder 
becomes tainted: hinges can pinch, rattles can herald a threat, and water can 
burn the lungs. Through a process of disillusionment, humans come to real-
ize the danger of the ‘other’—a being outside of themselves, or specifically 
another human outside of oneself. The original, innocent wonder is tar-
nished by the perception of threat. One may merely weather the threat of 
the other, or one may cope with the threat by moving towards a devaluation 
of the other. Once that which posed a threat is devalued, one can dominate 
it more easily. Consider, for instance, the reaction of one who is insulted by 
a close friend; while continuing to value the friend’s opinion, one will feel 
deeply hurt by the insult. One may weather the hurt, but there is a more 
palatable option: to eradicate it. How often, then, will one react by disavow-
ing the friendship, or by claiming that the friend’s opinion is meaningless, 
groundless, false, and not worth consideration. Such a reaction is one of 
devaluing what is hurtful—ignoring or eliminating its value—and thus 
depriving it of the power to hurt. Note, such devaluation may spare one 
pain in the here and now, but perhaps at the cost of greater goods.
Now I should observe that while Desmond criticizes the above loss of 
wonder at otherness, he is not necessarily calling us to return to an imma-
ture, childish wonder. There are in fact three ways of wondering, as 
Desmond outlines in “Ways of Wondering” (ISB 260–300). First, the 
original astonishment: pre-reflective and pre-intentional. Desmond writes,
[T]his idiocy of astonishment sounds negative, not our negation but our 
being negated. And yet it is more the affirmative ‘too-muchness’ of the hap-
pening that is outlined in the event of astonishment. There is an intrusion of 
ontological frailty in the unpremeditated event of coming to be: it might not 
have come to be, it might not have been at all. (ISB 264)
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

305
We wonder at creation around us, not because we are weak or lesser, but 
because of the abundant goodness of the being of the other. This astonish-
ment is not a failing or weakness on our part, but rather a recognition of 
the magnificence of the other.
The initial, pre-reflective astonishment must give way to a more consid-
ered view of the world. While it can go wrong and lead to a more deter-
minate, even positivist, perspective, it can also give way to perplexity. 
Perplexity is a more mature way of wondering; it is
a modality of wondering that brings us more into the equivocity of being: the 
play of light and darkness, the chiaroscuro of things and ourselves; the dark 
light of unformed things and things forming; of ourselves formless and seek-
ing form and being returned to formlessness; of all things enigmatic and 
intimating; of ourselves the most baffling of beings, at once shouting 
absurdly and absurdly singing. (ISB 275)
This way of wondering is more reflective as it reacts to the equivocity of 
being, that is, a bewilderment that the previously perceived good is equiv-
ocally good—that it is in some sense threatening. Perplexity provokes us 
towards a more complex awareness of the other, perceiving it as not just 
idiotically good, as we once thought.
Finally, perplexity can give way to curiosity, which Desmond describes 
as follows: “Finally, positive science for the maturity of the human race: 
now disciplined, regulated curiosity knows positively of reality in all its 
detail. The teleology of knowing is mapped onto an inexorable move from 
the indeterminate to the determinative” (ISB 299). This is a more intel-
lectual way of wondering, a way that promises an understanding of the 
other, without limiting the other or viewing it as wholly graspable within 
the confines of our intellect. It is the most matured and intellectual way of 
wondering, which allows us to both know and marvel at the other.
Loss of Astonishment: The Move to Devaluation, 
Subjectification, and Instrumentalization
Astonishment can go awry when we become aware of the equivocity of 
being. Instead of yielding to a more sophisticated sort of wonder, we can 
lose astonishment and begin to devalue the other. The devaluation of 
nature as ‘other’ comes in response to the threat of nature which issues as 
desire for a more comprehensive sense of autonomy (EB 25–30). We can 
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

306
understand this more clearly when we consider that devaluation, in some 
ways, seems to create both ethical and logical space for control and domi-
nation of the other. The devaluation of which Desmond speaks is a rejec-
tion of intrinsic value in the other, leaving merely instrumental value. If 
something has no value besides instrumental value, then it is permissible 
for us to use this thing in ways most profitable to us. We no longer see any 
good in the thing itself. For example, if it is more profitable for us to 
destroy a tool, such as a hammer, rather than to hammer nails with it, then 
it is morally permissible to destroy the hammer, since the hammer has no 
intrinsic value. The very existence of the hammer is not good; the hammer 
is only good insofar as it is a useful tool for humans. It may then be used 
or destroyed in whatever way provides the greatest utility. When one 
rejects the intrinsic value of nature, or of things within nature, then one 
likewise instrumentalizes nature; we thus subjectivize value, valuing things 
only relative to ourselves (EB 39). If nature has no intrinsic value, then it 
can be used like a hammer: a tool, only valuable insofar as it can profit us.
A desire for autonomy, as well as recognition of the equivocity of the 
other, motivates subjectification of the other. As Desmond writes, “it is 
the self who is the power so to place the other, and to do so, not for the 
other as other, but for its own self, and indeed for the securing of its own 
self-determining power, or its own power as self-determining” (EB 35). 
The desire for pure autonomy leads us to treat the other as having no 
autonomy of its own—for if it did, we would have to acknowledge our 
own heteronomy, our own dependence upon the being of things around 
us. We desire perfect control over the other because only then can we be 
truly autonomous. Thus, failure to recognize our own limitations and het-
eronomy, that is, a desire for complete autonomy, leads to a subjectifica-
tion of the value of the other.
Even a cursory perusal of philosophy of nature during the nineteenth 
century reveals a predominant conception of nature as being merely mech-
anistic. With the rise of science and the positivist worldview, nature began 
to seem less a mystery and more purely determined or determinate:
Teleological explanations generally were rejected, and, at a time when 
Darwin’s doctrine had not yet been received, in its place the materialists set 
the claim that what looked like purposive behavior or development was 
nothing but the result of increasingly complex physical and chemical pro-
cesses. (Rueger 2012, n.p.)
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

307
With increasingly scientific explanation of natural phenomena, there was 
less of an inclination to recognize purpose within or beyond nature, leav-
ing room for us to impose our own purposes upon it. The “apparently 
mechanistic world of nineteenth-century science” thus facilitated the sub-
jectification of value within nature (ibid., n.p.). The prevailing view of 
nature as lacking intrinsic purpose or value primed people to view nature 
as something to be bent to their own purposes, and to only be of value 
insofar as it was valuable to them.
We thus have multiple concomitant reasons for the devaluation of 
nature and the subjectification of value. Nature was seen as a threat, brim-
ming with powerful forces that can potentially destroy. A palatable 
response is to neutralize the source of the threat, a perceptible theme in 
modern philosophy. Or, a more Nietzschean response, one of positing 
man as the source of all value in a valueless world, places man in the posi-
tion of power.1 We become that which determines value. Our rejection of 
the other, the result of perceiving it as a threat, is trifold: a rejection of its 
autonomy, helping us view nature as something within our control; a 
rejection of its intrinsic value, leaving it only instrumental value; and a 
rejection of its ‘overdeterminacy’, a term by which Desmond expresses 
that something is not indeterminate, but also not purely determinable by 
man.2 This trifold rejection of nature, prompted by the perception of 
nature as a threat, can explain the use and misuse of nature in modernity: 
all over the world, natural resources are being depleted. The philosophy 
behind this is clear: if nature is not with us but against us, we must control 
it to make it work for us; if nature has no intrinsic value, we have the right 
to alter it for any of our purposes; if it has no overdeterminacy or intrinsic 
good, then we should determine and modify it to make it good for us.
One may object that not all ill-treatment of nature is the result of per-
ceiving it as a threat; for example, we pillage many resources that would 
not have been threats if left to their own devices, such as forests or other 
natural habitats. However, we need not posit that every act of control is 
the direct result of perceiving a threat; even if we do not view nature as a 
threat, yet we still question its inherent goodness, there is logical space for 
1 See: “So we can restate the point concerning the grounding milieu of value: modernity’s 
shaping of the ethos grows out of distrust of equivocity, expressed in the univocalizing men-
tality of dualistic opposition that produces a devaluing objectification of being on one side 
and a subjectification of value on the other side” (EB 41).
2 For a helpful example of ‘overdeterminacy’, see EB 163.
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

308
us to control and determine nature. As Francis Van den Noortgaete notes, 
“in modernity—especially so in its current late form—the given goodness 
of being has been progressively called into doubt, resulting in a decou-
pling of being and the good, as notions of inherent value were increasingly 
replaced by humanly attributed potential use value” (2016, pp. 122–123). 
So, merely believing that being and good do not necessarily correspond to 
one another creates space for us to deny the intrinsic good of nature and 
determine it at our own scrutiny. Once mankind views nature as some-
thing we should control or determine, then it is easier for us to rationalize 
using it, or even abusing it, for our own purposes, exactly as we would do 
with a tool or anything else upon which we impose value.
Loss of Perplexity and Implications on Nature
Desmond diagnoses modernity as also lacking ‘erotic perplexity’; such a 
lack is the inability to recognize that some aesthetic value cannot be per-
fectly grasped by human intellection. As Desmond describes in Perplexity 
and Ultimacy, perplexity arises in response to the mysteriousness of the 
Good, for “the Good suggests an enigma which will not let us excuse 
ourselves from thinking. Quite to the contrary, this enigma renews per-
plexity and makes the mind sleepless. Beyond every determinate problem 
and every univocal answer, there is another, second perplexity, beyond all 
determinacy” (PU 173). Erotic perplexity is the natural response to recog-
nizing that the other is known, only in part; there is a part of it that tran-
scends the limitations of our intellects. Such recognition implies a sort of 
scepticism, which is not necessarily bad: “Whether it crushes or releases, 
skepticism can be an expression of philosophical truthfulness” (PU 184). 
Such scepticism, however, can prompt a form of self-transcendence, for 
“there is an implicit orientation of honest self-transcendence towards the 
absolute truth as other to our own self-transcendence” (PU 175). 
Realizing that the other is transcendent, and consequently, transcending 
our powers of comprehension, directs us towards what is higher, rather 
than reducing all to the finite, or the determinate. Erotic perplexity turns 
us beyond ourselves.
Enlightenment philosophy lost such erotic perplexity and tends towards 
reductionism. As Holmes Rolston III describes modernity’s worldview, 
“Animals were mindless, living matter; biology was mechanistic” (1989, 
p. 126). Reducing everything to mechanism both deprives it of value and 
deprives us of wonder. The loss of wonder parallels a quest for control and 
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

309
complete understanding, at the expense of the failure to recognize those 
things which might transcend our understanding. For example, we might 
try to understand something exhaustively, using science, but there are 
some aspects of a thing’s being that science cannot capture, and so our 
methodology will be limited. Consider, for instance, a scientific analysis of 
a painting: it would yield a comprehensive account of the chemical com-
position of the paint, the dimensions of the painting, and the proportions 
of its figures; however, it would not be able to tell you, quite importantly, 
whether the painting counted as good art; science would not have the 
correct methodology to measure something’s aesthetic value.3
On Desmond’s account, something like nature exceeds the capacities of 
not only particular disciplines, but also of our finite intellectual powers. 
Thus, our observation of nature is characterized not only by the limita-
tions of our methodologies, but also of our understanding. Something 
unquantifiable, immeasurable, and undeterminable, such as the beauty of 
a sunset or the sublimity of a thunderstorm, is not valuable to one who 
seeks thorough comprehension of nature, because such values cannot be 
measured and determined by human powers. The scientific explanations 
of sunsets and thunderstorms do not capture their aesthetic goodness. 
Consequently, the desire to eliminate perplexity causes a desire both to 
make nature purely determinate and to ignore its aesthetic qualities.
Meanwhile, modern philosophy is the perfect companion for industrial-
ization: the devaluation of nature means we can exhaust natural resources 
for our own gain, since there is no value except in relation to us. Desmond 
refers to such a phenomenon as the “subjectification of value”, that is, value 
becoming relative only to oneself, the subject. The subjectification of value, 
concurrent with instrumentalization, easily complements Nietzschean will 
to power. Nietzsche, questing for higher autonomy and self-transcendence, 
rejects the possibility of a power or determiner higher than man: without a 
higher power beyond man, there is no source of value external to man, 
enabling man to determine the value of all things (see EB 153). While 
Nietzsche wishes to maintain transcendence within man, at least within the 
human will, his desire to escape inherent value leaves him trapped in nihil-
ism, “despite his excess of rhetoric about overcoming nihilism” (EB 154). 
Nietzsche quests for value and transcendence, but ultimately devalues 
being, for “Nietzsche knew the devaluation of being in modernity, though 
3 For more of Desmond’s thoughts on a scientific worldview, see EB 213, 238 and 
379–380.
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

310
he took this valuelessness for the truth of being: no inherent value—value is 
what we stamp on the flux. Nietzsche recommends a more radical process 
of creative self-becoming” (EB 153). However, “his aestheticization of the 
good and the world is such that there can be no good, no rank, will it oth-
erwise though he may” (EB 156). There is a desire for value in Nietzsche, 
without a metaphysical basis for such value. How can we give value to a 
valueless world, when we are indeed part of that valueless world?
As Desmond explains then, Nietzsche becomes the equivocal doppel-
ganger of Kant. In Nietzsche, Kant’s self-legislation becomes autonomy 
that is not under moral law, since it is the source of the law. Thus, “postu-
lating God becomes postulating self, and self becomes the summum 
bonum” (EB 153). Because Kant’s argument for the existence of God is 
roughly a postulation of a higher power, Nietzsche can go a step further 
to postulate man as that higher power. Such will to power then contrib-
utes to the subjectification of value, and thus, of the value of nature.
Aesthetics and Environmental Ethics
Desmond recounts various approaches to ‘aesthetics’, which I understand 
to be the desirable aspect of the good, and I will apply these senses of 
aesthetics to environmental issues. The ways of considering aesthetics are 
the univocal, equivocal, dialectical, and finally metaxological. First, the 
univocal: this way considers one objective good. To be, is to be good, and 
this good is completely determined. Such univocity relates to aesthetics 
insofar as aesthetics refers to what we find desirable; what we desire is sim-
ply the good.4 Univocity, thus, roughly parallels the original astonishment 
into which we are born; there is no doubt that the baby wants the puppy, 
or that the puppy is good. That moment when the puppy bites, disillu-
sioning one to its purely determined goodness, reveals the equivocity of 
being, as well as the equivocity of the good, leading to the second sense of 
the aesthetic. Being can be good in one sense, bad in another, and our 
desires will shift accordingly. Furthermore, some goods will fuel, not sat-
isfy, our appetites, and so we find that the more we acquire, the more we 
desire. Equivocity lies both in our shifting perception of the good and in 
4 Desmond writes, “This aesthetic univocity of value is a pre-reflective univocity: lived in 
very definite ways, especially as defined by the common sense of communities; not made an 
object of determinate thinking unless there is a breakdown, an unforeseen change, or a depri-
vation” (EB 57).
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

311
the tendency of one good to propagate further desires for that good, or 
for other desires (see EB 87). Thus, the good becomes indeterminate, or 
indeterminable, and our desires are indeterminate in the sense that they 
know neither constancy nor bounds.
The interplay between determinacy and indeterminacy, univocity and 
equivocity, leads to dialectical self-determinacy. Desmond writes, “passing 
into the determinate, and thence into significant indefiniteness, the dialecti-
cal way approaches the overdetermined ethos in terms of self-determination. 
If to be is to be good, here to be good is to be self-determining” (EB 117). 
The indeterminate is intolerable, and so one seeks to determine things one-
self, to control things. Consider the Kierkegaardian aesthete, a character 
consumed by sensual pleasures and immediate gratification; the infinity of 
sensual desires is intolerable, and quite often such characters will mellow 
to the life of asceticism, a form of ultimate control over desires. To deter-
mine things so completely, however, one must be the source of determina-
tion, but we are ultimately not the source of determination (see EB 231). 
Being is ‘overdetermined’; it points to something beyond itself (perhaps 
God), which has determined it, although this determination exceeds the 
capacity of human understanding. To make oneself the determiner of what 
is overdetermined, then, necessitates a self-transcendence, making oneself 
a higher power than one already is, as a Nietzschean account would have. 
But this is also intolerable, to Desmond, for it seems we cannot be the 
source of determination, and thus the source of value, goodness, and 
power, when we are a part of the very creation that we have stripped of 
these things (see EB 19 and 35–37). Recall that the ability to determine 
another’s value flows from the devaluation of that other. How can we give 
value to a valueless world, when we are ourselves part of that valueless 
world? Only when we recognize our heteronomy—that is, acknowledging 
that we are not purely autonomous, that there are other partially deter-
mined, partially autonomous powers, and hence other sources of value 
and other holders of value—only then do we see reality as it actually is, 
which brings us to metaxology.
Since we cannot be the source of everything—value, goodness, power, 
even being itself—we must recognize the transcendence of the other and 
the givenness of being. That is, there is a way in which nature transcends 
us, and its very existence is a gift from a more transcendent origin. As 
Desmond writes, “The relation to the good as other is more complex than 
dialectic comprehends; the mystery is more affirmative than equivocity 
knows; determination is more open than univocity allows” (EB 219). 
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

312
Recognizing the overdeterminacy, the complexity, the ‘givenness’ of 
nature helps us appreciate nature as other, in its own right, not merely in 
relation to ourselves; recognizing its origin as something beyond us helps 
us appreciate its intrinsic value. Thus, we return to original astonishment 
at nature, and by extension, the environment. Interacting with nature 
becomes an aesthetic experience: we return to appreciating the goodness 
of the other, and even its terrible moments are transfigured into an aes-
thetic experience of the sublime. A lightning storm is no longer perceived 
as a threat, but as something to behold with awe, as well as with awareness 
that it has the power to obliterate us. Lightning is beautiful, but it can kill 
you; it is striking in two senses of the word! The aesthetic experience of 
the Sublime—“a finite manifestation of the infinite”—reminds us of the 
overdeterminacy of nature: that is, it is neither purely determined nor 
undetermined; it both transcends us, and comes from something more 
transcendent than itself (EB 183). The sublimity within nature is “beyond 
the measure of our moral evaluations of good and evil” (ibid.). It has a 
source greater than us, and a purpose greater than ours.
Metaxology, then, by pointing to the origin of being as something 
beyond us, re-elevates the very nature, the very environment that moder-
nity has devalued. By helping us experience, aesthetically, the overdetermi-
nacy and the intrinsic good of the other, a metaxological worldview shows 
us that nature has value beyond our instrumental uses for it. It is not 
something we can determine; our will to power is futile. But more impor-
tantly, nature is good. There is no need to determine it, dominate it, con-
trol it; nature is not a threat to us, but a gift, rife with awe-filling, perplexing 
beauty.
Metaxology, as a metaphysical system that points to the origin or 
metaxu of a being, restores the original astonishment that was tarnished at 
the discovery of being’s equivocity. Van den Noortgaete says, “to 
Desmond, precisely this renewed astonishment about the plenitude of 
being forms the basis of ontological gratitude” (2016, p.  123). 
Furthermore, gratitude “due to its acknowledgement of a goodness that 
is not self-authored” helps us not only recognize a source of value beyond 
ourselves, but also it makes us want to uphold the bearer of that value, 
because we appreciate it (ibid.). As we will see, such an attitude helps 
immensely in environmental ethics.
Regarding nature and the environment, metaxology tells us to look 
beyond our own transcendence, for though there is a transcendence of 
man, there is the transcendence of the other, in this case nature, as well. 
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

313
Another key point of metaxology is being “in the between”, neither wholly 
separate from the other nor wholly one with the other. We humans are in 
nature, but not of nature; although we do transcend it in a sense, our 
existence is interwoven with nature. We are neither purely autonomous 
nor purely heteronomous; we can act in ways not determined by nature, 
but there are other senses in which we are still determined by nature: one 
cannot, for example, plant a garden without earth, water, seeds, and so on. 
Our most basic sustenance is dependent upon nature. This betweenness, 
then, helps us value the other insofar as we are interrelated with it; 
betweenness humbles us through the acknowledgement of our own het-
eronomy (see EB 200). Meanwhile, by revealing the transcendence of 
nature as something that points towards an origin higher than both itself 
and us, metaxology prevents us from viewing our dependence upon nature 
as the only source of its value. Thus, metaxology makes a twofold contri-
bution to environmental ethics; by asserting our heteronomy, a metaxo-
logical worldview prevents us from believing that we can have absolute 
power over nature, and by defending the transcendence of nature as other, 
metaxology preserves the intrinsic value of all beings in nature. 
Metaxological metaphysics, by pointing to the agapeic origin of being, 
shows us that we are not self-created, self-determined, or self-made, and 
neither is nature determined by us.
Applied specifically to aesthetics, metaxology shows us that to be is to 
be good. Thus, the existence of nature and its constituents is good. 
Furthermore, metaxological aesthetics reveals incarnate goodness; exis-
tence as physical, fleshed being is good. Nature, in all its sensuality, and our 
corporality that makes us dependent upon nature, are good in virtue of 
being physical things. The aesthetic value of flesh is given, as well as a task, 
for it refers us to the other; through the aesthetics of embodiment, we 
sense others and are sensed. Aesthetics thus relates us even more to the 
other.
In nature, aesthetic qualities, including sublimity, point to the other-
ness and transcendence of nature’s origin, and consequently to the other-
ness and transcendence of nature. Because aesthetics involves our desires 
as well, such recognition of aesthetic good in nature is not merely an 
epistemological recognition, but a recognition of desire; one sees the 
good of nature and wants it. This connects to gratitude, gratitude for the 
good of the other, without which “environmental ethics risks being 
reduced to a duty, and hence limited in its impact” (Van den Noortgaete 
2016, p. 125). Desmond’s metaxological account of aesthetics, as well as 
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

314
of ethics and metaphysics, yields an approach to environmental ethics by 
which the ethical behaviour is desirable, not onerous, for “gratitude appar-
ently fosters a tendency for cooperative behavior exceeding what is 
required by, or esteemed as appropriate in view of, social norms. It 
increases the inclination to help, even when this is effortful or costly, and 
thereby extends to include strangers” (ibid., p. 126). Thus, a metaxologi-
cal perspective on aesthetics, as well as on metaphysics, can induce us 
towards a more ethical treatment of the environment.
Conclusion
A metaxological worldview can vastly promote respect and consideration 
for nature. Desmond uncovers the shortcomings of the very aspects of 
modern philosophy that make the misuse of environmental resources 
appear permissible. He replaces such metaphysics with metaxology, which 
preserves the dignity of nature as other, consequently, as something par-
tially independent from us, with value and transcendence of its own. The 
implications of Desmond’s view are that nature has intrinsic value, as well 
as a purpose other than our instrumental purposes for it. Therefore we 
ought to respect nature as other. Furthermore, ethical treatment of nature 
is not onerous, but something delightful, if we return to our original 
astonishment at nature as good, along with erotic perplexity at beholding 
its aesthetic qualities. Thus, by not only preserving the value of the other, 
but also calling us to enjoyment, appreciation, and awe at the good and 
beauty of the other, Desmond’s view would make respectful treatment of 
nature and the environment not only obligatory, but also pleasurable, as 
one delights in all aesthetic goods.
Bibliography
Brennan, Andrew, and Yeuk-Sze Lo. 2016. Environmental Ethics. The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Winter Ed.
Desmond, William. 1995. Perplexity and Ultimacy: Metaphyscal Thoughts from the 
Middle. Albany: State University of New York Press.
———. 2001. Ethics and the Between. New York: SUNY Press.
———. 2012. The Intimate Strangeness of Being: Metaphysics After Dialectic. 
Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press.
Rolston, Holmes, III. 1989. Environmental Ethics: Values in and Duties to the 
Natural World. Ethics and the Environment 11: 363–368.
 
A. ROMANYSHYN

315
Rueger, Alexander. 2012. Conceptions of the Natural World, 1790–1870. In The 
Cambridge History of Philosophy in the Nineteenth Century (1790–1870), ed. 
Allen Wood and Songsuk Susan Hahn. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Van Den Noortgaete, Francis. 2016. Generous Being: The Environmental-Ethical 
Relevance of Ontological Gratitude. Ethics and the Environment 21 (2): 
119–142.
  METAXOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ETHICS: ON THE ETHICAL… 

317
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1_19
CHAPTER 19
Responding Metaxologically
William Desmond
The themes of this book are very fitting for the preoccupations that have 
perplexed me. There is hardly a book I have written, from Art and the 
Absolute to The Intimate Universal, in which the interplay between art, 
religion and philosophy (in a metaphysical register) has not been at issue.1 
These three, in addition to our being ethical, are of significance for them-
selves and for philosophical reflection. All honor to Hegel for placing art, 
religion and philosophy at the highest level of absolute spirit. I am at one 
with the imputation of ultimate importance, though I am not fully at one 
with the way Hegel relates them. I hold that there is a metaxological inter-
mediation among art, religion and philosophy rather than a dialectical 
sublation, as Hegel held. The metaxological intermediations of the spaces 
between art, religion and philosophy are plurivocal rather than univocal, 
or even dialectical. There can be intermediations between philosophy and 
1 See especially AA and IU.
W. Desmond (*) 
Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA
Maynooth University, Maynooth, Ireland
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium 
e-mail: William.Desmond@kuleuven.be

318
the aesthetic, as there can be between philosophy and our being religious, 
as well as between the aesthetic and the religious.2 Being ethical is not to 
be neglected, and I have also written extensively on this.3 Kierkegaard is 
not wrong in speaking of the aesthetic, ethical and religious spheres of life. 
The question for me is, as with Hegel, how he understands them. How 
they overlap or pass into each other demands thought more subtle than 
laying them contiguously side by side in an existential self-becoming. 
Kierkegaard does not do this, of course, though I would say that the aes-
thetic and art, as much as our being religious and ethical, participate in a 
saturated equivocity in which significant ambiguity comes from the poros-
ity of our being rather than from an endeavor to move from the aesthetic, 
to the ethical, to the religious, otherwise contiguously placed side by side. 
There is something about the permeability of these that continually resists 
their each being placed in their autonomous spheres.
About all three, in themselves and in relation, as well as in connection 
with our being ethical, there are saturated equivocities that resist the uni-
vocal literalness of prosaic thought. These equivocities find a place in 
thought somewhere between system and poetics. At the same time these 
equivocities are not to be dialectically superseded by the higher univocity 
of a speculative system. Hegel’s philosophy of absolute spirit has been 
recurrently a source of fascination and resistance in my own thought which 
differently treats this saturated equivocity. The equivocity is to be dwelt in 
metaxologically: as a sign of the surplus signifying of the overdeterminate 
ethos of the between, not as a medium allowing passage to conceptual 
thought, simply thinking itself at the end of all self-becoming. There is an 
aesthetic/artistic wording of the between, just as there is a religious and a 
philosophical wording. Being ethical is the incarnation of that wording in 
a form of human life in fidelity to the call of being good.4 Instead of the 
triadic sublation of art, religion and philosophy in the unity of the concept 
at home with itself, there are metaxological intermediations which have a 
more fourfold character. The wording of the between is a crossing of the 
between. We can cross from in to out, from out to in, from below to 
2 If AOO answers the intermediations of art and philosophy, and IST responds to the 
intermediations of religion and philosophy, The Gift of Beauty and the Passion of Being: On 
the Threshold between the Aesthetic and the Religious (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2018) 
addresses intermediations between the aesthetic and the religious.
3 Most fully in EB but also in PO.
4 See ‘Wording the Between’, in The William Desmond Reader. Ed. Christopher Simpson 
(Albany: SUNY Press, 2012), 195–227.
 
W. DESMOND

319
above, from above to below. This seems simple enough at first glance, but 
there is nothing univocal about it. There is something about it hard to 
determine, something exceeding our self-determination, something not 
merely indeterminate but in excess as overdeterminate. In what sometimes 
seems almost nothing there is a too-muchness that shows finite being on 
a threshold, in a communicative, even revelatory sense. A metaxological 
dwelling with the saturated equivocity tries to think these crossings, tries 
to word plurivocal passages in the wording of the between.
This book presents to me a rich collection of impressive discussions rang-
ing over an equally impressive range of themes and figures. On each of them 
I could have, and would have liked to have, said something fuller in response, 
but space forbids this. I have tried to make an important point or two as I 
respond to each of them. I am grateful for the care with which my work has 
been read and honored. I am full of appreciation for the acumen in com-
menting on my work, and the charity in correcting it. I take each of the 
contributors as companioning my own thoughts. I hope that my remarks 
are not too impressionistic but I have listened to my companions, and if I 
raise issues I see related to the exchange, I often want to amplify or supple-
ment the given contribution. Of course, as happens in the conversation of 
companions, explicit responses do not preclude silent accords and unspo-
ken communities of shared understanding. There is always more to say.
1
As one would expect from John Milbank, he offers a bold and very inter-
esting reflection, with imaginative and surprising turns of thought and 
connections that highlight hitherto unnoticed possibilities. I appreciate 
the connections he draws of my own work with a longer historical unfold-
ing. I would remark on my own long meditations on the relations between 
the esprit de finesse and the esprit de géométrie. Perhaps the rigors of math-
ematics have not enough engaged me in thinking through the equivocities 
of the metaxu. I once was a dab hand at mathematics when I was young, 
but it is a language I have left unused later. That said, the tense combina-
tion of the ordered thinking of mathematics and the wayward intuitions of 
the poetic was important in the formation of my mind. I suppose the esprit 
de finesse has assumed a kind of priority in my thoughts over the esprit de 
géométrie. This is not because I am lacking in respect for the latter. Quite 
the contrary, the extraordinary univocities of the mathematical quest are 
perplexingly interesting insofar as they lead to certain equivocities and 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

320
paradoxes at certain extreme thresholds. I take this territory of paradox to be 
home ground for John Milbank’s penetrating reflections. I do touch on 
some of these matters briefly in articulating the transition from being as 
univocal to being as equivocal in BB (see the end of Chap. 2 and the begin-
ning of Chap. 3). I have put stress on diverse conceptions of infinity in my 
work, right from the beginning with DDO: the infinite of succession, inten-
tional infinitude and the actual infinitude—these are at the core of this first 
effort to stage the metaxological philosophy. I speak of different conceptions 
of infinity also in connection, for instance, with the understanding of the 
world we find in Pascal and Hegel. I remain a companion of Plato in think-
ing that there is a noetic and ontological level beyond the mathematical level 
of thinking of dianoia. (I am not sure Badiou gets this.) Reflecting the long 
tradition stretching back to the Pythagoreans, Leibniz has an interesting 
remark about arithmetic and music: ‘Music is a hidden arithmetic exercise of 
the soul, which does not know that it is counting’ (Musica est exercitium 
arithmeticae occultum nescientis se numerare animi. Letter to Christian 
Goldbach, April 17, 1712). It is cleverly altered by Schopenhauer: ‘Music is 
a hidden metaphysical exercise of the soul, which does not know that it is 
philosophizing’ (Musica est exercitium metaphysicis occultum nescientis se phi-
losophari animi). I would alter it again in wondering if music is ‘before’ cal-
culating. The word sings the world into being; the word sings mathematical 
intelligibility into being. It is not just that music is secretly mathematics, but 
that mathematics is a music the intellect does not always know it is singing. 
Leibniz’s God sometimes comes across more as a God of geometry than a 
God of finesse.5 In reading John Milbank I am reminded how George 
Cantor believed he was hearing the voice of God in connection with transfi-
nites. Alas, theia mania also may be shadowed with the risk of real madness. 
I can identify with the Pythagorean-Platonic strain whose music is still to be 
heard in Kepler but which has gone silent in Galileo. Among the many 
important things John Milbank points to in this splendid exploration is the 
admission of ‘logical mystery beyond logic alone’ which allows us to think 
the thought of God anew, and this without exiling, with Wittgenstein, ethi-
cal and religious matters to the ‘sublime margins’. And this in the worthy 
company of thinkers like Nicolas of Cusa and Erich Przywara.
The reflection of David Schindler is a very searching and sensitive 
exploration on the importance of truth and being truthful. There are 
5 See GB Chap. 3 on the Gods of geometry.
 
W. DESMOND

321
many things I like about it, but I will just mention his delving into the 
relevance of some of the thoughts I elaborate in ISB. He offers a probing 
discussion of Vattimo full of insight, and while I will not comment on 
Vattimo, I will offer a supplementary remark, in the spirit of this contribu-
tion, on a certain overlap in concerns between myself and Heidegger. I 
agree that it is an important point to move to a level of considerations that 
are not confined to the terms of propositional truth(s) alone. Heidegger 
tries to name this order of being in the truth with his notion of alētheia. I 
would rather speak about the more original porosity of being, in and 
through which truth as other to us comes to communicate itself in and to 
our own immanent being truthful. In BB, there is an important chapter 
entitled ‘Being True’ in which I try to articulate the connection between 
different senses of being and different modalities of being true, culminat-
ing with the metaxological sense. I talk about being true as the agapeic 
service of transcendence. In relation to this, I would say that Heidegger’s 
concern with alētheia is only half-true, and seems to me to be untrue to 
our more primordial participation in being true in our own being truthful. 
What I mean is betrayed in the way that in Being and Time (§29) he uses 
the language of robbery (ein Raub) to describe alētheia: we wrest truth 
from its hiddenness, we steal it from its being withheld in itself. I think of 
Prometheus stealing fire from the gods. In Heidegger’s robbery I do not 
find the agapeic manifestation of the true which offers itself to us in gener-
ous communication. We do not steal the true from its hiddenness. If we 
were to play with perhaps related metaphors, the agapeic communication 
of the true is more like Pascal’s fire (feu): it comes to us, comes over us. 
The true words itself in tongues of fire. How Heidegger gets from his rob-
bery (or from Polemos) to Gelassenheit is never made clear. He is moving 
in the right direction but I have always wondered if the terms of his earlier 
commitments hinder his truer release into the clear, the truer release in the 
porosity of being and being true. Among David’s work is the first-rate 
Plato’s Critique of Impure Reason (2008): it shows an admirably finessed 
sense of the plurivocal Plato, between system and poetics. Christ’s remark 
comes to mind about those who become scribes for the kingdom: they are 
like householders who bring out from the storeroom things both old and 
new. I sense an agapeic mindfulness, stretched between what was, what is 
and what is to be, at work in his writings.
Daniel Minch addresses the issue of the relative silence about God in 
recent philosophy, especially since Kant, but reminds us very helpfully that 
the issue is one for theology also. Theology also has had to come to terms 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

322
with its own ongoing ‘crisis of metaphysics’, partly sourced in a problem-
atic understanding of finitude that has come down from Neo-Scholasticism. 
He offers us an eminently lucid account that takes in a longer historical 
view that shows the prefigurement of current crises in earlier understand-
ings. I am illuminated by his way of situating the ‘crisis of metaphysics’ in 
theology, and he makes impressive sense in applying the scheme of the 
fourfold sense of being to the hermeneutics of experience, as Schillebeeckx 
understands this. I confess to not being as knowledgeable about 
Schillebeeckx as Daniel Minch’s illuminating chapter persuaded me that I 
should be. I learned much from it about his thought, and I am struck by 
the intelligent and engaging way Daniel  puts my own thought into a 
mutually illuminating contrast with Schillebeeckx’s work. I do have some 
hesitations about the transcendental approach in philosophy, and am too 
much of a Platonist (perhaps in a heterodox or reformed sense) to make 
me hesitant about the aporias generated by a too unsuspecting historicist 
or hermeneutical approach to things. The relation of time and eternity has 
been a too-much-neglected issue in historicist thought since Hegel. It is 
hard to drive out of mind what Dostoevsky calls ‘those cursed, eternal 
questions’. I wonder also if one were to stress more the porosity of being 
and the passio essendi, whether one might modify the tendency to privilege 
some kind of futurity we find in much modern thought. It is a serious 
question for me how teleology and eschatology need to be rethought in 
light of an ontological/metaphysical and theological archeology of the 
absolute origin which bring us closer to the truth of the porosity of being 
and the passio essendi. This is not absent here, but Daniel’s worthy reflec-
tion makes me wonder about the future tilt of Schillebeeckx.
The hesitation about Kantian ‘correlationism’, and hence the legacy of 
transcendental thought, is at stake in Sandra Lehman’s very interesting 
and well-thought-out study of how the realist impulse is present in the 
new realist thinking and my own work. She is quite right to note a funda-
mental difference in the overall design of the two approaches. Whereas a 
metaxological philosophy opens to a form of metaphysical theism, the new 
realism seems predicated on the groundless character of the absolute, if 
indeed there can be an absolute at all on its terms. That said, she helpfully 
offers a lucid and well-structured account of a kinship between metaxol-
ogy and the new realisms, the result of shared ontological concerns. In 
agreement, I must celebrate the liberation of ontology/metaphysics from 
the dogmatic dead-end produced by the orthodoxies of post-metaphysical 
thinking. In tune with the spirit of her thoughts, I have worried whether 
 
W. DESMOND

323
this new realism is too much in agon with forms of philosophizing domi-
nating the French landscape in the twentieth century, without enough 
hermeneutical self-consciousness that the realistic impulse is both as old as 
the philosophical tradition and as ontologically rooted in the deep consti-
tution of the human being as the porosity to being, expressed diversely in 
different formations of the desire to know. Vis-à-vis correlationism, I have 
wrestled with what I take to be the one-sidedness of the transcendental 
approach when it comes to the knowing of the other qua other (in DDO, 
for instance), but that granted, I think we cannot think ourselves out of 
the picture in a full accounting of the ontological field. To think ourselves 
out of the picture (apart from the incoherence) would be a philosophically 
reactive reply to the one-sidedness of correlationism. The deeper truth of 
selving and othering is in this porosity of being and indeed various 
reformed shapes of correlationism that articulate the being of the between. 
I find that Sandra says very apposite things on these scores, as well as wel-
come things about Heidegger, which I also endorse.
2
I am very grateful to Brendan Sammon for bringing his impressive knowl-
edge of the work of Dionysus the Areopagite to bear on the possible 
metaxology of the divine names. While some recent philosophical think-
ers, such as Jean-Luc Marion and John Manoussakis, have shown sympa-
thies for this tradition, contemporary philosophy generally finds itself out 
of sorts in dealing with these themes. There are analytical discussions of 
the divine attributes, but I think it safe to say that the mode of treatment 
lacks the feeling of appreciative, reverent participation we find in earlier 
forms. I am illuminated by the work of Sammon, and I note his concern 
elsewhere with beauty in his excellent The God who is Beauty, a concern I 
share. What I call the hyperboles of being, and the finding of indirect 
direction to God through these hyperboles, can be seen to belong to this 
Dionysian tradition. I will only add that Part 4 of GB, entitled ‘God’ (fol-
lowing godlessness, ways to God, Gods), can well be seen in that tradition 
and in a genuinely participatory way. The names of God, the so-called 
attributes, are thought through by means of what I call ‘metaphysical can-
tos’, of which I sing ten. A metaphysical canto is a sung riposte to those 
post-metaphysicians who purse their lips when pronouncing the word 
metaphysics and indeed God. Brendan Sammon is also a singer in his 
attunement to the beauty of the divine. The metaphysical cantos, surface 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

324
appearances notwithstanding, are full-throated efforts at being mindful of 
God: they give voice to thought singing its other (as I put it in PO). I am 
at home in singing with Dionysus and with Brendan. Singing and meta-
physics can make divine love to each other.
Mark Novak rightly sees a continuing friendly dialogue with Richard 
Kearney with whose work I have kept in touch over many years. He out-
lines helpfully some of the salient features of both of our approaches. His 
voice enters mindfully into that continuing conversation. Richard Kearney 
himself contributes to this volume, and I will say a further word or two in 
due course. That said, Mark Novak’s exploration is helpfully relevant to 
the theme of aesthetics, religion and metaphysics. I wonder if there are 
slightly different slants to these in my own and Richard’s works. My rela-
tion to the metaphysical tradition is more sympathetic than his, who has 
been more accepting of something closer to the Heideggerian character-
ization of the tradition. This has consequences for the God of metaphys-
ics, so-called, consequences I do not find myself at home with. That said, 
the convergences that Mark foregrounds are well worth stressing. 
Theopoetics: this is mirrored in my own concern with the poetics of the 
religious, though the terms ‘between system and poetics’ tell something of 
the different sense of conversation between metaphysics and the aesthetic 
I would have. Mark Novak picks up on this very well in the later parts of 
his chapter. In one light my engagement with art, religion and philosophy 
is a kind of metaxological redoing of Hegel’s absolute spirit, and perhaps 
overall more of a (re-)sacralization of the aesthetic rather than an aestheti-
cization of the sacred. A forthcoming book, The Gift of Beauty and the 
Passion of Being, brings this out. Do I have a slightly different take on the 
creative power of the imagination which, I think, more truly finds itself 
endowed by the passio essendi, and nurtured to figural wording out of the 
more primal porosity of being? If it is true I am trying to recall the agape-
ics of the divine (something philosophers have not done, or even 
attempted), Richard Kearney and I are at one in thinking that eros and 
agape do not have to be set over against each. The hyperboles of being are 
figures that word metaxological thresholds, thresholds where we can begin 
to hear again the divine wording of being as a given between. I have sig-
nificant things to say about metaphor, analogy, symbol and hyperbole that 
give metaxological precision and nuance to our wording(s) of the divine 
metaxu.
I am heartened by Patrick Cooper’s welcome attention to the idiotics 
of the divine woo. I take us to be at one in the face of the amazing forget-
 
W. DESMOND

325
fulness of the mystical in the moralization of the religious in our time. 
Moralization can become a project of our autonomy, but mysticism lies in 
the agonizing delight and delicacy of the divine woo. Mysticism comes in 
many forms, but recurrent is the ecstasy and torment of being called to 
love, of being in love where idiotics, aesthetics, erotics and agapeics pro-
miscuously mingle. Patrick perceptively picks up on central Augustinian 
registers from early in my work and to which I return again and again. I 
found illuminating the contrast with Blondel that he offers us on that 
score. Also very illuminating was the community of echo and reecho with 
the work of Russbroec. I am grateful to Patrick for helping me better see 
my own work in this echoing and reechoing. One is struck by the signifi-
cance of Russbroec as an important interlocutor. He is not as attractive to 
the fashionable postmodern admirers of Eckhart, and it would be an inter-
esting question to ask why. Yet he is a worthy interlocutor, the quiet rich-
ness of whose work deserves honoring, and which Patrick honors nobly. I 
found very engaging Patrick Cooper’s deployment of The Intimate 
Universal, coupled with a precise reminder of how Augustine or 
Augustinian themes are companions to my thinking over the long haul. 
Part of the brilliance of Augustine lies in his capturing in a concise formu-
lation an entire sense of the world, of self and of God, and yet what is 
captured is not captive but rather releases in us an awakening to divine 
mystery. It is captivating to us but we cannot make it captive and so is not 
unlike the mystical woo of the divine idiotics.
3
Cyril O’Regan offers a very fine exploration of evil in my work and in that 
of others. Cyril is perhaps the person who has most engaged my work, and 
I am grateful for the finesse and friendship of his companioning presence 
over a long time. Evil is a recurrent perplexity in all my work in some form 
or other, and I have written a significant number of articles on different 
dimensions of the mystery of evil. I have hopes to write a trilogy in which 
the first volume will be called Desecrations, to be followed by Purgations 
and Consecrations. I hubristically model this trilogy on La Divina 
Commedia. I did start on Desecrations but put it aside for the moment, 
and the difficulty of the matter (or anti-matter) is brought home to me by 
Cyril’s exploration. Instead I turned to The Gift of Beauty and the Passion 
of Being. In that book, the opening reflection on the gift of beauty ended 
with an encounter with the mockery of evil in relation to the beautiful: a 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

326
séance with hell. Even with beauty I could not escape encountering hell. 
It is very difficult to enter intimately into the mystery of evil, and one risks 
being perplexed to the utmost, indeed being tormented and shattered by 
the mystery. While I hesitate about theodicy as practiced by rationalistic 
philosophers, I do find that the contemporary rejection of theodicy makes 
it a bit too easy to side-step the perplexity that generates the torment of 
soul about the justice (dike) of the divine (theos). Gnosticism I share an 
interest in, but defer to Cyril O’Regan’s superior knowledge. I have 
learned more than I can say from his exceptional work on Gnosticism. His 
approach to Gnosticism is more oriented to narrative hermeneutics, while 
mine has perhaps more of an ontological-existential pathos. His very help-
ful contribution here helps me gather some of my thoughts to date, and 
also points in very helpful directions with regard to other resources and 
thinkers. I have high respect for Paul Ricoeur, perhaps to a degree more 
for the earlier Ricoeur of Fallible Man, and also his exceptional Symbolism 
of Evil. I do find a version of Kant haunting the later Ricoeur, to which I 
cannot subscribe unreservedly; admittedly Ricoeur is equivocal. George 
Bataille, Cormac McCarthy and Jerzy Kosinski are illuminatingly cited. 
The excremental mysticism of the first I found both fascinating and repul-
sive. Concerning the second I did have an earlier interest but let it lapse 
through a mixture of laziness and lack of time. The third precipitated me 
into unresolved rumination, occasioned by his suicide. In my own engage-
ment with evil, I would mention Shakespeare, John Milton, Flannery 
O’Connor, William Golding, Gerard Manley Hopkins (the dark sonnets) 
and Dante. Cyril is spot on to focus on the Medusa theme, which has 
engaged me probably most in connection with Schopenhauer and 
Nietzsche. I recall an early study of Hegel’s dialectical account of evil, how 
to interpret it and how it is limited. In tune with Cyril’s suggestion, I 
argue for the indispensable need of the image to deal with what I call the 
idiocy of the monstrous: indispensable not to know the evil in the sense of 
providing a determinate rational explanation, but in the sense of helping 
us acknowledge and remember what lies on the threshold of determinate 
conceptualization and pointing beyond such determination to our inti-
macy with the mysterium iniquitatis.
Roberto Del’Oro provides us with a very nuanced discussion of some 
central ethical issues connected with the thresholds of life and death: com-
ing to be and passing away. It provides a first-rate mingling of philosophi-
cal and anthropological dimensions to address ultimate issues that have 
been recessed in many discussions of medical ethics or bioethics. Roberto 
 
W. DESMOND

327
is a theologian with serious philosophical credentials, willing to enter into 
dialogue with currents of thought, some of which are not either hospitable 
or even antagonistic to the theological dimension of bio-ethical issues. It 
is often forgotten how in this matter ethical concerns were first raised by 
those with religious or theological concerns. Medical ethics or bioethics 
risks being overtaken as a professional area of concern by thinkers not at 
all sensitive to the issues of philosophical and theological anthropology. 
The results are a kind of wasteland of medical ethics, so well described 
here, and against which Roberto struggles honorably. One wonders if the 
second ethos we have reconfigured in the light of our uses of science and 
technology, in the dominion of serviceable disposability, makes us lose 
intimacy with the deeper sources, not only of our humanity but of being 
at all. This chapter is a recall and wake-up call to what is elementally con-
stitutive of our condition of being. It makes first-class use of my own 
notions of the passio essendi, the conatus essendi and so on. It is admirable 
in the way it brings these thoughts to issues in bioethics which reveal the 
recessed ontological and theological issues in patterns of thinking which 
are overtly in flight from metaphysics and theology. He is very sensitive to 
how, though rooted in nature, we risk denaturing ourselves in remaking 
ourselves according to a second nature. This remaking runs roughshod 
over the passio essendi and lacks reverence for subtleties of the endowed 
powers that constitute our incarnate being. In echoing my own thoughts, 
he reveals them to me in new lights, not so evident to me before. I find it 
heartening that the ideas have lives beyond the ones they have lived or are 
living in my own work. For myself I grow more somber and fearful of the 
wasteland, not as the desert before the rejuvenating rains, but as the 
degraded soil that follows misuse of the earth, misuse too of our own bod-
ies as the earth of our singular and communal selves that endow us as 
extraordinary beings in creation.
Dennis Vanden Auweele’s chapter is a very interesting and insightful 
study of the plurivocal nature of silence. However, I cannot be silent in 
regard to my gratitude for Dennis’s indispensable support and tireless 
work in organizing the gathering out of which the current book emerged. 
He was a kind of primum mobile, for nothing would have happened 
­without him, nor would this collection of chapters have come to be. He 
has more than generously offered my work the gifts of his own engage-
ments. I endorse his appreciation of the playfulness of Socrates-Plato (in 
the dialogue Euthydemus) in comparing us as philosophers to children 
chasing after larks. I like the twinning of seriousness and playfulness: seri-
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

328
ousness, since if one has watched the way a child might try to catch a lark, 
the child can be absolutely absorbed in the chase; and yet when the lark 
escapes, what we sometimes witness is a squeal of delight! There is some-
thing tender rather than disparaging about this image: children, closest to 
immediate wonder, and tireless in seeking and yet not paralyzed by the 
discouragements of the already defeated. Look at a child chasing a bird on 
a beach: it is not the will to capture but the delight of surprise that capti-
vates us, the joy in seeking to touch the mysterious creature of flight that 
alights, tantalizes us and flies off, if we do not woo it to stay a while. A 
number of significant discussions of silences are gathered and remarked 
upon, and I very much endorse the indispensable need of silence. I once 
wrote a piece entitled ‘The Solitudes of Philosophy’, in which what was at 
stake was the corrective and convalescent power of silence, about which 
Dennis’s reflection writes in salutary reminder. Beata solitudo, sola beati-
tudo. This is a wise saying, much forgotten in the professionalization of 
philosophy as an academic specialty for which we are not promoted for 
our silences. It would be interesting to connect what Dennis says on 
silence with the soliloquy about which Renée Kohler-Ryan speaks: a solil-
oquy, spoken by one alone, is meant to be heard, or overheard—either by 
fellow humans or by the divine; it is not absolutely alone. There are many 
silences, of course, and not all of them benign. I am interested in mystical 
silence; the silences of nature; the silences of lovers; the autistic silence into 
which religion is driven in an age idolizing secular autonomy. Dennis 
properly notes the apophatic dimension of silence and suggestively says 
much about silence in Dostoyevsky and Nietzsche. I am struck here how 
the Grand Inquisitor does all the talking while Christ says nothing. The 
Grand Inquisitor talks himself out of his intention to execute Christ again. 
His talk provides the rope by which he hangs himself. Christ says nothing 
in response to being told to depart and never return. He silently kisses the 
Grand Inquisitor. Christ is neither a judge nor executioner; he is who he 
is, and in his company, our truth is reflected back to ourselves, and some-
times we become our own judges and executioners. Until we are kissed. 
Silently. One thinks too of the silences of Christ in the company of Pontius 
Pilate. Sometime a silent kiss is the true answer. It meets the kiss of Judas 
in a doing of the good, an act of love, not a theory. There is much more I 
would like to say, but alas on this occasion, I must now be silent.
I am intrigued to be coupled with Giorgo Agamben, but my intrigue 
is answered very well by this exploration of Philip Gonzales. Part of this 
intrigue concerns a movement in thought which exhibits a kind of 
 
W. DESMOND

329
­post-­Christian colonization of Christian symbols. This is cause of joy to 
some theologians, but I find myself hesitant. I worry that it answers to 
what I called (in connection with Hegel’s God) the production of coun-
terfeit doubles. (This is central to the contribution of Sander Griffioen 
and I will say a word or two about it next.) Agamben is undoubtedly 
intriguing, and not least in connection with displays of what looks like 
an extraordinary mastery of arcane erudition. We are lured and allured 
by this teasing erudition but wonder to what pass the entire perfor-
mance brings us. Philip’s excellent reflection put me in mind of the 
question of eschatology about which I have been asked more than once. 
I explain my diffidence in terms of the idolization of any (to me) ques-
tionable teleology of immanent history. Such a teleology risks being false 
if deprived of a proper archeology of the good of the ‘to be’. Without 
what in more theological terms is called ‘creation’, we find it hard to 
articulate an ontology of the ‘to be’ and its good, and what follows is 
not recreation but our reconstruction of the future as a this-worldly 
redeeming beyond. This may not be Agamben, though if memory serves 
me correctly, in The Coming Community, he speaks of limbo in terms 
with an echo of Aquinas, though not with the significance of Aquinas: 
limbo as the state of natural happiness one might enjoy without the 
beatific vision. That happiness might be deemed happiness enough. 
Limbo is thus, perhaps, a certain take on what Charles Taylor calls the 
‘immanent frame’. I am struck by how ‘eschaton’ has the meaning of 
‘edge’ (as well as ‘end’). ‘Edge’ is a threshold and a cutting. I would 
speak of the need to be at the edge of things in which the clogged poros-
ity is cut open again, pierced by a beyond that cannot be contained by 
any immanent historicist teleology—communicating immanently the 
infinite qualitative difference of divine transcendence as other. Such 
would refer to an archē or origin ‘before’ creation or coming to be and 
to an overdeterminate fullness beyond every determinate and self-deter-
mining completion. This is divine grace not human work, and it qualifies 
the meaning of glory differently with regard to erotic sovereignty and 
agapeic service. It is not a matter of either servility or sovereignty. 
Beyond this contrast what is at stake for us is the right alignment of self-
affirming love, eros, philia and agape. The point is not a strike against 
erotic sovereignty. There is glory there too. But the fuller glory is the 
coursing of the companioning power through all the loves. This means 
that, beyond any ‘immanent frame’, we must do what we can to keep the 
porosity to the divine open.
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

330
4
I very much appreciate the discerning attention that Sander Griffioen 
devotes to my engagement with Hegel. I am glad he sees that my relation 
to Hegel is not any dualistic opposition which simply rejects him but a 
metaxological intermediation which opens to him as the other as well as 
receiving from him, though there may be tensions and sometimes even 
hostility, hopefully righteous, between interlocutors. Sometimes I wonder 
if I have more philosophical appreciation for Hegel in my dissent than 
some of his devoted acolytes who repeat verbatim the words but some-
times miss the spirit of the Sache selbst. I am gladdened by Sander’s memo-
ries of some of our own exchanges—always invigorating—on our 
peregrinations in the Far East. Indeed these memories bring back to me 
the pleasures of finding philosophy and friendship alive together. I am 
intrigued by his reference to the role of Hegel’s Protestantism in the more 
mature writings. I have been asked by pious Hegelians, even atheistically 
pious Hegelians, if my arguments with Hegel have to do with my being 
Catholic. I am suspected of being happy with the unhappy consciousness 
and the mortal sin for any modern, namely, being in love with the ‘beyond’. 
I do find myself perplexed about the exact place of religion in Hegel’s 
thought. There is something paradoxical in placing religion at the level of 
absolute spirit and affirming Christianity as the consummate religion, and 
yet from the standpoint of the immanent historical realization of freedom, 
claiming that the religious community, while needful as providing some 
foundation to the modern state, is too ‘spiritual’, while the modern state 
is the more complete worldly realization of freedom. I find myself resonat-
ing with Kierkegaard’s warnings about the idolization of the modern state. 
A secular community can be an idol if it counterfeits the religious com-
munity. I have wondered if this is closer to the question of nihilism: not 
that the highest values devalue themselves, but that counterfeits of the 
highest values masquerade as higher than the highest values. I am made to 
think again by this chapter about the counterfeit double as a parodia sacra. 
Extraordinary mimicries of the highest are hard to distinguish from the 
highest, since they mimic them so faithfully—a paradox since the faithful 
mimicry is unfaithful. Nihilism is not how the highest values devalue 
themselves but how an economy of counterfeit doubles of such values 
becomes indistinguishable from these values themselves—the faithful 
mimicry is without faith. I think of the secular moralization of the reli-
gious mystery that preaches to the religious that is it not moral enough 
 
W. DESMOND

331
and hence to be superseded. The new configuration seems very like the 
original but something is missing, something has been hollowed out, or 
subject to a mutation, and the new doubling or redoubling has the char-
acter of a counterfeit. It claims to have the currency, claims perhaps to 
have more currency than the original, but it is evacuated of what made 
possible our confidence in the original. We can invest confidence in what 
we call a ‘con job’, but it is backed up by nothing in which we can place 
our confidence, our true trust.
I am glad to be better instructed about Sergei Bulgakov by Josephien 
van Kessel, and I defer to her knowledge of Vladimir Solov’ëv. I am happy 
also to confess that given the way I try to orchestrate the interchange of 
considerations between Lev Shestov and Solov’ëv, while also trying to 
communicate something of the metaxological approach, all the nuances of 
Solov’ëv might have well merited further consideration. I am also glad that 
there are convergences between Bulgakov and my own work, and need my 
attention. I would still say in my own work that something like a reformed 
Shestovian impulse is at work, against the abstract universal. The notion of 
all-unity has for me too many associations of an enclosing totality, though 
I sense that this is not Solov’ëv’s intention. As best as I can in GB, I try to 
distinguish between the God of the whole, whether of pantheism or 
panentheism, and the God beyond the whole, the God of creation. I still 
think panentheism has questions to answer and that the God of creation 
offers subtler possibilities than its critics always allow. My own explorations 
of the intimate universal might be seen as partaking of a Shestovian as well 
as a Solov’ëvien impulse. The thought of the anti-Christ cannot be fitted 
into the logic of any immanent holism. Likewise, there is a refusal of the 
whole at work in evil which cannot be rendered in holistic terms. The sin-
gular mutation of the intimate is at the source of the idiocy of the mon-
strous. Christ and anti-Christ look like twins but they are not, and no logic 
of the universal alone, or the whole, will do justice to what is at stake. 
What Sander Griffioen says regarding the nature of the counterfeit double 
is insightful on the issue. Perhaps the point is too crude, but in suitably 
qualified ways, I see that Solov’ëv is to Shestov as Hegel is to Kierkegaard. 
Paul Weiss once remarked about BB that it was a rewriting of Hegel from 
a Kierkegaardian interior, something he had previously thought was 
impossible. He compared BB to the Phenomenology of Spirit and advised 
me now to write my Science of Logic. I did not think this was possible, 
given that the apotheosis of metaxological mindfulness is not thought 
thinking itself. Though not a science of logic in Hegel’s sense, perhaps IU 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

332
is a kind of attempt to meet Weiss’s request. Now being better instructed 
about Bulgakov and Solov’ëv, I take Josephien’s appreciated thoughts as 
an opportune invitation to turn to them again.
The chapter of Philip Gottschalk presents a contrast with Josephien van 
Kessel. He is a serious student of Shestov and Nicholas O. Lossky, and he 
perhaps puts more emphasis on what motivates my hesitations about pan-
theism and panentheism and rightly so. He carefully outlines what Peter 
Hodgson says in critique of my interpretation of Hegel and I will say 
something below on this. My distance from panentheism is not sourced in 
any dualistic opposition of immanence and transcendence but more posi-
tively comes from a space beyond dualism and immanent dialectic of the 
Hegelian form. There is a strong sense of affirming the divine transcen-
dence as other to the immanent transcendence of nature as a whole, or the 
self-transcending of the human being as willing to complete its own imma-
nent and autonomous self-determination. Philip offers a thoughtful and 
lucid exploration of why I am not a panentheist. He is right that ‘strong’ 
transcendence is not fashionable today, partly because it is misinterpreted 
in terms of a dualistic opposition of finite and infinite, partly because of 
the antinomy of autonomy and transcendence relative to which we choose 
the ultimacy of immanent self-transcending. Philip rightly mentions that I 
stand back from teleology of the Hegelian sort, and I would refer to 
remarks above in reference to eschatology as beyond this form of imma-
nent teleology. Hegel has had many offspring on this score in relation to 
immanent history, even among those whose philosophical idiom is mark-
edly anti-Hegelian. The philosophical and theological option for some 
form of immanent holism, at best with a weak sense of something ‘more’, 
is chosen over the transcendence that follows from the absolute singularity 
of the divine. An agapeic sense of that singularity is entirely compatible 
with an affirmation of divine community, such as we find in a Trinitarian 
theology, and the thought of the absolute intimacy of the divine with 
finite creation. Absolute transcendence and absolute intimacy are not 
opposites in the metaxological orientation. I am happy Philip brought 
Hodgson into the discussion. Hodgson favors something closer to panen-
theism, but I note a last long footnote which indeed are the last words of 
his book. They recount remarks by a reader for Oxford University Press. 
They raise questions about his interpretation, questions Hodgson grants 
as needing to be addressed and allowing another interpretation of Hegel. 
These words are mine. I was the reader. I have said this in printed exchange 
with Hodgson, though the words might have been taken ironically. 
 
W. DESMOND

333
Ironically, perhaps in a deeper sense, Hodgson was not entirely without 
agreement with me, though he did not know it, in confessing agreement 
with the ‘reader’.
5
I am warmly grateful to Richard Kearney for these searching reflections on 
chosen passages and aspects of my work, grateful for their mindful atten-
tion, itself attendant with the friendly spirit of companioning thought. I 
have said one or two things already in response to Mark Novak’s study. 
There are companioning convergences in both of our works, even if some 
of our intellectual places of departure are not exactly the same. Our shared 
concerns with the aesthetic, the ethical and the religious are marked in 
Richard’s case by efforts to formulate a theopoetics, while mine, perhaps 
more metaphysically inflected, take place between system and poetics. He 
asks about being and God, and I would not univocally identify the two. I 
recall visiting Paul Weiss as an old man, and on entering his apartment, he 
would immediately almost shout (he was a bit deaf): “How do you get 
from being to God?” I sensed he wanted a direct answer, whereas my sug-
gestion was to find direction by indirection. My sense is that this answer 
would be approved by Richard, even if his indirections are more mediated 
by hermeneutical narrative (understood in a broad sense). The figurative 
dimension of the exploration, even in metaphysics, is not to be slighted. I 
do think that a metaxological metaphysician has to be a ‘lover’ as well as a 
‘theorist’, as I put it in IST. He is right to say that I have often tended to 
stress the archē by contrast with his tendency to tilt toward the ‘end’. I do 
think his sense of eschatology in small things; his ‘micro-eschatology’ is 
very consonant with the spirit informing the notion of the intimate uni-
versal. I said above how ‘eschaton’ has also the sense of ‘edge’, even down 
to the cutting edge that opens up the closure upon themselves of imma-
nent historicist teleologies. The eschaton in the micro cuts into time, all 
the time. If I am not mistaken, this is at work in his more recent depar-
tures in anatheism. It is not accidental that I am also interested in conse-
crations. Richard intriguingly talks about a ‘whisper’ of the beatitudes in 
my work. I note that I have written on Aquinas and the beatitudes, and am 
concerned, among other things, with how the beatitudes as ‘exceeding 
virtue’ break out of the terms of reference of Aristotelian ethics, and not 
without what I detect is a hint of discomfort here and there on Aquinas’s 
part. I like the suggestion that the mystics ‘ghost my pages’, especially if 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

334
we invest ‘ghost’ with its secret, saturated meanings. I am not so sure I am 
as reticent about God as I take him to suggest. I am more reticent in some 
books, true. But I have the sense that some in the confraternity of 
Continental philosophers cross to the other side of the street when they 
see me coming: I smell too much of God! In fairness to myself, nobody 
talks about God today in quite the way I do in GB (granting the book is 
understood). I think that the penultimate chapter on the mystic God, in 
light of the idiotics of the divine and the mystic woo, is worthy of mention 
(as Patrick Cooper does). If I am not mistaken about myself, the final Part, 
simply entitled God, with its ten ‘metaphysical cantos’ (and there is a tale 
in these terms), is all but shamelessly religious for a contemporary 
philosopher.
Renée 
Kohler-Ryan 
makes 
a 
profound 
connection 
between 
Shakespeare’s dramatic deployment of the soliloquy and the specifically 
philosophical roots that it has in Augustine. As she rightly underscores, 
Augustine coins the word in calling attention to the particular way one 
speaks to oneself while in the presence of God. I mentioned in response to 
Dennis Vanden Auweele how soliloquy paradoxically is meant to be heard 
or overheard. Who ‘over’-hears when a humanistically oriented sense of 
things takes over? Not least, something of the startling freshness of 
Augustine’s astonishing process of (over-heard) self-discovery is weakened 
or lost. I do not hide my admiration for Augustine, and how I am taken 
by the way he describes his own itinerary of thought: from the exterior to 
the interior, from the inferior to the superior. The superior agapeically 
over-hears the inferior in the reserved depths of its most intimate 
quest(ion). Renée gives a lovely meditation on speaking the amen with 
reference to Macbeth and the Augustinian soliloquy. She knows how much 
I love and honor this play as perhaps the supreme dramatic exploration of 
the equivocity of being, under the doom of sacrilegious evil, and how it 
blocks the porous flow of true communication. Renée offers some fasci-
nating discussion of the ethos of equivocity prevalent in Shakespeare’s 
London around the time of the writing of the play. Killing the anointed 
king is an attempted deicide of God in one’s own soul, and eventually, in 
the tyrannical mutation of erotic sovereignty, it is also the self-murder of 
one’s own soul. The theme is handled with aplomb, rightly bringing in 
Nietzsche and the potentially infernal equivocity of seeking to be beyond 
(moral) good and evil. The step beyond is not into the innocence of 
becoming but potentially into the infernal de-creation of the integrity of 
the soul, the ethical community and the political order. The Augustinian 
 
W. DESMOND

335
soliloquy is always porous, beyond selving, to the superior good of the 
divine companioning power. Porous to this companioning in its being, 
selving becomes clogged on itself when it insists on itself alone, sometimes 
to the extreme of closing the giving source of the porosity, closing into 
itself in being incurvatus in se. Absolute selving is the death of self, if being 
absolute is only being for itself. There is equivocal mimicry: absolute selv-
ing counterfeits the absolute—without the porosity. There is no absolu-
tion, if the absolute self claims to confer it on itself. Renée’s reflections put 
me in the mind of how Shakespeare, in the words of Macbeth himself 
before the crime is committed, offers us a different take to Nietzsche on 
pity and the tyrannical will to power: ‘And pity, like a naked newborn 
babe,/Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubim, horsed/Upon the sight-
less couriers of the of the air,/Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,/
That tears shall drown the wind’. I believe that in Shakespeare’s time a 
pictorial representation of the crucified Christ was called a ‘Pity’. Macbeth 
too knows that beyond the equivocation of evil there is judgment. He 
knew the ‘Doom’ would come. (At that time the representation of the 
Last Judgement was called the ‘Doom’.) The Doom and the Pity: both 
the working out of the divine amen and our responsive amen to it that 
affirms it again, or not.
I am pleased to see Alexandra Romanyshyn lucidly and intelligently tak-
ing up the ecological implications of my thought. She recounts finely how 
the claims stemming from the modern anthropocentric standpoint risk 
landing us in a wasteland where nature’s being and worth for itself come 
under threat. Her reflection is a very good complement to the work of 
Francis Van Den Noortgaete who recently completed a fine doctoral dis-
sertation, ‘Being Beholden: An Iconic-Liturgical Perspective on Nature 
and the Role of Ontological Gratitude in Environmental Ethics’. The 
ongoing work of Peter Scheers also merits mention. Her concern has been 
an important theme from early on in my thought, and she represents it 
well. I am thinking, for instance, of some reflections in the final chapter of 
PO, ‘Thought Singing its Other’. There in ‘Songs of the Elemental’ the 
changed orientation to the land in Ireland struck me as full with ominous 
possibilities, even while the official views sang a te deum to the land as an 
exploitable resource in the dominion of serviceable disposability. 
Something stirred that was profoundly at odds with the older Irish atti-
tude to the land, and I do not single out Ireland for reasons of ethnic 
piety, but because of something elemental being at stake. There was some-
thing ominous about the situation whose dangers have only increased 
  RESPONDING METAXOLOGICALLY 

336
with the intervening years. Has mindfulness of the elemental become 
more widespread? Yes, and no. Yes, in that we face more publicly the loss; 
no, in that often the response is taken primarily to be more efficient tech-
nologies in the running of the dominion of serviceable disposability. 
Alexandra sees that this will not be enough. One might say that what we 
need rather is an ontological metanoia in relation to the givenness of cre-
ation. Metanoia is often translated as a repentance, and surely we need 
that, but it is also a matter of a new noetics of being, a noetics that is meta 
in the double sense of the Greek: in the midst and also beyond. Metaxology 
is a form of metanoetics in this regard. (The work of Takeshi Morisato is 
very helpful in pursuing this point in dialogue with Hajime Tanabe.) 
Alexandra’s reflection contributes to the communication of this mindful-
ness and this metanoia. It is very perceptive in seeing the need for perme-
ability between aesthetic, ethical, religious and metaphysical considerations. 
Often treatments of ecological issues make one unsure about whether the 
fullness of these considerations enters the picture. Ecological thought asks 
a metaxological metanoetics. I see Alexandra’s welcome reflections as 
pointing in this direction.
Bibliography
Desmond, William. 2012. Wording the Between. In The William Desmond Reader, 
ed. Christopher Simpson, 195–227. Albany: SUNY Press.
———. 2018. The Gift of Beauty and the Passion of Being: On the Threshold Between 
the Aesthetic and the Religious. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock.
Schindler, David. 2008. Plato’s Critique of Impure Reason: On Goodness and Truth 
in the Republic. Washington: CUA Press.
 
W. DESMOND

337
© The Author(s) 2018
D. Vanden Auweele (ed.), William Desmond’s Philosophy between 
Metaphysics, Religion, Ethics, and Aesthetics, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-98992-1
Index1
1 Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
A
Agamben, Giorgio, 10, 155, 155n6, 
209–224, 328, 329
Agape, 8, 10, 49n2, 52, 114, 
120–123, 274–276, 324
Agapeic love, 16, 116, 121, 133, 251
Amen, 174, 224, 285–300, 334, 335
Anti-Christ, 234, 235, 237, 239, 
247–250, 254, 331
Aquinas, Thomas, 16, 19, 49, 49n3, 
81, 136, 259, 275, 329, 333
Arche, 114, 120, 123, 206, 275,  
329, 333
Augustine, 11, 45, 57, 129, 132, 133, 
136, 137, 141, 144, 152, 153, 
158, 161, 163–166, 163n19, 
163n20, 165n23, 165n24, 168, 
212, 216, 222–224, 237, 250, 
252, 278, 285–296, 298, 299, 
325, 334
Autonomy, 5, 8, 10, 54, 73, 142,  
182, 186, 187, 190, 191, 
195–207, 305–307, 309,  
310, 325, 328, 332
B
Badiou, Alain, 18, 35n15, 40, 41, 
210, 213, 222n11, 320
Bataille, Georges, 155, 155n5, 160, 
160n13, 169, 170, 172, 326
Bioethics, 10, 177, 181, 188, 189, 
326, 327
Blondel, Maurice, 136, 137, 325
Boole, George, 19, 38
Bruno, Giordano, 17, 27, 27n6, 28
Bulgakov, Sergei, 11, 243–246, 
245n4, 246n7, 246n10, 
248–255, 251n13, 251n14, 257, 
262–266, 331, 332

338 
INDEX
C
Cantor, George, 22, 29–41,  
32n12, 320
Caputo, John D., 113, 124, 210,  
213, 275
Caritas, 8, 45–47, 57, 273, 284,  
287, 288
Catholic, 9, 30, 33, 61–63, 156n8, 
204, 218–220, 294, 330
Community, 5, 7, 8, 10, 46, 52, 53, 
56, 97, 100, 105–110, 116, 131, 
134, 146, 147, 151, 160, 168, 
207, 237, 241, 246, 248–252, 
254, 257, 258, 260, 261, 264, 
266, 278, 281, 285–287,  
292, 294, 297–299, 297n12, 
310n4, 319, 325, 330,  
332, 334
Conatus essendi, 55, 56, 107, 156, 
156n9, 157, 167, 184, 186,  
187, 206, 220, 224, 276,  
280, 327
Concrete ideal-realism
real beings; concrete 
consubstantiality, 263
Confidence, x, 53, 77, 272, 273, 283, 
284, 287, 331
Copernican turn, 17
Correlationism, 79–87, 322, 323
Counterfeit double, 51, 60, 197, 211, 
230, 234, 240, 248–250, 
329–331
Creation, 9–11, 27, 62, 64, 65, 70, 
71, 73, 88, 102, 103, 120, 
162n17, 164, 188, 189, 219, 
222–224, 230, 239, 239n17, 
245–248, 250–252, 260–265, 
271–284, 296, 298, 305, 311, 
327, 329, 331, 332, 336
Cusa, Nicholas, 17, 19, 20, 27, 27n6, 
28, 31, 35n14, 119, 173, 275, 
279, 320
D
Dante, 3, 167, 326
Dasein, 80, 85, 153n2, 221
de Lubac, Henri, 61, 63, 140, 187
Death of God, 47n1, 118, 209, 212
Deconstruction, 1, 9, 23, 115, 140, 
180, 275
Deleuze, Gilles, 18
Descartes, René, 18, 19, 24, 26, 28, 
29, 35, 278
Dialectics, 4, 7, 16, 18, 19, 69, 89, 
118, 120, 122, 134, 139, 158, 
160n13, 160n14, 232, 253,  
255, 258–262, 292, 293,  
311, 332
Dionysius the Areopagite, 9, 97–99, 
101–108
Divine names, 9, 323
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 1, 2, 154, 
166–168, 195, 212, 328
E
Eckhart, Meister, 144, 282, 325
Equivocal, 16, 17, 67–69, 72, 90, 
90n4, 115, 118, 136, 138, 140, 
141, 144, 195, 201, 231n3, 254, 
283, 292, 293, 299, 310, 320, 
326, 335
Eros, 121, 122, 132, 138, 139,  
141, 174
Erotic, 16, 49, 51, 71n8, 85, 
117–119, 121, 122, 131, 133, 
134, 138–140, 142–147, 
154–156, 159, 190, 191, 205, 
231, 231n3, 232n6, 237, 251, 
258, 277, 282, 308, 314, 325, 
329, 334
Ethos, 5, 6, 104, 108, 109,  
131, 141, 147, 167, 177–191, 
254, 307n1, 311, 318,  
327, 334

339
  INDEX 
Event, 7, 48, 85, 98, 99, 109, 113, 
115, 159, 187, 188, 199, 
209–214, 216, 218, 221,  
223, 304
Evil, 3, 10, 26n4, 124, 124n3, 
151–174, 215, 235, 237–239, 
252, 259–261, 263–266, 285, 
286, 290, 292, 293, 295, 298, 
299, 312, 325, 326, 331,  
334, 335
F
Factiality, 79, 81, 82, 82n2, 88, 89
Fate, 153, 162, 172, 204
Fichte, J.G., 18, 18n1
Fidelity, 53, 55, 169, 278, 318
Finesse, x, 5, 7, 50, 131, 133, 147, 
196, 197, 203, 250, 320,  
321, 325
Florensky, Pavel, 262–263, 265, 266
Fragility, 101, 131, 145, 153
Freedom, 46, 52–55, 64, 66, 73, 155, 
165n23, 187, 190, 191, 196, 
233, 234, 238, 239, 247, 250, 
251, 259, 263–265, 276, 279, 
280, 295, 330
G
Gabriel, Markus, 77
Gadamer, H.G., 65–67, 178, 179, 
231, 231n2
Gelassenheit, 124, 321
Givenness, 10, 55, 79, 80, 89, 105, 
125, 131–133, 145, 146, 155, 
157, 189, 196, 200, 212, 275, 
276, 280, 311, 312, 336
Glory, 168, 196, 209–224, 245,  
281, 329
Gnosticism, 134, 161, 161n16, 164, 
245, 326
God, 2, 4, 6, 9–11, 21, 27, 27n6, 28n8, 
31, 33, 41, 48, 55, 60–65, 70, 72, 
73, 81, 98–109, 129, 131–135, 
138, 139, 141, 143–147, 159, 
162n17, 168, 188, 191, 196–199, 
197n1, 201–203, 207, 210, 211, 
217n8, 218–224, 229–241, 243, 
244, 245n6, 246–252, 254, 255, 
257–266, 271–278, 281, 282, 
286–290, 292–294, 296–300, 
310, 311, 320, 321, 323–325, 
329, 331, 333, 334
H
Health, 159, 186, 288–290,  
288n4, 299
Hegel, G.W.F., ix, 3–5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 
15, 18, 18n1, 49, 89, 135, 151, 
158–161, 163, 163n18, 212, 
217, 222, 230–236, 238, 248, 
253, 254, 257–262, 264–266, 
276, 278, 317, 318, 320, 322, 
324, 326, 329–332
Heidegger, Martin, 3, 6, 9, 53, 55, 
65, 77, 79, 80, 83–88, 90, 114, 
115, 118, 126, 127, 127n4, 153, 
153n2, 162, 163, 174, 197, 212, 
215, 216, 216n7, 221, 222, 231, 
231n2, 272, 274, 275, 321, 323
Hermeneutics, 9, 21, 54n11, 59–74, 
118, 119, 183, 213, 222, 283, 
322, 326
Heterodox, 145, 322
Holism, 230, 232–234, 244, 
246–248, 250–253, 255, 258, 
331, 332
Humanism, 18, 283
Husserl, Edmund, 38, 39, 179,  
272, 278
Hyperbole, 6, 104, 116, 132, 140, 
144, 275, 282, 323, 324

340 
INDEX
I
Immanence, 59–62, 101, 105, 115, 
116, 122, 136, 137, 139–142, 
144, 235, 243, 246–249, 278, 
282, 332
Instrumentalization, 11, 70, 303, 
305–309
Intimate universal, 7, 48, 49, 53, 56, 
57, 122, 130, 131, 141, 143, 
177–180, 190, 240n20, 248, 
273, 277, 278, 282, 331
J
Jacobi, F.H., 17, 40
Justice, 48–50, 56, 78, 85, 100, 101, 
105, 113, 125, 199, 239n17, 
258, 259, 326, 331
K
Kant, Immanuel, ix, 4, 8, 17, 18, 29, 
40, 77–80, 136, 152, 153, 156, 
158n12, 167, 167n27, 185, 196, 
199, 201–203, 248, 253, 278, 
310, 321, 326
Kearney, Richard, 9–11, 210, 213, 
277, 324, 333
Kierkegaard, Sören, 153, 258, 259, 
261, 278, 318, 330, 331
Kristeva, Julia, 113
L
Levinas, Emmanuel, 113, 156, 209, 
210n1, 276
Logic, 8, 19–21, 23, 30, 32, 35, 
38–41, 50n4, 54, 118, 136, 160, 
180, 186, 187, 201, 248, 253, 
255, 260, 320, 331
Love, x, 16, 30, 46–50, 49n2, 50n7, 52, 
56, 98, 99, 116, 121, 122, 133, 
143, 145, 172, 172n32, 177–191, 
204, 205, 215, 219, 223, 224, 
231, 243, 249–252, 273, 278, 
280, 283, 284, 287–290, 294, 
324, 325, 328–330, 334
M
Macbeth, 11, 154, 166, 285, 286, 
290–300, 334, 335
Maréchal, Joseph, 10, 129,  
135–142, 144
Marion, Jean-Luc, 34, 34n13, 35n14, 
36, 84, 113, 173, 173n34, 197, 
211, 323
Materialism, 77, 79–83, 87, 89,  
253, 259
Mathematics, 8, 17, 19, 20, 22–28, 
30, 34, 35n14, 38–41, 319, 320
May-be, 82, 119
McCarthy, Cormac, 170–172, 
170n30, 326
Mediation, 5, 16, 28n8, 69, 72, 90, 
100, 129, 130, 132, 138, 141, 
142, 144–147, 259, 276, 280
Medicine, 177–180, 182, 185
Medusa, 152, 169–174, 326
Meillassouc, Quentin, 9, 78–83, 82n2, 
87–90
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 80, 80n1, 283
Messianism, 209–211, 214,  
216–218, 220
Metaphysics, 2, 5, 6, 8–10, 15, 19, 21, 
40, 41, 45–57, 59–74, 77, 78, 88, 
95, 98, 106, 115, 117–119, 129, 
130, 132, 133, 137, 139–141, 
147, 151, 152, 156n8, 156n9, 
159, 182, 189, 191, 197–200, 
202, 211, 213, 215, 216, 
221–223, 265, 266, 271, 273, 
275, 276, 279, 282, 283, 303, 
313, 314, 322–324, 327, 333

341
  INDEX 
Metaxology, x, xi, 2–4, 7–11, 45–57, 
77–90, 156n8, 205, 219, 
243–255, 259, 260, 272, 283, 
303–314, 317–336
Metaxu, 3, 5, 15, 97, 104, 107, 
114–117, 126, 243–246, 254, 272, 
278, 283, 285–300, 312, 319, 324
Middle, 1, 9, 31, 97, 102, 104, 105, 
113, 115–127, 131–133, 141, 
142, 166, 167, 243, 282
Mindfulness, 51, 52, 78, 83, 85, 86, 
89, 104, 117, 125, 130, 131, 
137, 142, 145, 147, 188, 212, 
222, 223, 283, 321, 331, 336
Moral law, 199, 202–204, 290, 310
Murdoch, Iris, 154, 154n3, 168
N
Nancy, Jean-Luc, 158n12
Naturalism, 17
Neoplatonism, 26, 28, 97, 98, 164, 
165, 173
Neoscholasticism, 39, 60, 62, 63,  
67, 322
Neo-Thomism, 1, 2
Newman, John, 62
New realism, 9, 78, 90, 322, 323
Nietzsche, Friedrich, ix, x, 2, 4, 5, 45, 47, 
52, 60n2, 155, 157, 160–163, 202, 
203, 205–207, 212, 235, 235n11, 
238, 249, 250, 253, 292, 292n8, 
309, 310, 326, 328, 334, 335
Novalis, 18n1
O
Ontology, 18, 27, 35, 36, 67, 77, 78, 
85, 117, 118, 120, 159, 212, 
275, 280, 322, 329
Orthodox, 41, 245, 245n6, 246, 
246n7, 252, 262, 265, 322
Otherness, 3, 4, 54, 66, 68, 70–72, 85, 
89, 101, 103, 104, 116, 118, 120, 
123, 130–133, 135, 137, 138, 
141–143, 145, 147, 184, 185, 
188, 190, 199, 205, 206, 219, 
222, 223, 232n5, 233, 252, 258, 
260, 277, 280, 299, 304, 313
Overdeterminacy, 115–117, 133, 136, 
142, 196, 274, 291, 307, 312
Overdeterminate, 3, 101, 103, 104, 131, 
134, 135, 197, 293, 318, 319, 329
P
Panentheism, 253, 257–266, 332
Pantheism, 8, 10, 159, 250, 258, 263, 
331, 332
Pascal, Blaise, 3, 27, 163, 163n20, 
166, 204, 212, 320
Passio essendi, 55, 56, 107, 131, 156, 
156n9, 157, 167, 184, 187, 189, 
206, 224, 272, 276, 280, 322, 
324, 327
Patience, 55, 107, 206, 278, 280, 281
Paul, St., 46, 56, 163, 163n19,  
174, 230
Perplexity, 2, 5, 6, 11, 31, 182, 
235n10, 238–241, 305, 
308–310, 314, 325, 326
Plato, 2, 6, 19–23, 25n3, 26, 28, 40, 
97, 154, 158, 161, 163, 163n20, 
200, 212, 222, 243, 248, 263, 
320, 321
Plurivocal, 3, 104, 105, 109, 125, 
133, 134, 317, 319, 321, 327
Poetry, 6, 124, 125, 197, 198, 204, 
244, 253, 253n16, 255
Porosity, 3, 6–9, 105, 108, 129–134, 
138, 143, 145, 157, 167, 177, 186, 
189–191, 196, 197n1, 230, 232, 
241, 252, 253, 272, 277, 278, 282, 
289, 298, 318, 321–324, 329, 335

342 
INDEX
Postmodern, 7, 8, 15, 46, 49, 50n4, 
51, 53, 151, 155, 158n12, 
197–199, 222, 253, 272, 325
Postulatory finitism, 9, 59–61, 73, 222
Prayer, 117, 188, 277, 287, 288, 290, 
295, 297n12, 299
Privatio boni, 156n8, 238, 239, 279
Providence, 161, 243
Przywara, Erich, 8, 41, 213, 213n4, 
219, 222, 320
R
Religion, 5, 7, 8, 10, 40, 55, 113, 
118, 119, 130, 151, 152, 157, 
158, 164–166, 190, 196, 197n1, 
198, 223, 231, 233, 233n7, 
234, 235n11, 236, 236n14, 
244, 260, 266, 271, 272, 
278–283, 317, 318, 318n2, 324, 
328, 330
Ricoeur, Paul, 10, 152, 162–168,  
174, 326
Rublev, Andrei, 274
Ruusbroec, Jan van, 10, 130, 132, 
142–147
S
Sabbath, 10, 197, 213, 216, 220, 221, 
223, 224
Schelling, F.W.J., 4, 5, 15, 17, 18, 
18n1, 157, 157n10, 217,  
248, 253
Scheuer, Pierre, 10, 129, 135–142, 144
Schillebeeckx, Edward, 9, 61–70, 72, 
73, 322
Schlegel, K.W.F., 18n1
Scholasticism, 96, 101
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 2, 153, 320, 326
Second Vatican Council, 61, 63
Selving, 59–74, 104, 122, 142, 144, 
155, 189, 212, 232, 271, 278, 
280, 323, 335
Shestov, Lev, 11, 212, 234, 244, 
246–250, 253, 255, 261, 262, 
265, 331, 332
Silence, 10, 60, 133–135, 137, 
139–141, 174, 181, 188, 
195–207, 296, 321, 327, 328
Skepticism, 60, 308
Socrates, 200
Soliloquy, 11, 285–300, 328,  
334, 335
Solovyov, Vladimir Sergeievich,  
11, 244–255, 257, 262–266, 
331, 332
Sophia, 127, 243–251, 251n13, 
251n14, 253–255, 262–265
Sophiology, 11, 243–255, 262, 263
Soul, 263
Sovereignty, 51, 122, 154–156,  
160, 169, 215n5, 216,  
277, 329, 334
Spinoza, 17, 28, 40, 55, 56, 56n13, 
159, 161, 185, 212, 220,  
248, 253
Subjectification, 185, 305–310
Sublation, 118, 122, 258–261,  
317, 318
Substantival agent, 263
T
Taylor, Charles, 100, 101, 181,  
183, 190, 210, 213, 272, 276, 
283, 329
Teleology, 73, 248, 261, 305, 322, 
329, 332, 333
Telos, 134, 206, 247, 261
Theism
theistic, 263

343
  INDEX 
Theodicy, 4, 152, 156n9, 157–160, 
162, 165, 167n27, 168, 261, 
262, 265, 326
Theopoetics, 10, 114, 114n1, 117, 
123–128, 274, 275, 324, 333
Transcendence, 5, 9, 49, 51, 59–61, 
85–87, 89, 90, 90n4, 97, 
100–106, 108–110, 115, 116, 
123, 131, 132, 136, 144, 147, 
154, 173, 174, 191, 197, 223, 
232n6, 243–255, 286, 292n8, 
293, 298–300, 304, 309, 
311–314, 321, 329, 332
U
Univocal, 4, 6, 15, 17, 18, 24, 67, 69, 
70, 84n3, 90n4, 104, 105, 109, 
115, 118, 138, 144, 161, 162, 
185, 231n3, 248, 253, 255, 283, 
292, 296, 299, 308, 310, 
317–320
V
Vattimo, Gianni, 9, 46–48, 51–55, 
51n8, 210, 213, 275, 321
Vector, 85, 86, 90n4, 96, 102, 103, 131
Veritas, 8, 9, 45–47, 57
Vico, Giambattista, 20, 28, 35n14, 38
W
Weak thought, 51
Weil, Simone, 154, 154n3, 168, 171
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 22, 25, 30, 
33–40, 79, 320
World Organic Whole
organic whole, 263
World soul, 263
Z
Zero, 18, 22–24, 25n3, 29, 34,  
41, 289n5
Žižek, Slavoj, 113, 210, 213

