The Philosophy of 
Mathematics
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Wittgenstein’s 
Philosophy of 
Mathematics
Juliet Floyd
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
edited by
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
WITTGENSTEIN’S
PHILOSOPHY OF
MATHEMATICS
Juliet Floyd
Boston University
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108456302
DOI: 10.1017/9781108687126
© Juliet Floyd 2021
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2021
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-108-45630-2 Paperback
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
DOI: 10.1017/9781108687126
First published online: July 2021
Juliet Floyd
Boston University
Author for correspondence: Juliet Floyd, jfloyd@bu.edu
Abstract: For Wittgenstein, mathematics is a human activity characterizing
ways of seeing conceptual possibilities and empirical situations, proof and
logical methods central to its progress. Sentences exhibit differing
“aspects,” or dimensions of meaning, projecting mathematical “realities.”
Mathematics is an activity of constructing standpoints on equalities and
differences of these. Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy of Mathematics
(1934–51) grew from his Early (1912–21) and Middle (1929–33)
philosophies, a dialectical path reconstructed here partly as a response to
the limitative results of Gödel and Turing.
Keywords: Wittgenstein, rule-following, philosophy of mathematics, history
and philosophy of mathematics, logicism, meaning in mathematics,
surveyability, realism in mathematics, mathematical knowledge, logical
necessity, mathematical necessity, language and mathematics, foundations of
mathematics, philosophy of logic, logic and communication, mathematics and
language, naturalism in philosophy of mathematics, philosophy of
mathematical practice
JEL classifications: A12, B34, C56, D78, E90
© Juliet Floyd 2021
ISBNs: 9781108456302 (PB), 9781108687126 (OC)
ISSNs: 2399-2883 (online), 2514-3808 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
1 Introduction
1
2 Early Philosophy (1912–1928): Absolute Simplicity
7
3 Middle Philosophy (1929–1933): Relative Simplicity
30
4 Later Philosophy (1937–1951): Fluid Simplicity
50
List of Abbreviations
75
References
76
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
1
1 Introduction
1.1 Aims and Sources
Few have characterized Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics over the
entirety of his intellectual life. Some favor the Early and Middle Wittgenstein
over the Later. Below I argue that Later Wittgenstein, a dialectical revisor of
Early and Middle Wittgenstein, offers us a defensible contemporary philosophy
of mathematics.
In 1944 Wittgenstein wrote that his “chief contribution has been in the phi-
losophy of mathematics.”1 He aimed at a book whose first part would clarify
the nature of meaning and whose second part would apply that clarification
to the foundations of logic and mathematics. RFM is an edited selection from
unfinished drafts Wittgenstein hoped would form PI part 2. But he withheld
its publication. These writings utilize Wittgenstein’s Later interlocutory style,
but lack polished orchestration; interpreters have frequently distorted his ideas
by using the method of drive-by quotation. Selected remarks lack their orig-
inal context. The tentativeness of Wittgenstein’s thoughts is obscured. Since
2000, BEE has been used to supplement RFM with manuscripts. We rely on
commentaries using BEE.2
1.2 Aspect Realism
Wittgenstein sees mathematicians articulating conceptual constructions that
provide standpoints for modeling empirical and mathematical facts, situations,
structures, events, procedures, and characterizations. While its techniques are
intertwined with logical features of language, mathematics is not reducible to a
single “foundation” such as second-order logic or set theory. Later Wittgenstein
suggests looking at mathematics as a “MULTICOLORED mix of techniques”
(RFM III §§46,48) to nuance the kind of anti-foundationalism he always urged.
In Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy, aspects are discovered or revealed,
whereas mathematical techniques are invented.3 Mathematics is both discovery
and invention. I read Wittgenstein as an “aspect realist” about mathematics.
This is a “realistic” form of realism in the sense of Diamond (1991) and
Putnam (1999): realism without grounded metaphysics and no particular epis-
temology or theory of mind. It transposes what is often called “realism.” I shall
not worry whether the informal language of “seeing aspects” is metaphorical
1 Monk, 1990, 466.
2 Mühlhölzer, 2010 (RFM III); WH (RFM II, V).
3 BT, §134; RFM II §38, RFM III §§46ff; MS 122, pp. 15, 88-88, 90; PI §§119,124-129,133,
222, 262, 387, and 536; xi, p. 196; PPF xi, §130. Floyd, 2018a; Harrington, Shaw, and Beaney,
2018; and Baz, 2020 concern aspects generally.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2
Philosophy of Mathematics
Figure 1 Necker Cube
Source: TLP 5.5423.
or wholly misjudged. The phenomenon is clear enough in the ambiguous depth
cues of Jastrow’s Duck-Rabbit and the Necker Cube (Figure 1).
Aspects are modal, attaching to possibilities and necessities: fields of sig-
nificance, opportunities for projecting and instantiating our concepts. We see
through the picture to our own seeing of it as realizing one way among others.
What we see is seen, but also we see. We rearticulate what we see, sometimes
seeing it thereby anew. There is an active and a passive aspect to this. Aspects
show themselves (the middle voice).4 What we are seeing is not simply an
actual drawing on a page. We can also “see” in these drawings possibilities
of projecting our concepts. Here we take modality as primitive, though up for
investigation.
Wittgenstein always rejected the “Platonist” idea that mathematics reveals
actual entities, abstract facts, or realms that explain our mathematical practices
but are causally inert. Aspectual realism is an offered substitute. He has no story
about whether a possibility is itself a possible state of affairs; he is burying
ontology in that sense, as many current philosophers of mathematics do.5
Aspects shift the “naturalism” urged in psychologistic, conventionalist, and
Humean readings of Later Wittgenstein: these underplay his Later views on
truth, confusing them with assertability conditions.6 Since Benacerraf (1965),
many philosophers of mathematics have aimed to balance three main ideas:
(a) an epistemological position privileging immediate perception of material
objects, conceived as a causally cemented, receptive lining up of experience
with words or concepts; (b) phenomena such as incompleteness, undecide-
ability, and nonstandard models; (c) modality as something to be explained
in metaphysical terms.
4 Narboux, 2014.
5 Auxier, Anderson, and Hahn, 2015, 11; Putnam, 2004.
6 Fogelin, 1987, 2009; Maddy, 2014.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
3
Wittgenstein rejects these ideas, while respecting their deep appeal. He
broached a phenomenological account of mathematics in his early Middle
Period as a way to resist them (§3.2). This failed, leading him to reject the idea
that experience is intrinsically structured in a life-world. His Later Philosophy
seeks to dislodge the argument between the naturalistic, causal view and the
phenomenological one: both sides underrate the power of ordinary, colloquial
ways of speaking in and about mathematics.
Though logicians have not failed to attend to the role of ordinary language
(§3.1), the signature element in every period of Wittgenstein’s philosophy is
his reflection on our “silent adjustments” of its complexities (TLP 4.002). The
Later philosophy finally factors these adjustments into realism itself.
Psychological contingencies are relevant to the question, “What is the nature
of logic (and mathematics)?” Psychology explores aspect-perception as a phe-
nomenon. But psychology cannot substitute for critical discussion of our
ordinary discussion. When Wittgenstein remarks that a proof must be “sur-
veyable,” he is not discussing the width of our cognitive abilities but our need
for mathematics (§4.4). His concerns about extensionalism (§3.5, §4.5) are in
place even though, so far as I know, cognitive psychologists have no idea how
to account for our coming to grasp the concept of set.
Realistically speaking, in mathematics there is moulting and molding of
concepts: truth is not simply a matter of grasping an extension, asserting or
stipulating a principle. Aspect “perceptions” show us “the limits of empir-
icism” in Wittgenstein’s sense.7 This contrasts with typical mathematicians’
images of these limits. Russell (1936) argued that the limits lie solely in the
“medical” fact of our finitude and the need for abstraction to universals: we
cannot drink an infinite number of glasses of water. But this is a contingent
fact. Hrbacek and Jech (1999, 86), a textbook in set theory, states, for example,
that
it is possible to write down decimal expansions 0:a1a2a3 ... where
“‹ai›iD1:::1” is an arbitrary sequence of integers between 0 and 9.
Most readers pass over such remarks silently. Later Wittgenstein urges, not
that such “supertasks” are incoherent, but that the limits of empiricism lie
elsewhere: first, in our need to communicate proofs (RFM III §71), therefore,
second, in the activity of concept-formation (RFM IV §29), and third, in our
embeddings of words and symbols (including the above-quoted ones) in forms
of life (RFM VII §§17, 21).
7 RFM III §71, IV §29, VII §§17, 21.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4
Philosophy of Mathematics
Maddy (2011, 2007) advocates“thin” realism about sets and a Second rather
than a First philosophy. “Aspect realism” is a form of this. But Maddy focuses
first and foremost on set theory. Moreover, she lacks confidence in our ability to
articulate a sense of depth in mathematics. Aspect realism is intended to round
out “thin realism” to convey more of a 3D sense of mathematical depth and
insight.
“Naturalistic” philosophers of mathematics have tended to privilege physics
as the arbiter of ontology, and psychology as the basis for “naturalized epis-
temology.”8 In Wittgenstein a more “liberal” form of naturalism is in view,
the kind advocated by the post-1990 Putnam.9 Like Wittgenstein, Putnam held
that mathematics explores conceptual possibilities (he called this “modal struc-
turalism”). But he insisted on the normative elements in play here. “Forms of
life” express the human animal’s ways of structuring possible lives with lan-
guage, and this has an evolutionary, biological tint, but also a normative and
ethological one.10
The Later Wittgenstein emphasizes the importance of projectability and
plasticity: the work of fitting concepts to reality, including the reality of mathe-
matical (and other) experiences. This form of realism not only glosses the wide
and multifarious kinds of applicability of mathematics – to empirical situations,
to mathematics itself, to experiences, and to concepts. It also allows mathemat-
ics its autonomy, as modal structuralism does. Wittgenstein treats mathematics,
however, more thinly: as a kind of scaffolding for descriptions, that is, a mod-
ular, transportable collection of possible conceptual constructions that may be
configured and reconfigured in an unlimited variety of ways. It does not support
the edifice of knowledge so much as help human beings erect it.
What we learn in mathematics comes to feel so natural, in certain cases, that
it comes to shape our immediate experience, embedding its modalities deeply
in our habits and perceptions. There is an echo of Kant here. Wittgenstein
does not, however, forward a view of intuition as a fixed form of immedi-
ate, singular, nonconceptual representation. The idea instead is that there are
mathematical possibilities and necessities, “forms” of particular, immediate
experience, construction, and conceptualization typical of human beings and
communicable among them.
Wittgenstein is grammaticalizing the “intuitive,” that is, subjecting it to
discussion, using the ordinary language of mathematics to do so, taking this
language as (an evolving) given. He does not replace mathematical experience
8 Maddy, 1997, 2005.
9 Putnam, 1990, 1992, 2012, 2016.
10 Cavell, 1988.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
5
with language, but rather uses language to open up our receptiveness to it.
“Language itself provides the necessary intuition” (TLP 6.233). This allows
him to capture “the reflective element” that Bernays (1959) missed in RFM. In
the Later Philosophy, it is as if the whole idea of a metalanguage is absorbed
into the ever-shuffling process of formalization, reformulation, renewed expe-
rience, informal characterization, re-parametrization, and reinterpretation. We
should respect the hustle.
I detect an affinity with a Gödelian norm that plays a crucial role in mathe-
matical practices, lately developed by Kennedy (2020). She calls it formalism-
freeness. In Wittgenstein this is a matter of characterizing what formalisms are
and mean, ideally with a minimal degree of formalization. Both Gödel and
Wittgenstein associate aspect-richness with incompleteness. Whereas Gödel
hypothesizes that there may be an actual infinity of complexity given in expe-
rience, Wittgenstein regards the unbounded degree of complexity as potential
and grammaticalizable.11 He stresses the non-extensional rather than the exten-
sional perspective. While Gödel felt the perspectives could be conceptually
merged, Wittgenstein resisted this.
I shall use the term “non-extensional” instead of the more usual term
“intensional,” which is typically associated with constructivism as a working
branch of mathematics. I do not regard Wittgenstein as a constructivist about
mathematics, and he did not believe in intensions as entities.
Aspect-talk allowed Wittgenstein to soberly discuss the experience of nov-
elty, the reorientation of our way of seeing that comes when we encounter
mathematical features, forms, and structures anew.12 There is a two-ness of
grammatical complexity in the entanglement of modality with the ways we
use the verb to “see” and “seeing-as” phrases to describe it: through charac-
terizations we can come to “see” or “reveal” or “discover” a possible way of
conceiving of something we hadn’t seen before. Mathematics is filled with such
“seeing.” This is not literal perception, but more like seeing a new dimension
or possibility for thought.
Wittgenstein takes our as- and aspect-phrasing to serve us essentially in our
ability to draw meaningful distinctions between characterizations and prop-
erties, discoveries and inventions, appearances and realities, possibilities and
necessities. Aspects open up space for the kind of discoveries it is possible
to make in philosophy, logic, and mathematics – and also the kinds of things
that people may miss. That there is such a thing as insight into things and peo-
ple, into possibilities that are not necessities, into truths and falsehoods, and
11 Floyd and Kanamori, 2016, MS 163, 40v.
12 RFM I App II (Mühlhölzer, 2002) criticize unsober ideas of discovery.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6
Philosophy of Mathematics
that such things are not merely fleeting appearances or conventions – these are
among Wittgenstein’s deepest philosophical themes.
Aspect is therefore a logical notion. It reworks Frege and Russell. For them,
truth is absolute; there is no way of being true.13 For Wittgenstein there are
different ways of articulating truth as an absolute notion.
The term “aspect” does not occur in Frege’s German, though English transla-
tors have often used it to render his remarks on the decomposition of judgments.
We hear Frege speak (1879, §9) of our “imagining that an expression can be
altered” at a place in a sentence; in shifting “24 D 16” to “x4 D 16” the term
is “regarded as replaceable” (Bauer-Mengelberg) and we may “imagine the 2
in the content” so that the content is “split into a constant and a variable part”
(1880/1881, 17–19), though Frege actually is careful to say that it divides, or
decomposes itself. In
.1 C 1/ C .1 C 1/ C .1 C 1/ D 6
“the different expressions correspond to different conceptions [aspects] and
sides, but nevertheless always to the same thing” (1891, 4f.); a name “illumi-
nates its reference only one-sidedly” (1892, 27).
These imaginings, regardings, and 3D metaphors flirt with procedural and
with psychologistic language, even though Frege is marking something static:
the generality of a concept. Wittgenstein’s aspect-talk picks up on this. The
slide is between a metaphor of proceeding, “thinking” a position as variable,
and a metaphor of something exposed (a concept or function). Frege himself
warned against this metaphorical danger (1897, 157n), (1918/19, 66).
In TLP Wittgenstein emphasizes the multiple “standpoints” (aspects as
prospects, or views) from which the sameness or difference of meaning of a
sentence or arithmetic expression might be assessed (6.2323). Mathematics
consists of equations and uses the “method of substitution” (6.234ff.). Logical
patterns – shared “internal” features of sentences – evince “faces” or “looks”
(4.1221). But Wittgenstein replaces Frege’s idea of “varying a position” in a
sentence by the idea of possible step-by-step “operations”: formal procedures
that evince “internal” necessity. He operationalizes generality and meaning.
Like Frege, Wittgenstein resists the idea that the process of decomposing a
thought into its components requires “intuition.” But he rejects Frege’s gen-
eral sense/reference distinction. For Wittgenstein (Early, Middle and Later),
names have Bedeutung (reference), but not sense; only sentences, in which
names structurally figure, have sense (Sinn), evince aspects, help project the
realization of specific possible situations.
13 Shieh, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
7
Wittgenstein’s aspect-phrasings invite the charge that he confused talk about
essence with essence, sign with object, truth with appearance. Russell’s use of
aspects in his (1914) construction of the world had urged something close to
this. But Wittgenstein was pursuing the reverse idea, committed to fulfilling the
analytical role played by Russell’s notion of “acquaintance”: immediate, direct
knowledge of a mind-independent, particular thought-form. In responding to
Russell, Wittgenstein returns the concept of “acquaintance” to its everyday
home, the sense in which one may be “acquainted” with a person, a proof, a
face, a habitat: one looks, speaks, walks around, thinks, from different angles.
This de-emphasizes the causal story by recasting the role of “perception.”
For Wittgenstein, mathematics may be said to be “about” numbers, aspects
of concepts, and so on, but only in an ordinary language sense familiar from
Austin.14 This emphatically does not mean that “all we are talking about when
we do mathematics is language” or that Wittgenstein confused linguistic and
metaphysical matters. Ordinary language is about whatever we talk about: so it
is not just the words, it is how we look at things, describe things, fit our concepts
to one another and reality. What is “ordinary” is not simply given; rather, it is
what is familiar, taken for granted. It must be thought through – occasionally
denied or shifted – for its potentialities (aspects) to be seen.
A number, as Gowers nicely puts it, “is what it does” (2002, 18). But it does
not do what it does, have the force and reality and necessities and possibilities
it does, without being fit for (indefinite) elaboration in specific ways – like any
action, human or animal. An action is no action at all unless it falls under a series
of intelligible characterizations. An action, a number, a proof have different
aspects, that is, necessities, faces, characters.15
These phenomena are real. We can regard the real number field as a field; a
proof as a model of an experiment (RFM I); we may see (or miss) a grasp of
the concept “counting” in a child’s behavior. This projection and reassembling
of concepts is, in fact, ubiquitous.
2 Early Philosophy (1912–1928): Absolute Simplicity
2.1 “Final” Analysis
TLP urges an ideal of absolute simplicity: the design of a logical notation in
which the totality of sentences (“what can be said”) is formally constructed,
step-by-step, from a base of simplest “elementary” sentences, atomic config-
urations of “simple” names that “picture” facts. Possibilities of combinations
14 Mühlhölzer, 2014.
15 Diamond, 1991; Floyd, 2010, 2012a; Putnam, 2012.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8
Philosophy of Mathematics
of names in elementary sentences would mirror the possible configurations of
facts. Wittgenstein uses schematic language – “f.x/”,“.x; y/”, “p”, and so on
(4.24) – but this draws out necessary “formal” features of any language, not spe-
cific values in a particular language from the point of view of a metalanguage.
There is just one language that I understand, just one logical space.
Russell broached the possibility of a hierarchy of languages in his Intro-
duction to the TLP. But Wittgenstein never accepted that reasoning in a
metalanguage about a syntactically specified formal language clarified funda-
mental philosophical issues. If devoid of attachment to a working, meaningful
language, a formal language is logically accidental. Wittgenstein distinguishes
between signs (sign types, e.g., “A is the same sign as A” [3.203]) and symbols
that are essential (logical) features of the expression of thought in any language.
The main task in rewriting ordinary sentences in a Tractarian notation is to
separate what is arbitrary from what is not arbitrary in thought. Symbols receive
a “formal” expression in the final analysis: it is unthinkable that an object or
thought lacks an “internal” feature that its symbols so display (4.1221).
The TLP excludes a “theory” of types: the possibilities of saying what is
the case inscribe types directly into the grammatical workings of the symbols.
What it is impossible to think is nonsense, and Wittgenstein has no theory of
what that is. Russell’s “paradox” is obviated by seeing that a concept such as
F. fx/ cannot take itself as argument, because if this is done, the working sym-
bolic “prototypes” automatically disambiguate: “F.F. fx//” should be rendered
 .. fx/ (3.333).
Wittgenstein’s conception of second-order generalization is unclear. Do
types automatically circumscribe the range of sentences demarcated by
 .. fx/? Did he take such a form to be constructible, step-by-step, from the
forms of elementary sentences? On one reading we imagine free use of second-
order generalization, as in Frege, with types carrying the load.16 Alternatively
only predicatively defined, recursive second-order concepts are allowed in the
generation of second-order variables.17
An intermediate position envisions a type-free language with a -operator
and a cumulative, predicative presentation setting out the language in stages:
second-order variables shift their range depending upon the (finite) stage of the
construction of the language.18 This expresses a portion of Principia’s rami-
fied type theory: eventually every second-order “form” appears, its instances
restricted from below.
16 Potter, 2000; but compare Weiss, 2017, 7.
17 Ricketts, 2014; Sundholm, 1992.
18 Fisher and McCarty, 2016.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
9
Possibilities of logic are not states of affairs that we picture, but come
through – are “shown” in – our saying what is the case and our thinking,
truly or falsely. We have the capacity to regard our sayings as affirming
and/or denying the realization of this or that set of possibilities among oth-
ers, leaving certain possibilities aside as logically independent. Logic explores
the formal interrelations among (structured) sayings of what is the case,
rewriting “ordinary” sentences in a notation to reveal “necessary” relations
amongst them, even those involving “material” concepts (e.g., empirical
laws).
In the imagined final analysis, each elementary sentence, being logically
independent of all the others (as in truth-functional logic), would be capable of
being affirmed or denied, rightly or wrongly (each is true or false). A particular
affirmation of “everything that is the case” would affirm/deny each elemen-
tary sentence in a manner consistent with the totality of its consequences,
accomplishing in action a truth-functional assignment of T’s and F’s to each
elementary sentence. Wittgenstein’s point is that same-saying by affirmation
and/or denial is definite and unambiguous.
Wittgenstein’s Operator N yields a step-by-step, formal construction of all
possible sentences. The totality of the results of N’s constructive applications
unify the formal aspects of logic and language in what Wittgenstein calls the
“general form of sentence” (hereafter GFS). The TLP’s notational devices
are all devoted to making this rewriting project seem not only plausible but
necessary.
Sentences are composed of symbols exhibiting dimensions of generaliza-
tion on which we can formally “operate” in a step-by-step manner: aspects. If
I think, for example, that the object a is red (suppose a and “red” appear in the
final analysis), then a logical aspect of the thought is expressed with the sen-
tential variable “x is red.” A general form, “.x/;” ranges over all elementary
sentences sharing this form.
“Simple objects” are the ultimate nodes of inference in the final analysis. The
forms of their possible configurations mirror all possible “internal” – that is,
logical – relations among structures of thought, the common “form” and “sub-
stance” of all ways of thinking or imagining what might be so. An “internal”
relation among thoughts p and q (or objects) is necessary in that they cannot
fail to have and remain the thoughts (objects) they are: that is, p is logically
equivalent to q. Crystallizing the totality of both form and content, undefinable
by further analysis or description, the names of simples are like coordinates and
dimensions constituting “logical space.” Philosophy (logic) is to construct “a
system of signs of a definite number of dimensions – of a definite mathematical
multiplicity” (5.475).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10
Philosophy of Mathematics
The final analysis would fully disambiguate language: different names indi-
cate different objects. Thus the identity sign is eliminated from the proposed
notation as redundant (5.53f.), with the cardinality of the universe expressed
by the number of names – obviating the need for an Axiom of Infinity. Rus-
sell’s second-order definition of identity as indiscernibility is unnecessary
(5.5302ff.), his theory of descriptions reduced to configurations of names.
Frege’s treatment of sense and reference for names vanishes (6.232).
The right “mathematical multiplicity” would emerge a posteriori, as a result
of research (5.55ff.). It is not part of the task of analysis to anticipate the actual
compositions of sentential structures needed to represent reality, for exam-
ple, the number of n-place relations or the extent of higher-order analysis or
geometry required in physics.
Yet Wittgenstein urges that a complete a priori analysis of all the pure pos-
sibilities and mathematical multiplicities must be possible. We are capable of
setting aside any factual truths, laws, or happenstances by seeing through our
everyday activities of picturing facts to what is the case if a thought or sen-
tence is true. Sentences are themselves facts, structures, none of which is a
priori true, each of which may be compared with the facts. Form is the possi-
bility of structure, the being-capable-of-being-true-or-false, or “sense” (Sinn)
of a sentence (2.033).
This transposes the traditional dialectic between Realism and Idealism
(“Skepticism”) into a purely logical key. Analysis presents the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, simply – that is, determinately and clearly (3.23,
5.4541, 5.5563). It is coherent to imagine that all our affirmations of what is
the case are false, that they are all true, or that some are true, some are false.
Logic and mathematics run through all possibilities of thought. This is a move
reminiscent of Kant, except that while Wittgenstein remarks that logic is “tran-
scendental,” he also holds the un-Kantian view that all logic is general (formal)
logic, which is “analytic” and therefore “tautological.”19
Like Kant, Wittgenstein never regarded mathematical knowledge as tauto-
logical. Aspects are his logicist-inspired way of articulating the “syntheticity”
of thought at which Kant aimed. The Vienna Circle did not follow the philos-
ophy of mathematics of the TLP, for they assumed that the logicist reduction
of mathematics to logic was successful. Carnap, who attempted to reconstruct
arithmetic and analysis as tautological and failed, relabeled the truths of logic
and mathematics “analytic” but not “tautological,” reserving the latter term, as
we now do, for the smaller class of truth-functional tautologies.
19 Dreben and Floyd, 1991.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
11
2.2 The General Form of Sentence, Form Series
The GFS expresses a rule for constructing all sentences using iterated applica-
tions of N, a generalized form of a Sheffer Stroke: not only single sentences
but collections of sentences and/or their forms may be jointly negated by its
means.
Wittgenstein mentions three ways generality may appear through N’s appli-
cation (5.501). First, N may be applied to a finite list of sentences to produce a
list of their negations. Second, “N.f.x//” expresses the collection of “all” sen-
tences which are negations of sentences of the form of a propositional variable
such as “f.x/” (the bar indicates “all”). This gets us to quantificational gener-
ality. Wittgenstein interprets his translation of Russellian quantifiers in such a
way that different variables bound by the same quantifier must be instantiated
by different values, in accordance with the complete disambiguation of names
in the final analysis (4.1272). This makes it difficult to translate his notation
into ours. After a decades-long dispute, Rogers and Wehmeier (2012) settled
that Operator N can express first-order logic with identity. However, Wittgen-
stein’s logic is more powerful than this. For it also contains, third, the generality
of recursive definitions.
“Form series” collect series of sentence forms by means of terms express-
ing the potentially infinite application of an iterated, step-by-step, formal rule
(5.501):
The general term of a form series a, O’a, O’’a, …. I write thus: “[a; x; O’x]”.
This expression in brackets is a variable. The first term of the expression is
the beginning of the form series, the second the form of an arbitrary term x of
the series, and the third the form of that term of the series which immediately
follows x.
A “formal law” does not represent a material concept but an operation char-
acterizing relations among forms: a well-founded formal field of variation on
a single rule. Unlike a sentence or sentential function used in the expression
of a material concept (e.g., “f.x/ v g.x/), a form series variable does not belong
directly to the logical form of any particular sentence: it is elliptical, a nonexten-
sional device. Wittgenstein sharply differentiates its generality from the merely
“accidental” generality of a set or class (6.031).
Any particular enumeration of the elementary sentences of a language will
exhibit “accidental” generality: the elementary sentences are logically inde-
pendent, so any starting point is arbitrary. But what is not arbitrary is that some
enumeration of all sentences is possible. It might be that the number of ele-
mentary sentences, each logically independent of all the others, is (countably)
infinite. But each of them is a finite structure (a determinate picture, a fact).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12
Philosophy of Mathematics
No matter what the size of the set of elementary sentences (finite or infinite),
an arbitrary correlation of syntax with a (potentially infinite) alphabet must be
possible.
Why? Wittgenstein defines numbers as “exponents” of formal operations
enumerating the number of steps taken in the construction of a formal series,
no matter what the base of the series and what the operation (6.02, §2.4).
This possibility of indexing includes subscripting a (lexicographically ordered)
alphabet of names to structure a formally ordered collection (a1; a2; a3; : : :).
Thus may the elementary sentences be enumerated. Given any psychological,
auditory, or pictorially expressed thoughts, it will be possible to enumerate
them using translations into an alphabetical language (4.014, 4.025). (Gödel
later showed the possibility of arithmetically coding the well-formed formulas
of any formalized countable language.)
Any enumeration of the elementary sentences is arbitrary, as it utilizes “acci-
dental features” of the language involved (3.34): particular names go proxy for
objects according to different conventions in different languages. But in any
language something is not arbitrary. It is the way the names are configured in
a particular language that constitutes their expression of a thought, their pic-
turing of a specific fact: sentences are not mere collections of names (3.1432).
And thus what is not arbitrary is the possibility of enumerating the sentences
beginning with some articulation of the language.
What is presupposed in this claim are the capacities to (a) begin from a partic-
ular base (of simple names and their combinatorial possibilities in elementary
sentences), (b) distinguish identity and difference of names, and (c) construct a
formal series based on the identity of outcome of applying a formal rule to any
reoccurrence of a particular name or sentential form. Let us call (b) and (c) the
“Uniformity Principle.” For Poincaré (1904, 1.I) it is logical, not mathematical:
It must be granted that mathematical reasoning has of itself a kind of creative
virtue, and is therefore to be distinguished from the syllogism. The difference
must be profound. We shall not, for instance, find the key to the mystery in
the frequent use of the rule by which the same uniform operation applied
to two equal numbers will give identical results. All these modes of reason-
ing, whether or not reducible to the syllogism, properly so called, retain the
analytical character, and ipso facto, lose their power.
Wittgenstein logicizes the Uniformity Principle, drawing it into the foundations
of mathematics. What is not accidental to logic is the capacity to use form series
terms to express thoughts in the form of the generality of formal laws and to
index them. By “capacities” we do not mean present, actual abilities we possess,
materially speaking, but rather “logical capacities.” These are primitive.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
13
Speaking extensionally, the first and second forms of generality (5.501) – (a)
listing sentences and (b) using sentential variables for “material” concepts – are
encompassed by (c) the generality of a form series term. However, for Wittgen-
stein the nonextensionalist there is a sharp contrast between (a) and (b) versus
(c), the latter characterizing rules ordering forms. Presumably Wittgenstein
held that every formal “law” may be expressed by a form series term. But not
every collection of logical forms will be a form series.
The GFS is given in terms of a form series expression. N is the heart of
the TLP: its expressive capacity is adequate to express all the truth functions,
and it may be used to characterize all (possible) logical forms. Wittgen-
stein’s idea is that the operation of negation runs through the formal unity
of logic, all saying what is the case. Indeed, the “fundamental thought” of
the TLP is that the logical constants do not name but characterize operational
potentialities with expressions (4.0312). Bivalence and the law of excluded
middle are not postulates or laws but reflected in the use of any representing
language.
As for the GFS:
The general form of truth-function is: Œ p; ; N./.
This is the general form of sentence.
This says nothing else than that every sentence is the result of successive
applications of the operation N’./ to the elementary sentences (6).
“p” “stands for all collections of elementary sentences, “” for an arbitrary
result of applying operator N a finite number of times to any such collec-
tion, and N./ for all possible applications of operator N to all possible results
of such collecting and joint negating with N. “N 0./” characterizes the result
of applying N a finite number of times, step-by-step, to any such base. Witt-
genstein’s claim is that every affirmable sentence, under analysis, is such a
result.
The form series term is Wittgenstein’s most novel device. It gives his logic
the expressive power of (at least) some predicative fragment of second-order
logic. It allows him (at least) to define the ancestral of a relation, logical con-
sequence, and all arithmetically definable sets.20 More broadly, it draws into
his philosophy the idea that it is part of our very concept of logic that we are
able to write down – that is, express with a finite number of symbols – formal
rules that we can follow step-by-step, thereby constructing a potential infinity
of forms.
20 Weiss, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14
Philosophy of Mathematics
2.3 Early Philosophy of Logic
Poincaré (1904) begins:
The very possibility of mathematical science seems an insoluble contradic-
tion. If this science is only deductive in appearance, from whence is derived
that perfect rigour which is challenged by none? If, on the contrary, all the
sentences which it enunciates may be derived in order by the rules of formal
logic, how is it that mathematics is not reduced to a gigantic tautology?
Wittgenstein reworks Poincaré’s “contradiction.” Logic consists wholly of tau-
tologies (and their negations, contradictions) (6.1201f.). A “purely logical”
conclusion is already “contained” in the premises of any deductive proof,
and every deductive proof is tautological when conditionalized. Logic car-
ries zero information (6.1203), admitting no comparison with reality (4.461).
Logical “propositions” are without sense (sinnlos), though not nonsensical
(unsinnig).
Language has the power to cancel out its own procedures through grammar.
This is a signature theme for Wittgenstein. The TLP remarks that “the whole of
philosophy” is full of this: philosophical “propositions” are nonsense (3.324)
– including the remarks of the TLP, which are instead “formal” elucidations
(6.54,7). Axiomatization in logic is epistemologically superfluous. The number
of “primitive propositions of logic” in any system is arbitrary (6.1271), a matter
of accidental presentation: the GFS encompasses all we require. Proof in logic
is, in quantifier-free cases, a “mechanical” expedient for determining logical
validity (6.1262).
Axiomatization in mathematics is more than window dressing, however,
for we use it to titrate and compare different theories. Hilbert wrote of the
“half-timbering” of concepts involved in this enterprise: universally applicable
struts that hold the edifice of mathematical concepts together.21 Wittgenstein’s
alternative picture is that logic and mathematics involve scaffolding, formal
rearrangements (3.42). They are not conceptual frameworks, but rather mod-
ular, transportable, humanly used pieces of language that interconnect in a
variety of ways. They may be erected and transformed as we build the edi-
fice of science, but they do not support that edifice. Wittgenstein replaces the
axioms of Principia with formal procedures. Axiomatizations run the dan-
ger of leading us to confuse tautologies or equational rules of arithmetic for
propositions depicting “reality.” This may drive us to respond with convention-
alism about logical aspects of mathematics. Wittgenstein aims to avoid these
dangers.
21 Hilbert to Frege, December 29, 1899, in Frege, 1983, p. 60.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
15
The sign “=” is extralogical, expressing the intersubstitutivity of operational
forms. The method of mathematics is “the method of substitution” (6.24),
a “logical method.” This method is nonextensional, for it conveys the idea
of necessary (rule-governed, procedural) generality. Wittgenstein took formal
series – the potential infinity of step-by-step, operational routines, calculations,
and substitution steps – as basic and ubiquitous elements of logic and mathe-
matics. The extensional point of view, the theory of sets or classes, abstracts
away from all procedures and rules, offering only “accidental” generality, the
happenstance of a collection without order, something of no ultimate logical
significance.
Frege and Russell were also nonextensionalists (Frege spoke of “concepts”
and “senses,” Russell of “propositional functions”). But they took the two
perspectives, extensional and nonextensional, to fit together. By contrast, Witt-
genstein drew a sharp distinction between the two. Principia’s Axiom of
Reducibility states that for every nonpredicatively specified sentential func-
tion there exists a predicatively specifiable extensionally equivalent function
of a lower order. For Wittgenstein this is logically inessential to mathematics,
for it might turn out to be false (6.1232). Unlike the equations of elementary
arithmetic, we must await the final analysis’s verdict on whether or not it applies
to forms of “reality.”
To reason about infinite sets in mathematics, we must develop an extensional
theory, abstracting away from all possible human procedures and rules. We
appeal to rules, choices, and procedures also in set theory, but the extension-
alist regards this as “merely” human. Wittgenstein works, by contrast, with an
everyday notion of mathematical understanding and separates the perspectives.
If one imagines another – supertasks or hypercomputability – this would be a
matter of metaphysical accident rather than logical necessity.22
2.4 Early Philosophy of Mathematics
Like Poincaré, the TLP takes mathematical insight to be independent of the
particular quantificational logical structures of Frege and Russell because
logic consists of tautologies (6.233). Unlike Poincaré, Wittgenstein ties math-
ematical forms of operation to logical form as the possibility of structure.
Wittgenstein proceduralizes the intuitive, substituting atemporal procedures
for what Kant regarded, in his philosophy of arithmetic, as the formal intui-
tion of succession in time. This expresses a debt to logicism and a rebellion
against it.
22 Russell, 1936; Copeland, 2002.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16
Philosophy of Mathematics
Wittgenstein’s notion of operation is equiprimordial with the GFS:
If we are given the general form of the way in which a sentence is con-
structed, then thereby we are also given the general form of the way in which
by an operation out of one sentence another can be created.
The general form of the operation ’.) is therefore: Œ; N.’/./
.D Œ; ; N.//.
This is the most general form of transition from one sentence to another.
No operation can generate a form that fails to be potentially attached to forms
of elementary sentences. But there may be operations that bear an indirect rela-
tion to the representing power of language (e.g., substitutions). Mathematics
consists of a “calculus” of operations spelling out possible forms of depicting
reality. Its operations carry propositions to propositions, not primarily via the
application of truth functions and/or quantificational rules, but more generally
by means of iterable operations that are applicable to sentences, forms, and
operations themselves.
Form series earmark Wittgenstein’s lifelong resistance to the idea of a reduc-
tion of arithmetic to logic. He takes mathematics to provide us with ways of
seeing forms of possible structurings of objects and procedures. His philosophy
of mathematics is an ontologically neutral, predicative modal structuralism tak-
ing recursive procedures as basic, abstracting away from any particular factual
basis. In mathematics there are no empirical hypotheses. Yet the applicability
of mathematics in the logical forms of empirical science is indispensable.
No matter what the mathematical multiplicity in the final analysis, it is
possible to write down, formally, any number using form series (6.431). If
the number of objects turns out to be finite, then the operational language of
arithmetic reflects a certain redundancy, like clock arithmetic.
The arithmetical language Wittgenstein envisions in the TLP is, on the
surface (though not in its potential applications), “logic-free.” Numbers are
indices of steps taken in form series (6.2323), so their “generality” is not
quantificational but given through the possibility of parametrizing formal
procedures:
6.02 And thus we come to numbers. I define
x D 0’x Def. and
’’x D C1’x Def.
According, then to these symbolic rules we write the series
x; ’; ’’x; ’’’x; : : :
as:
0’x; 0C1’x; 0C1C1’x; 0C1C1C1’x; : : :
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
17
Therefore I write in place of “Œx; ; ’”,
“Œ0’x; ’x; C1’x”:
And I define:
0 C 1 D 1 Def.
0 C 1 C 1 D 2 Def.
0 C 1 C 1 C 1 D 3 Def.
and so on.
A number is the exponent of an operation.
Frascolla (1997) reconstructs Wittgenstein’s language rigorously, writing down
the “proof” of 2  2 D 4 that Wittgenstein gives (6.241) and noting the simi-
larity of the formalized language to that of the -calculus.23 However, in that
calculus “” works as a function. Wittgenstein’s “’s” are schematic, indicat-
ing possible parametrizations of formal aspects of language, mathematical and
extramathematical.
In labeling arithmetic equations “pseudosentences” Wittgenstein is protect-
ing its universal applicability (i.e., its readiness to accommodate any set of
elementary propositional forms). He accounts for the “formal” character of,
for example, “if I have 2 eggs and 4 eggs, then I have 6 eggs” as substitu-
tional, thereby satisfying the logicist demand that inferences using ascriptions
of number be nonempirical. However, Wittgenstein takes such inferences to be
analogous to – though not identical with – tautologies. In construing equality
as the expression of a formal and procedural relation he rejects the idea that
an analysis of ascriptions of number (“there are 6 eggs”) involves reference
to numbers as objects or an identity claim concerning properties of concepts
treated extensionally (via the notion of a one-to-one correlation).
How does Wittgenstein provide a nonquantificational account of our knowl-
edge of general truths of number and arithmetic, including the validity of proofs
by mathematical induction? These seem, as Poincaré insisted, not to be any-
thing tautology-like. Inductive arguments contain within them a potentially
infinite cascade of steps of reasoning from the holding of a property .x/ for
each particular number n to .Sx/ for its successor Sn (Poincaré, 1904, 10).
This rule seems to presuppose, in turn, that we may infer .n/ from .8x/.x/.
Wittgenstein treats the potentially infinite number of conclusions as a “syn-
thetic” form of reasoning that is formal (5.43). What Frege–Russell logic ren-
ders in terms of universal instantiation is aspectual in Wittgenstein. Induction is
conditionalized reasoning insofar as particular numbers await the final analysis,
23 Compare Marion, 1998 and Fisher and McCarty, 2016.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18
Philosophy of Mathematics
but it is direct as a formal possibility. In any inductive proof all the mathemat-
ical work goes into establishing that there is a formal “projection” from the
possession of property .x/ by n into “the same” for Sn.
This is why mathematical induction is not even mentioned in the TLP:
Wittgenstein takes its mathematical “validity” to emerge directly from the form
of any form series. The number series 0,1,2,3,…is rendered as a formal series
term “Œ0; ;  C 1” in which “” ranges over exponents of operations (6.022,
6.03). Its “generality” is procedural (aspectual), depending upon mathematical
insight and the three presuppositions of form series generality mentioned above
in our gloss of 5.501 (§2.2).
Wittgenstein’s emphasis on the gap between extensionalism and nonexten-
sionalism complicates his inheritance of Russell and Frege. They too insisted
that symbolic logic reflects nonextensional aspects of meaning (e.g., “con-
cepts” and “propositional functions”), but their axioms crossed the boundaries
between the two viewpoints (Frege’s Basic Law V; Russell’s Axiom of Reduci-
bility). Wittgenstein refuses this. He always resisted construing equinumerosity
extensionally, as the actual existence of a one-to-one correlation between the
objects falling under them.24 For him cardinality and equinumerosity are aspec-
tual, evincing the possibility of “projecting” one aspect of collection into
another through the possibility of indexing elements with formal series.
In Principia the Axiom of Reducibility is used to define identity second-
order and to develop real analysis: it guarantees that impredicative definitions
(those using quantifiers ranging over the classes they characterize) pick out sets
belonging to same type. Since Wittgenstein does not regard identity as a gen-
uine relation, the first task is otiose. Dedekind’s analysis of real numbers as
“cuts,” or classes of rational numbers, uses impredicative definitions to define
basic concepts such as the “least upper bound” of an interval of reals that is
bounded from above. This requires Reducibility to guarantee the membership
of that number in a set characterized at a lower type. Wittgenstein allows for
Reducibility to be used as a principle in mathematics for certain conceptual
purposes internal to the extensionalist perspective. But this evinces “acciden-
tal” generality and is mathematically “superfluous” (6.02). In “real life,” he
remarks, we “only” utilize mathematical propositions to help us with material
inferences (6.211).
There is no characterization of real numbers or the continuum in the TLP.
Like Frege, Wittgenstein regarded Dedekind’s cuts as unable to account for the
applicability of real numbers.25 The TLP does not contain much discussion of
24 Sullivan, 1995; Floyd, 2005, 98f.
25 Frege, 1893/1903, II §83; Snyder and Shapiro, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
19
geometry – only an insistence that, like arithmetic, its forms are potentially var-
ied enough to handle any of the particular logical forms that may arise through
analysis: “a place is a possibility: something can exist in it” (3.032f., 3.411).
Geometry evinces all-pervading, necessary formal features of our portrayals of
reality. But logical “space” is shaped by it in a specific way only in the final
analysis, where it would be determined, for example, whether material space
is or is not Euclidean.
In TLP the arithmetic of numbers (whole, integer, and presumably real num-
bers) as well as the measurement relations of geometry are built into the very
idea of any possible language. But Dedekind’s “cuts” and set theory are not. In
fairness to Wittgenstein, the presentation of real analysis in textbooks through
the 1920s was nonextensional: a matter of developing calculational techniques
for functions of a real variable.26 Physics’s uses of analysis depend neither
on the Dedekindian analysis of what a real number is nor on set theory. The
Axiom of Choice’s status was not yet crystallized in mathematical practice at
the time.27 Dedekind himself did not regard his “cuts” as an analysis of the
continuum but rather a possibility projected into the number line through an
axiom that is incapable of proof.
2.5 Poincaré’s Objections
The Uniformity Principle is a procedural, nonextensional counterpart of the
notion of function (it speaks of “inputs” and “outputs”). The TLP shows that the
“frequent use” of this principle is more fertile, leads to more novel insight, than
Poincaré believed. The identity of results of rules developing formal aspects of
language through operations is ubiquitous in mathematics, as well as logic.
Uses of our number terms as parameters in constructing contexts for proof and
calculation everywhere rely upon its applications.28
Wittgenstein explored the status of the Uniformity Principle throughout his
life; what evolved was his understanding of the nature of its fundamentality. In
modalizing it, he did not endorse an empirical axiom of the stability of signs.29
But his departure from Frege’s and Russell’s logicism necessitates a reply to
two main objections.
First, for Frege and Russell any particular symbolic articulations used in the
presentation of deductive logic are not essential to the content of the justifica-
tions of arithmetical knowledge and logical relationships that logic provides.30
26 Hobson, 1927, WH §§7ff., §4.3 below.
27 Waismann, 1936a, chapter 13; WH Chapter 8.
28 Shapiro, 2008, 2012 discusses ontological, semantic, and pragmatic aspects of parametrization.
29 Compare Frege, 1884, xxf.
30 Goldfarb, 2018b.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20
Philosophy of Mathematics
One may count parentheses and use mathematical induction over signs and
formulas to read the symbolism, but this is irrelevant to the mathematical
knowledge that the language of logic articulates – as irrelevant as is the color of
the ink involved. Our uses of the formal signs involves a psychological under-
standing of how we cognitively process logic, but this lies outside Frege’s and
Russell’s purview as logicists. Frege made a “reproof” of Wittgenstein dur-
ing their early conversations, viz., that “Wittgenstein places too much weight
upon signs.”31 Wittgenstein himself worries about “the danger” of his get-
ting “entangled” in “inessential” psychological investigations with his remarks
about notation (4.1121).
The TLP riposte is that any particular notation as a notation does not matter to
logic or mathematics. What matters is what is common to, what is reflected in,
all possible notations (3.3421). Logic deals with all possible modes of thought,
not the laws of its actual empirical realizations. The fact that a particular scheme
for calculating with tautologies can be devised shows something logical, just
as the possibility of a particular scheme for enumerating the sentences of a
language shows something logical (§2.2). It is not the sign-manipulations qua
causal events that matter, nor the psychological capacity we have to reidentify
shapes visually. It is rather a question of the possibilities of our activities with
the signs. This itself, and not any particular logical principles, is at stake. Witt-
genstein thus sidesteps the logicist accusation that he has confused signs with
justifications.
But what about the law of excluded middle and hence the consistency of all
the possible applications of logical inference in Frege’s and Russell’s systems?
For them there is a gap here, and perhaps a more sophisticated version of the
Poincaré objection applies.32 For they did not present logic in our contemporary
way, in terms of a syntax presented from the standpoint of a metalanguage,
or in terms of an axiomatic system having models.33 Rather, Frege called his
Begriffsschrift a “formula language” (1879).
Given the universality of this language (and of Principia, for Russell), nei-
ther Frege nor Russell had the means to prove that a particular sentence does
not follow by means of logic from other sentences: their systems can only dis-
play positive results. Wittgenstein aimed in TLP to develop a general notion of
“follows by logic” (logical consequence) that would verify or falsify any claim
31 Floyd, 2011, 7.
32 Parsons, 1983, 170f.; I disagree with Parsons and Waismann, 1936a, chap. 9 that Later
Wittgenstein regards “F.0/&.8n/.Fn  F.Sn//” as a “criterion” for the truth of “for all natu-
ral numbers n, Fn” that assures us of no conflict between the two methods for proving individual
cases; that is Middle Wittgenstein’s view.
33 Van Heijenoort, 1967.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
21
about validity or consequence (just as truth tables do). (Later on Gödel [1930]
provided a proof procedure for first-order validity while Church [1936] and
Turing [1936] showed there is no decision procedure for this.)
The issue of consistency only became pressing for Wittgenstein as he devel-
oped a response to Hilbert’s writings on the foundations of mathematics in the
1920s. Early Wittgenstein simply assumes a well-founded, step-by-step, recur-
sive construction of sentences. Being mutually logically independent from one
another, the elementary sentences are assumed to form a consistent set and are
bivalent (if they appear not to be so, analysis is not complete).
The second issue distancing Wittgenstein’s logicization of Poincaré from
mere psychologism is the sharp distinction he draws between experiment and
calculation as human epistemological processes: something Poincaré (1904,
Preface) also emphasizes. In an experiment, we do not know the outcome ahead
of time, we await the results and test hypotheses (4.031, 5.154). In a calculation,
by contrast, we regard the result as nonaccidental, timelessly contained in the
premises: “process and result are equivalent” and “there are no surprises,” not
in a psychological sense, but in a logical sense of necessity (6.1261, 6.2331).
Consider probability (5.1ff.).34 For any (fair) pair of dice we are capable of
“extracting” from a list of the total possible outcome-configurations probabilis-
tic “features” of their likely behavior (5.154f.). We can, for example, calculate
the probability of throwing a particular sum of the dice by dividing the total
number of ways to throw that total by the total number of possible combinations
it is possible to roll (viz., 36). We calculate, for example, that the probabil-
ity of throwing a sum of 5 on a particular throw is 11.11 percent. Probability
works with “formal” features of the total possibility space and, like arithme-
tic and geometry, serves as a standard against which empirical events are
measured.
Wittgenstein sharply distinguishes such calculations from the application of
probability in everyday life: “What can be confirmed by experiment, in sen-
tences about probability, cannot possibly be mathematics” (NB p. 27, 8.11.14).
What we “know” in probability statements are “certain general [formal] prop-
erties of ungeneralized sentences of natural science” – ultimately these turn on
the elementary sentences. The general laws of physics attach to them in the
final analysis. But this is not yet to know what will happen in everyday life on
a particular roll of the dice.
Wittgenstein likens such applications of mathematics to our experiences of
aspects of puzzle pictures. We may spot a tiny rabbit in the corner of a compli-
cated picture where at first it was not visible. Or we might “see” the solution of
34 Compare Floyd, 2010.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22
Philosophy of Mathematics
how to put puzzle pieces together to form a particular shape. The mathematical
structure may “click” into place with what we experience, the “reality” of the
formal concepts appear to be exemplified. This is not something empirical, and
it involves something other than calculation. It exercises a capacity we have for
looking at the world, modeling or seeing a happening or experience or sequence
of events in a particular way, under an aspect of (mathematical) necessity.
TLP likens this to spotting an expression (say, an emotion) in a picture-face
(4.1221). The emotion, like the logical feature, is internal to the particular struc-
ture of the face: when we see a smile in a happy face we see the apparent
manifestation of happiness, one amongst other emotions in a field of various
possible ones. When we apply aspect-perception to someone’s face in everyday
life we may mistake one emotion for another, just as when we apply probabil-
ity, we may not see things “click” (NB 15.10.16). But the happiness is still a
“formal” feature of the face.
Here emerges a crucial analogy for Wittgenstein, one he retains for the rest
of his life. It is not highlighted in TLP, but powerfully incipient (4.1221) and
grows in importance over time. We are capable of “seeing the face of necessity”
in a human procedure or empirical process, seeing the “reality” (i.e., the possi-
bility of structure) of a concept.35 This is what makes the applications of logic
and mathematics possible. “Seeing” the necessity does not mean ascribing a
material property to objects, or imposing a convention upon our descriptions,
or seeing a further fact or object behind the empirical events. It is instead a mat-
ter of fitting the necessities of a concept to empirical events. We are able to see
through processes and situations, however falteringly, to see in them necessities
and possibilities. This is a power, not of direct intuition of forms or necessary
truths, but of reflection on aspects of our own experiences and encounters with
the world. Philosophy is the development of this power.
2.6 Interpreting Form Series
For Frege and Russell, the notions of “all concepts” and “all objects” were
reflected in the second-order quantificational notation of logic; for Wittgen-
stein, “material” concepts reflect empirical science, and logic and mathematics
construct calculative routines capable of accommodating any set of material
concepts science might provide. The elementary sentences are directly ele-
mentary: they exhibit no “hierarchy” of types; rather, any “hierarchies” are
constructed by us via operator N. Wittgenstein remarks that we can only “fore-
see” what we ourselves construct (5.556): he regards logic and mathematics
35 Diamond, 1991, 243ff.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
23
as constructible in that we can “foresee” that their constructions involve form,
not content, and so run through all possible thought about what is the case.
This leaves ample room for the “creative” aspects of mathematics that differ-
entiate its forms from those of logic, for we cannot foresee which forms of
calculative manoeuvres and parametrizations it may be necessary to provide
for experience.
Wittgenstein agrees with Weyl (1918, 48) that “the idea of iteration, i.e., of
the sequence of the natural numbers, is an ultimate foundation of mathemat-
ical thought.” But he interprets “sequence” non-extensionally, in terms of the
possibility of a procedure. This prevents him from defining the ancestral of
a relation in the Dedekind–Frege–Russell, top-down, second-order way. Like
Poincaré and Weyl, he charges that this technique for changing an elliptical
procedure into an explicit definition contains a “circulus vitiosus.”36 He offers
instead a form series (4.1273):
If we want to express in logical symbolism the general sentence “b is a suc-
cessor of a” we need for this an expression for the general term of the form
series:
aRb;
.9x/ W aRx:xRb;
.9x; y/ W aRx:xRy:yRb;
: : :
:
Weiss (2017), relying on what he calls a “minimalist” reading of the use of form
series, shows how one may use Wittgenstein’s form series to frame all finitary
inductive definitions, the ancestral, and all arithmetically definable relations,
as well as categorical finite axiomatizations of arithmetic. Weiss notes (p. 44)
that the complexity of the consequence relation for this logic is sensitive to the
size of the domain; on his reading, the precise formulation of the consequence
relation would be settled for Wittgenstein through analysis, that is, only in the
application of logic.
This does not resolve the question of what, in general, Wittgenstein’s form
series representations allow. Weiss’s form series use operations allowing sub-
stitutions of sentences for sentences and sentential forms, beginning from a
sentence as base. Converting a name in an elementary sentence into a variable
(e.g., “Aa” to “Ax”, “Ax” to “Aa”) counts, as does substituting a sentence into
the place where another sentence is in a more complex schema. A “minimal-
ist” form series (MFS) results from replacing each occurrence of sentence p in
36 In Whitehead and Russell, 1910, second edition, Russell attempted to characterize “natural
number” predicatively, but this cannot be done: Marion, 1998, 43.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24
Philosophy of Mathematics
complex schema B with some base sentence or first-order sentential variable
and then, in subsequent steps, again with a sentence or (first-order) sentential
variable A. Weiss represents this as
JA; ; BŒp=K:37
As an example, consider the following form series spelling out
JAa; ; ŒAa ^ =K;
namely,
Aa; Aa ^ Aa; Aa ^ .Aa ^ Aa/; : : : :
We use parentheses to mark procedural groupings implicit in Wittgenstein’s
idea of a form series term (the associativity of operation results is a “formal”
feature of the intersubstitutivity of expressions (6.23)). Associativity in arith-
metic requires no axiom or proof by induction; it is built into the fact that
number terms are signs for possible indexings of formal series and already
contain their (procedural) generality of application.38
There must be something more than “minimal” operations that are plausi-
bly “formal” in Wittgenstein’s sense. Working with a base sentential variable
expression, consider the spelling out of two further MFS’s,
JAx; ; Œ= ^ AxK:
Ax; .Ax/ ^ Ax; .Ax ^ Ax/ ^ Ax; : : :
and J:Ax; ; Œ= ^ AxK:
:Ax; :Ax ^ .:Ax/; :Ax ^ ..:Ax/ ^ :Ax/; : : : :
Since numbers are exponents of operations, we can index the variables pro-
duced at each step of the formal series:
Ax1; Ax1 ^ .Ax2/; Ax1 ^ ..Ax2/ ^ Ax3//; : : :
:Ax1; :Ax1 ^ .:Ax2/; :Ax1 ^ ..:Ax2/ ^ .:Ax3//; : : :
A Tractarian justification for the multiple occurrences of (interior) variables
in these series is that identity and difference of signs has to be primitive for
identity-free signs, and the Uniformity Principle must apply to the results of
applying operations to particular forms taken as base. (Because of this, as
37 Weiss, 2017, 16.
38 This answers the objection Frege makes to Leibniz’s attempt to show that the truths of arithmetic
may be proven from definitions (1884, §6); compare Potter, 2000, §2.1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
25
Ω1, x, Ω2, x,
Ω1, x, Ω2, x,
Ω3, x, Ω4, x,
Ω3, x, Ω4, x Ω5, x.
Figure 2 Odd and even
(Ω1, x, Ω2, x, Ω3, x, Ω4, x Ω5, x)
=                   (Ω1, x, Ω2, x, Ω3, x).
– (Ω1, x, Ω2, x)
Figure 3 Subtraction
we have already argued above, an enumeration of the alphabet of the lan-
guage must be possible.) One also presumes that each application of the formal
law involves a substitution of a variable different from the variables already
occurring in preceding formulas of the series (in the TLP, differing vari-
ables must be instantiated with different values if they occur in “the same”
context).
Every number-form is involved in the formal possibility of indexing
repeated applications of operations for “constructing” form series indefinitely
many times (“all” is understood here non-extensionally, not quantification-
ally), regardless of what the cardinality of the actual universe turns out
to be.
Further mathematical concepts may be developed. “x is even” and “x is
odd” emerge from seeing whether an ordered series can be equally divided
in half (Figure 2). Subtraction? Lay two form series beside one another and
re-index (Figure 3). An account of the integers emerges from adding a mirror
image, reflecting. Given the idea of a possible procedure that is fixed in logical
space by the simples, there is a kind of “geometry” of operation signs available
to us.
Such a “geometry,” using our indexing and re-indexing of form series,
implicitly appeals to an operation that “dovetails” multiple form series expres-
sions. This requires something different from MFS’s, namely the construction
of a new formal series from the combining of two others.
For example, consider the formation of a formal series term expressing
“There are n A’s,” for all natural numbers n.
The initial term of such a series is a formula such as A.x/, with x a varia-
ble free in A. Choosing for simplicity’s sake an enumeration of those variables
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26
Philosophy of Mathematics
Figure 4 Dovetailing formal series
xi; i > 1 that do not occur in A, and setting x1 to be x, the operation or formal
law is to substitute for at least one occurrence of the free variable xi 1 in A the
next variable xi:
A.x1/; A.x2/; A.x3/; : : :
and for this we could use the following notation:
JA.x/; xi ! xiC1K:
Next, we dovetail with the “schematic” minimalist form series JB; p; p_CK. The
process constructs a series of form series; we then calculate first-step outputs
of each member of this series of series to produce a new form series (Figure 4).
The base steps of each term in the series of form series terms are the results
of substituting the terms of the first series, in order, for each basis. The formal
rule expressions in the series of form series emerge by substituting for “C”
the previous result of applying “C ^ p”, then moving on to the next basis for
the next form series. One “calculates” one value and then proceeds to the next
substitution into a basis. The whole process constructs the new form series:
A.x1/; A.x1/ ^ A.x2/; .A.x1/ ^ A.x2// ^ A.x3/; : : : :
A further form series may then be constructed by dovetailing with a series of
generalized applications of Operator N to each term in this form series, one at
the first step, two at the second, and so on:
Nx1.Ax1/;Nx2.Nx1.A.x1/^A.x2////;Nx3.Nx2.Nx1..A.x1/^A.x2//^A.x3////; : : : :
This expresses a formal series of denials of ascriptions of numbers 1; 2; 3; : : : n
to sentential function Ax. It may be translated into more familiar notation using
our quantifiers and Wittgenstein’s convention of excluding instantiation by the
same name of different variables within the scope of a single quantifier:
:.9x1/.Ax1/; :.9x1; x2/.Ax1^Ax2/; :.9x1; x2; x3/.Ax1^Ax2^Ax3/; : : : : (1)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
27
Figure 5 Diagonalization
We can now apply generalized Operator N to negate each term in this form
series, generating a series of ascriptions of “at least” 1; 2; 3; : : : n to the
sentential function Ax:
.9x1/.Ax1/; .9x1; x2/.Ax1 ^ Ax2/; .9x1; x2; x3/.Ax1 ^ Ax2 ^ Ax3/; : : : :
(2)
How to refine this to “exactly n”? We do this by combining the denials with
the affirmations of ascriptions of number according to the following diago-
nal routine – a use of formal series construction of which Wittgenstein was
undoubtedly aware.
First, represent the terms of the series (1) and (2) by writing them in an array,
placing the form series terms of (2) on the top row. According to the needed
schematic indexing, “a11” is the first term of (2), “a12” its second term, “a21”
is the first term of (1), and so on:
a11a12a13a14a15 …
a21a22a23a24a25 …
:::
Next, create a new form series by conjoining the diagonal terms in each rec-
tangle stage j1; : : : jn. Conjunction is attained by disjoining the negations of the
n diagonal terms a1j : : : ajj and applying Operator N to jointly deny the result
(Figure 5).
This gives us the formal series for ascriptions of exactly the number n, for
all natural numbers 1; 2; : : : ; n, to Ax, expressing Frege’s adjectival strategy for
ascriptions of number in terms of a form-series variable:39
.9x1/.Ax1/ ^ :.9x1; x2/.Ax1 ^ Ax2/ : : : ;
.9x1; x2/.Ax1 ^ Ax2/ ^ :.9x1; x2; x3/.Ax1 ^ Ax2 ^ Ax3/; : : : ;
.9x1; x2; x3/.Ax1 ^ Ax2 ^ Ax3/ ^ :.9x1; x2; x3; x4/.Ax1 ^ Ax2 ^ Ax3 ^ Ax4/; : : :
39 Frege, 1884, §56; Potter, 2000, §2.5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28
Philosophy of Mathematics
a11
a11a12
a11a12a13
a11a12a13a14
a11a12a13a14a15  ...
a21a22
a31a32a33
a31a32a33a34
a41a42a43a44
a51a52a53a54a55
a41a42a43a44a45
a31a32a33a34a35
a21a22a23
a21a22a23a24
a21a22a23a24a25
Figure 6 Ascriptions of number
If we wish to include 0, we index differently, making (1) the top row, so that
now “a11” is the first term of (1) “a12” its second term, “a21” the first term of
(2), and so on. Then the series of ascriptions of number to a concept Ax, for all
whole numbers 0; 1; 2; : : : ,
:.9x/.Ax/;
.9x1/.Ax1/ ^ :.9x1; x2/.Ax1 ^ Ax2/;
.9x1; x2/ ^ :.9/.x1; x2; x3/.Ax1 ^ Ax2 ^ Ax3/ : : : ;
may be represented by conjoining terms in stages (Figure 6).
We may then index these stages of procedure and recombine the indexed
variables into one unindexed variable “x” to neaten the presentation, using
numbers as indexes of the final stages of operation:
.90/Ax; .91/Ax; .92/Ax; .93/Ax; : : : :
These freewheeling uses of formal series and “applications” of number terms to
index form series expand the repertoire of MFS’s considerably. One sees how
heavily one depends upon the Uniformity Principle as one moves from stage
to stage in each “diagonal” construction.
We were inspired to these constructions by a puzzling pair of pictures Later
Wittgenstein wrote in RFM II §11 (see §4.3 below):
Since my drawing [of the diagonal schema at RFM II §1] is only an indication
of infinity, why must it be like this
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
29
and not like this
Here what we have is different pictures; and to them correspond different
idioms. But does anything useful emerge if we have a dispute about the
justification of them? What is important must reside elsewhere; even though
these pictures fire our imagination most strongly.
The image is that there are alternative ways of knotting the aik-carpet of form
series (Figure 7).40 Now our speaking of “diagonals” no longer makes sense,
but it is still the elements of the schematic form aii that are referred to when we
construct the form series.
We may imagine countless alternatives to this process, with its successive
augmentation of squares. These may well lead to “the same” aik-carpet and “the
same” formal series. The important point for Wittgenstein is that a supposed
actual infinity of the aik-array, conceived extensionally, may be replaced by
potential infinity, understood via the processes mentioned, together with the
idea of an equivalence of each with regard to their results regarded as part of a
procedure. In this way, actual infinity, a notion belonging to the extensionalist
a11
a11a12
a21a22
a21
a31
a21a22a23
a31a32a33
a31a32
a31a32a33a34
a41a42a43a44
a41a42a43
a41a42
a41a42a43a44a45
a51a52a53a54a55
a61a62a63a64a65
a71a72a73a74a75
a61a62a63a64
a51a52a53a54
a51a52a53
a31a32a33a34a35
a21a22a23a24
a21a22a23a24a25
a11a12a13
a11a12a13a14
a11a12a13a14a15   ...
Figure 7 Alternative diagonalization
Source: WH Chapter 7.
40 WH,179f.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30
Philosophy of Mathematics
point of view, obtains a non-extensional simulation. The constructive nature of
diagonal method is drawn out, shifting our focus to the procedural aspects of
the array: the rules as followed, rather than the extensions (see §4.3 below).
Poincaré expressed incredulity at the idea that the Uniformity Principle could
yield an account of the creative and richly varied aspects in mathematics. Yet
our brief foray into form series shows us that they give us the power to refashion
new form series with seemingly endless shifts of newness.
As Ramsey (1923) pointed out, the TLP treatment of elementary arithmetic
is minimal. It is not clear at all that or how Wittgenstein could formulate nega-
tion (inequations) or existence claims (“there are infinitely many primes”). If
we mis-substitute one numeral and miscalculate, Wittgenstein’s idea is that this
will show itself in possible calculations elsewhere, resulting in an obvious vio-
lation of equality for a single numeral (WVC, 193–194). An inequation cannot
be denied, as it has no sense. And what is the status of theorems such as “adding
two odd numbers always yields an even number”?
This drives home the stark contrast between quantificational logical struc-
ture and mathematical structure in the TLP. Above all, Wittgenstein forwards a
picture of the logical structure of ordinary language and how it must be if same-
nesses of outcome in step-by-step procedures are to hold. That is an assumption
he will jettison.
3 Middle Philosophy (1929–1933): Relative Simplicity
Middle Wittgenstein engaged with Brouwer, Skolem, Weyl, Hilbert, and the
Vienna Circle, especially Waismann. Conversations with Ramsey, beginning
in 1923, intensified with his return to Cambridge in 1929. He received a
fellowship (1930–6), lecturing and writing intensively.
Brouwer’s (1929) lecture in Vienna apparently inspired Wittgenstein to
return to philosophy, but he never subscribed to intuitionism.41 While he
sympathized with the radicalism of Brouwer, he endorsed no particular foun-
dational approach. Ramsey sought to save classical mathematics from what
he called the “Bolshevik” menace of Brouwer and Weyl, but to Wittgen-
stein this made him “a bourgeois thinker”: Wittgenstein wanted to canvas “the
foundations of any possible state,” not only the then-dominant classical one.42
So Wittgenstein surrendered the idea of one ultimate notation with the cor-
rect mathematical multiplicity, relativizing simplicity to systems of sentences
(Satzsysteme). These are mutually independent of one another analogous to
the elementary sentences in TLP. They are “arbitrary,” that is, not justifiable
41 Menger, 1994; Marion, 2003, LFM, 237.
42 MS,112, 70v; PI §125, Floyd, 2016, 44f.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
31
a priori: standards of justification are internal to each system. Mathematics
is now regarded as comprised of a plurality of discrete, autonomous “cal-
culi” of sentences whose grammar fully determines their logical place in the
system.
Aspects accommodate the idea that logical “features” are not merely Züge in
the sense of formal truth-functional operations that “pull out” series of formal
features by operations (4.1221), but also “grammatical” features of concepts
involving multifarious uses of language. Wittgenstein still aimed to resolve
philosophical conundrums, but soon abandoned the TLP’s formal methods,
expanding his repertoire to include a “genetic” method:43 philosophical “con-
tradictions” should be picked apart to see what patterns of thought lead to them
– like psychoanalysis (PG 381-2).
Wittgenstein discussed Ramsey’s (1926) and (1930) with the Vienna Cir-
cle (WVC, 129,189). The latter dealt with a portion of Hilbert’s Entschei-
dungsproblem, which asked whether there was a general, “definite” method
by which one might determine, in a finite number of steps, whether or not
a particular sentence in a formalized theory does or does not follow from a
set of axioms (Wittgenstein posed a version of this to Russell in 1913).44 He
rejected Ramsey’s construal of this as a “leading” problem of mathematical
logic (WVC 129, PI §124). The grammar (logic) of each Satzsystem internally
and completely determines the sense, Yes or No, of every sentence in the sys-
tem. Wittgenstein was denying that one “logic” could cover all Satzsysteme and
hence that Hilbert’s problem could be meaningfully posed.
Ramsey (1926) followed TLP, construing the theorems of Principia as
tautologies, but advocated an extensionalist conception of identity and “prop-
ositional functions.”45 Wittgenstein resisted this, but took the difficulties of
non-extensionalism to heart.46 If mathematics depends upon actually infinite
objects, then the extensionalist point of view is mandatory; yet it is difficult to
see how to construe this dependence.
The TLP was extensionalist with respect to the construction of sentences
using material concepts: Operator N included possibly infinite conjunctions and
disjunctions. But Wittgenstein now rejected this, opting for non-extensionalism
by rejecting the assimilation of quantifiers to truth-functions. The independ-
ence of the elementary propositions in TLP had allowed for the dispensa-
bility of identity through disambiguation of names, but now the complete
43 Engelmann, 2013.
44 Dreben and Floyd, 1991, 33.
45 Potter, 2005.
46 Sullivan, 1995.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

32
Philosophy of Mathematics
disambiguation was carried out by relativizing names to their roles in Satzsys-
teme. Equations and other sentences of mathematics now have “sense,” may be
true or false, within a particular system (names do not have sense, their roles
being exhausted by their combinatorial possibilities).
At Schlick’s request, Wittgenstein began a collaboration with Waismann
to produce an accessible presentation of the TLP (1929–30); but he resisted
publishing a “rehash of [TLP] theses” (WVC, 183f.). The project was never
completed. By 1932 he and Waismann turned toward coauthoring a new book;
this cooperation failed with the rapid evolution of Wittgenstein’s ideas. Wais-
mann quickly produced accessible and insightful writings developing Middle
Wittgenstein’s views; these have retained an influence, particularly the idea
of “open textured” concepts, a variant of Wittgenstein’s Middle/Later idea of
“family resemblance” (§4.1).47
3.1 Colloquial Language and “Effectiveness”
Effective and computable – step-by-step procedural reckoning by human beings
working according to explicit rules – were unanalyzed, informal notions
through the early 1930s. Yet the centrality of effectiveness, in practice, was cen-
tral to Wittgenstein’s treatment of logic and mathematics. Thanks to Turing’s
analysis of the idea of taking a “step” in a formal system (1936), the notion
has been rigorized.48 Turing’s analysis succeeds because it takes the informal,
human-centered idea of “effective” – the idea of a human being working with
a formal system, or calculating according to a definite rule, in a social context
– as a starting point (§4.3, §4.6).49
Logic, calculation, and proof depend upon the fact that we mean, and col-
loquial language must be respected because of the fundamental importance of
communicability. The TLP admitted this, but suggested that what makes this
understanding possible in general must be formally expressible. After he sur-
rendered this “must,” Wittgenstein had to face the question of how far we have
an informal understanding of colloquial language.
Middle Wittgenstein remarked (PG, p. 124)
I would like to say: I must begin with the distinction between sense and
nonsense. Nothing is possible prior to that. I can’t give it a foundation.50
47 Wittgenstein and Waismann, 2003, Preface; Waismann, 1936b, 1936a, 1976/1997, 1982;
Shanker, 1987; Makovec and Shapiro, 2019; Shapiro, 2018.
48 On “Church’s Thesis” that every computable function is Turing computable see Herken, 1988
and Olszewski, Wolenski, and Janusz, 2006.
49 Sieg, 2009; Floyd, 2017.
50 Wittgenstein, 1974.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
33
This general point about sense and nonsense is crucial for logic, and hence,
for mathematics. It is crucial both for formal theories and for informal ones,
whether considered separately or in interplay with one another. When we set
up a proof, it must be specified, in an intuitive sense, whether or not one has a
proof. “In an intuitive sense” implies effectively, that is, subject to the require-
ment that one can test whether or not what one has is a proof by going over
the series of symbolic articulations and following the reasoning step by step,
without the admixture of external opinion or controversial principles, in a finite
number of steps. This is the computational aspect of proof.51 (It applies also to
calculations.)
If such a terminating routine is not available, the proposer of the proof, in any
given instance, may reasonably be asked to give a proof that this is a proof, in
the sense of a forceful ground. There must be what (Turing’s dissertation advi-
sor) Church (1932) called a grasp of “intuitive logic”: a sense of cogency and
reasonableness in appeals to what is obvious and/or relevant. One cannot learn
formal logic without “intuitive logic,” for one would not be able to understand
the instructions for formulating and reasoning in formal logic without it.
Ordinarily we grant that a (meaningful) metalanguage may be used to set
out a formal criterion of proof. A formal system, insofar as it answers to
meaningful aspects of the metalanguage, may be considered a language. But
hierarchies of formal languages are from Early and Middle Wittgenstein’s point
of view just more construction by us in a unified language. Middle Wittgen-
stein was influenced by Hilbert’s formalism about “foundations,” reworking
the analogy between formal theories and chess. But he regarded Hilbert’s “met-
amathematics” as “just more mathematics,” and therefore not part of a general
philosophical answer to fundamental concerns about meaning and justification
(WVC, 136; §3.6).52
At issue for the Middle Wittgenstein is whether the computational aspect of
proof exhausts mathematical meaning (i.e., the rules in an autonomous system).
He holds that it does, though the algorithms surrounding mathematical calcula-
tions and proofs are localized to independent Satzsysteme. He surrendered this
idea after 1934, for very good reasons. But it took him a long time – until 1944
– to work out the consequences for philosophy of mathematics. What was in
the Middle Period a requirement for the meaningfulness of a mathematical sen-
tence (that it be decideable, i.e., proveable) became only one partial aspect of
mathematical sentences in the Later period.
51 Compare Whitehead and Russell, 1910, Summaries of Part I, *4.
52 Mühlhölzer, 2012.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

34
Philosophy of Mathematics
Middle Wittgenstein began to respect the complexities of “ordinary lan-
guage.” Simplicity was relativized to Satzsysteme. But within each system
there still were (realtively absolute) simples. This hybrid account resulted in
an unstable mix.
3.2 Satzsysteme and Statements of Gradation
Ramsey (1923) forwarded a number of penetrating criticisms of TLP, especially
its treatment of arithmetic and number. In RLF (1929) Wittgenstein responded
by making concrete proposals, publicly retracting the TLP claim that the GFS
alone expresses the formal unity of language and logic.
Ascriptions of graded properties (“It is 80ı outside”) immediately exclude
all other statements of the same degree (“It is 90ı outside”). An object can-
not simultaneously be both red and green all over. Wittgenstein now states that
these are “complete” descriptions of phenomena requiring no further analysis.
TLP’s structuralizing approach to numbers as operational exponents of purely
“formal” possibility forced a distinction between the variables used in different
ascriptions of units to situations. “It is 80ı outside” should be equivalent to “It
is .70 C 10/ı outside.” But “It is 70ı outside” might use “v1; v2; v3 : : : v70”
and “It is 10ı outside” “v71; v72; : : : v81”. To combine the statements would
require the final analysis, where all names have distinct references and the
ultimate ground of indexing by variables is exposed. Additive possibilities
would be explained by “hidden” conjunctions, exclusions by “hidden” disjunc-
tions (possibly infinite ones, given the need for functions of real numbers in
physics).53
Yet we see right away, on the surface of meaning, so to speak, that its being
80ı outside excludes its being 70ı outside, that a’s being red all over excludes
its being green, and so on with all statements of degree and gradation. This
shows that the TLP’s grammar allows for nonsense, promising to handle it later.
Wittgenstein now refuses to put the problem off, taking colloquial language as a
touchstone. The shift from hidden (truth-functional) contradictions to nonsense
indicates a striking shift. But he still initially proposed the construction of a
specialized “phenomenological” language to show why the claim that “A is
green all over and A is red all over at the same time” is nonsense.
Wittgenstein states that we “meet” in experience “the whole manifold of
spatial and temporal objects, as colors, sounds, etc. etc. with their gradations,
continuous transitions, and combinations in various proportions.” But in state-
ments of degree “we cannot seize …by our ordinary means of expression”
53 Ricketts, 2014 interprets TLP 6.3751.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
35
Figure 8 Numbers immediately structure elementary sentences
Source: RLF, 34.
these multiplicities (RLF, 33). Statements involving gradations must therefore
involve more than simple names in combination: “numbers (rational and irra-
tional) must enter into the structure of the [elementary sentences] themselves”
(RLF, 33). Mathematical form is no longer distinct from structure and internal
relations among all sentences. Now the “elementary sentences” are not always
formally independent. The GFS is (at least) incomplete.
The outcome of analysis will be systems of sentences (Satzsysteme). These
are held together by internal relations that are not only truth-functional.
Quantifiers do not abbreviate infinite conjunctions and disjunctions (MWL
6b:10, 6b:27). Infinity is an infinite possibility in the grammar of particular
Satzsysteme. For example, to say that a patch P is red in the visual field we
would write “for a continuous interval”, “[6–9, 3–8] R”, utilizing the coordi-
nate system as an unanalyzable feature of the mode of expression (RLF, 34)
(Figure 8).
Thus Wittgenstein sought to retain what he could of the TLP view. “Grammar
is arbitrary” in the sense that there is no universal, formal structure it must have
(PR §2): there is a variegated archipelago of determinate possible Satzsysteme.
We must analyze this without a priori assumptions or hypotheses. In one system
we might take the three primary colors as “simple,” and in another, based on
the color octahedron, four. In one system of number the rationals are ultimate,
in another the reals. The challenge is to find the right multiplicity within this
or that region of grammar and state it in rules.
But how was mathematics’ universal applicability across Satzsysteme to be
understood? What about the relations among mathematical systems of number?
Once he had given up the GFS, Wittgenstein could no longer attach his account
of number to logic directly via a general theory of operations. His “nebulous”
introduction of number in the TLP needed rectification (PR §109). He retained
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

36
Philosophy of Mathematics
a sharp distinction between the purely “formal” activity of ascribing a number
to a mathematical structure – he now thought of this as a “purely grammatical”
activity – and the ascription of number via material concepts (PR §113): arith-
metic is autonomous but universally applicable; like geometry it is developed
independently of how the world is.
Wittgenstein first attempted to construct a “phenomenological language”
to directly describe both what experience delivers to us and its mathematical
multiplicity. But this project soon collapsed.54
On the one hand, there were separate spaces (e.g., the “feeling space,” the
“visual space”). But mathematical multiplicities (e.g., direction) must be abso-
lute within each space, or else the spaces could be correlated or merged into
one grammatical space. If we are to take ourselves to be able to describe real-
ity (i.e., all possible things that may be said, true or false), there must be a
way to describe the grammar of each “space.” Thus in visual space there is an
“absolute” right and left, above and below, magnitude of length, and so on.
For example, we can apparently meaningfully speak in visual space of a part
of a red patch, or a yellow patch larger than an orange one. We may say, for
example, that two stars alternately appear and disappear at the same distance
from the border of a visual field. But we cannot say what really appears to
us. For we have no way of making sense of being wrong here: it is absurd to
suppose that we learn sameness of distance in the visual field by correlating
our experiences with some external system of measurement (say, a ruler). “The
system of coordinates is contained [internally] in the nature [grammar] of the
[visual] space” (MS 105, 35).
But now, Wittgenstein soon reasoned, the idea of the “reality” of the visual
space has not been given content. It doesn’t make sense to say that something
can appear differently than it is in visual space (MS 107, 29). We require
another space to make sense of this. But this will either be “hypothetical,”
importing the grammar of physical or other spaces, or it is wholly arbitrarily
imposed.
The difficulty lies in Wittgenstein’s having imposed the TLP’s demand for
sharpness of sense on the grammar of visual space. For that grammar, as other
possible grammars of experience, is essentially inexact. For me to assign, for
example, the coordinate unit to the length of a line in visual space, I must be
clear on the difference between a line of length n and nC1, or n and nC1:001.
But we aren’t able to see this (MS 107, 71). Wittgenstein considers Hjelm-
lev’s axiomatization of “rough” visual space and rejects its account’s distance
from ordinary language (WVC, 35, n. 15). He sees that we inevitably draw on
54 Engelmann, 2013.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
37
concepts from physical language, which have a certain precision, to describe
sense data.
The failure of Wittgenstein’s phenomenological language drove him back to
reconsider the role of ordinary language. In applied geometry, he conceded that
we give preference to Euclidean geometry as part of our grammar in relation
to what we see (WVC 59). Sentences are embedded in systems of possible
experience, he now thinks, as hypotheses that have possible verifications. They
are tools for guiding and building expectations and the fulfillment of intentions
and actions, which are internally related to the statement of desires and wishes,
as well as beliefs and statements.
Differing Satzsysteme (e.g., physical and memory time) must not have their
grammars mixed, lest we confuse ourselves with nonsense. Internally to a sys-
tem, questions make sense only as searches whose conditions of fulfillment are
clear in advance, and for which there is a definite method of resolution; how
we search for an answer tells us precisely which question is asked. If there is
no definite possible resolution of the question in the grammatical system, it is
nonsense and there can be no search for an answer (PR §§33, 43).
3.3 Aspects: Sheffer’s Strokes
The image of wholly independent, equiprimordial Satzsysteme raised the issue
of what kinds of relations such grammatical systems could have to one another.
In Sheffer’s stroke – the fundamental inspiration for the GFS – Wittgenstein
found the answer. He reinterpreted Sheffer’s “discovery” of the stroke as the
“discovery” of a new possibility in grammar, a new Satzsystem, something
of the right multiplicity – which, on Wittgenstein’s Middle view, meant the
invention of something new (BT 419):
What was it that we didn’t know before [Sheffer’s] discovery?
You can see that very clearly when you think of the objection raised: pjp
is not what :p says. The answer is, of course, that it is only a matter of the
system pjp etc. having the necessary multiplicity. So Sheffer has found a
symbolic system that has the necessary multiplicity.
Here we see a signature idea of the Middle and Later Wittgenstein emerging.
What Sheffer “discovers” is not merely a trivial abbreviation; abbreviations
we can get along without (BT 469). Rather, he introduces a new aspect of logic
and mathematics: the fact that the logical constants display the “multiplicity”
of a Boolean Algebra.55 Sheffer gets us “acquainted” with a way of regarding
things, a new conceptual structuring, an “internal” relation between systems of
55 Sheffer, 1913.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

38
Philosophy of Mathematics
grammar that is not logical in character, but yields mathematical insight (PR
§104, BT 478). (Russell took this to be the real value of Sheffer’s work, and
recommended that he rewrite all of Principia.56)
Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics turns on generalizing a sharp dis-
tinction between definitions that merely abbreviate (tautology-like substitutive
rules for expressions, e.g., the fact that the Sheffer stroke may be used as an
abbreviation device in truth-functional logic) and conceptual remodelings that
reveal new and fruitful aspects of mathematical structure, re-analyzing, re-
dimensionalizing, re-scaffolding, and re-projecting mathematical concepts. He
takes these aspectual shifts to be what Kant had aimed at in calling mathematics
“synthetic a priori” (PR §108).
Wittgenstein includes typical cases (the embedding of the natural numbers
in the integers, the rational numbers in the reals), but also the embedding of
particular calculations in recursive proofs (BT 469) and even the square of a
binomial:
It’s clear that the discovery of Sheffer’s system in  p &  p D  p and
 .p &  p/ & .q &q/ D p &q corresponds to the discovery that
x2 C ax C a2
4 is a special case of a2 C 2ab C b2 (BT 478).
This sense of being a “special case” is not quantificational but aspectual: a
deep indication of Wittgenstein’s non-extensionalism. He remarks that though
we are inclined to regard the ratio 1
3 as if it consists in the extension 0:333,
what we have is more than a mere abbreviation; it is a new a rule of proceeding,
exhibiting internal necessities (BT 466). This “face of necessity” is lost if we
try to conceive of writing out a real number expansion extensionally; this is like
writing down a sentence by copying letters off of coded outcomes of rolling the
dice. Sentences have aspects; they are not mere sequences of signs (PR §17, BT
6). The variable does not merely abbreviate, any more than .9x/f.x/ abbreviates
a disjunction (BT 230).
This means that certain examples of “defined” real numbers don’t count as
aspectually “synthetic.” Wittgenstein struggles with this. The number defined
from the expansion of
p
2 by substituting “5” everywhere the digit “3” appears
is just an “analytic” variant of
p
2 (PR §183). The general idea of “number
generated from
p
2 by such a transposition,” in belonging to no system of meas-
urement or otherwise, is tantamount to
p
2 all over again (PR §183). 0, defined
as replacing every occurrence of the digit “7” in the expansion of , is “home-
less” until we have a handle on the occurrences of “7” (PR §186). “ 2!5
p
2 might,
56 Whitehead and Russell, 1910, xv; Floyd, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
39
for all we know, mean
p
5. The substitution rule .1 ! 5/ “strikes at the heart”
of the expansion 0.101001000 …, but how?
Although Satzsysteme are internally structured grammars, it is essential that
we can sometimes make one out in another: we can project internal relations
across different fields of expressivity. For this, however, they must be distinct
conceptual spaces:
Is it a search, if I don’t know the Sheffer’s system and say I want to construct
a system with only one logical constant. No! The systems are not in one space
at all so that I could say: There are systems with 3 and 2 logical constants,
and now I am trying to reduce the number of constants in the same way.
There is no same way here! (MS 108, 104–107).
Wittgenstein’s insistence on the completeness of grammar within systems,
coupled with the independence of Satzsysteme from one another, inflicts an
epistemological constraint. There is no step-by-step procedure or method to
reach one Satzsystem from another, nor is there a way to “reach” something
inside a Satzsystem other than calculation (because anything that may be said
is already there in the grammar). Therefore, there is no “route,” either from one
system to another or from one sentence to another within a system. Grammar
is modally static and determines a total space. Whatever procedural elements
there are are operational, or formal, in the TLP sense. These do not have the
power to alter the internal structuring of the concepts.
Wittgenstein has a particular way of getting to a concept of “reality” at this
point. There is something to see: possibilities are revealed through analysis,
discovered. But there is no grammar of “searching” for aspects or proofs. The
TLP’s sharp distinction between calculation and experiment, formal and mate-
rial, holds fast. Justification is constituted by grammatical rules that are always
internal to the Satzsystem they form.
It follows that there can be no meaningful mathematical conjectures (PR
§148): until proved, a mathematical sentence formulated in ordinary language
has no sharp sense. Unproved conjectures are merely linguistic stimuli.
Within this form of verification, mathematical sentences have a sense, at
least once proved. In the TLP they did not. Wittgenstein has broached a prob-
lem he will not resolve until much later: What is mathematical understanding?
What is it to grasp the sense of a mathematical proposition or a mathematical
concept?
Middle Wittgenstein has begun to put together a form of “realism” with
which he can live. In characterizing such-and-such as so-and-so we draw out
an aspect or way in which things are. Objects and properties are not collections
of aspects; they have internal conceptual (modal) structure. Aspects are there to
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40
Philosophy of Mathematics
be seen: they are discovered, and so not “merely subjective,” purely epistemic,
or conventional in character.
What was it we didn’t know [wussten] before [Sheffer’s] discovery? (It
wasn’t anything that we didn’t know [wussten]; it was something with which
we weren’t acquainted [kannten].) (BT, 419)
Wittgenstein contrasts “knowing” that a particular proposition is true with
“knowing” in the sense of “being acquainted with”: his replacement for
Russell’s notion of “acquaintance” with forms (§1.2).
That aspects represent the discovery aspect of mathematics remains central
to Wittgenstein’s discussions from this point on. He does not fail to emphasize
the “invention” aspect: if he has to choose, he emphasizes this (RFM I §168,
I Appendix II §2). In the Middle Period, however, the invention side of things
is left hanging, described as a matter of “intuition” or “insight” or “decision”
(PR §104,174). Given Wittgenstein’s calculus conception of the grammar of
Satzsysteme, there is no room for conceptual (“grammatical”) “discovery” or
“invention” within a system. Thus there are no criteria for distinguishing the
appearance of “the same” mathematical sentence in two different Satzsysteme.
Every sentence with sense requires a grammatical place in some such system.
But how to tell where to place a given calculation?
This broaches the so-called rule-following “problem” (§4.2). It takes several
different forms in PR.
First, if we imagine calculating with a decimal expansion of an irrational
number there is no periodicity. So even if we have a “rule” according to which
we are calculating – e.g., digits of  – this may be a “rule” in a different sense
from one for a rational number, especially when we consider  in a differ-
ent way, say, as a “law” for measuring. The individuality of the expansion’s
home(s) outstrips what we can say in general about a pattern.
This is a problem in other kinds of cases, such as instantiations of recursive
rules with particular natural numbers. Seeing a substitution as a correct substi-
tution instance is different from the enunciation of a rule of substitution such
as an equation or logical inference rule (WVC, 154f.). Wittgenstein is tempted
at one point to say that there is a new “insight” at each step of a calculation
(PR 198), though he draws back from the phrase “direct insight,” replacing it
with “decision” (PR 129, 171): a collapse into conventionalism. He has seen
that there must be a way of grasping a projection that is not an interpretation
(from outside the system), but a way of reading (structuring) the signs, and he
sees that this cannot be a particular mental state (PG §9).57 But aspect-shifting
57 Fogelin, 2009, 15ff.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
41
sits uncomfortably with the idea of being wholly inside or wholly outside a
system.
Second, it is not clear what might allow one to transcend the limits of a
particular Satzsystem. No room may be made for this, as there was for a series
of forms or iterated types in the sense of TLP. Our above diagonal arguments
(§2.6) press upon Wittgenstein the problem that “being the same” is neither
relative nor absolute across his variety of systems.
3.4 Skolem Arithmetic and the Uniqueness Rule
In TLP the whole edifice of arithmetic depended upon a fixed, absolute mul-
tiplicity. What was Middle Wittgenstein to say about his characterization of
cardinal number by way of the formal series Œ0; ;  C 1? What was to ensure
that in taking a step “one more further” in one Satzsystem one would still be
taking one step further in that system?
Unlike the grammar of visual space, number admits of no vaguenesses. Witt-
genstein remarks that a number is a “picture of an extension,” by which he
means that it is a norm against which an extension is measured within the con-
text of a proposition as a whole. As in the TLP, the possibility of (making sense)
of a correlation amongst objects and numbers procedurally (non-extensionally)
is at issue in counting, not any actual (extensional) correlation between objects
or signs (PR §100). But if Wittgenstein’s modal, non-extensional treatment of
sameness of cardinality was to hold up, something had to be universal in the
idea of counting when it is transposed into the keys of differing Satzsysteme.
Wittgenstein read Skolem’s (1923) paper presenting a quantifier-free ver-
sion of arithmetic. This stimulated him to reformulate his reliance on what we
earlier called (§2.5) the Uniformity Principle: Poincaré’s idea that a “uniform”
operation applied to “the same” inputs will yield the same result. Associativ-
ity of arithmetical laws was grounded in the GFO in TLP. Now Wittgenstein
presents the generality of associativity as a “basic rule of the system” of arith-
metic, namely a grammatical, constitutive rule about which nothing can be
proved, because it enunciates an infinite possibility of application to particular
numbers (PR §163).
The same status seems to be attributed to the equality of a number with itself.
Wittgenstein asks why one cannot deny a basic rule of the system such “2=2”,
but can deny an equation such as 2  35 D 70 (PR §163). There are aspects of
the grammar of an equation that one can miss, so to speak. Yet miscalculations
are capable of being shown not to “fit” the grammar of arithmetic.
In the TLP the natural numbers were “all” built in to the general form of form
series. Now Wittgenstein criticized Skolem’s failing to make clear that “all”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

42
Philosophy of Mathematics
must already reside in the very ideas of an operation, a form series and a formal
substitution: “all” numbers must be always already “seen in” the “calculus” of
(quantifier-free) arithmetic. Skolem’s recursive proofs yield, not propositions
with sense, but “signposts,” guides pointing us toward specific steps we can
take with it (PR §163).
Skolem’s treatment of the associativity of addition, key to his step-by-step
substitution of terms in the quantifier-free setting, failed to draw out this modal
character. For Wittgenstein, Skolem’s failure to acknowledge his reliance on the
Poincaréan, modalized Uniformity Principle, a fundamentally non-extensional,
procedural sense of rule, was lacking.58
“Every symbol is what it is and not another symbol,” remarks Wittgenstein,
alluding to Bishop Butler (PR §163). When one chases down the implications
of an inequation, one reaches nonsense. This suggests a connection between a
procedurally conceptualized version of the Pigeonhole Principle (if one has n
items and m boxes, n > m, one cannot put items into the boxes without putting
more than one into at least one box) and the Principle of Mathematical Induc-
tion. Such a connection there is: mathematical induction proves the Pigeonhole
principle, which therefore appears as conceptual, something about procedures.
(This does not prevent one from regarding it under the aspect of an empirical
fact.)
Wittgenstein works with the idea that the natural number instances of the
laws Skolem investigates serve as parameters. The question emerging is, With
what right can we operate with parameters at all in mathematics? How can
a procedure of shuffling parameters show the generality of a theorem? Once
again: the Uniformity Principle is logically fundamental.
Ordinarily one regards elementary, quantifier-free arithmetic as a schematic
template for reasoning hypothetically about characterizations of the numbers.
Or one quantifies second order over properties. As we have seen, neither route
is acceptable to Wittgenstein for constructing a primordial “foundation” of
arithmetic.
R. L. Goodstein, who later made a number of contributions to logic and
recursive function theory, attended Wittgenstein’s Cambridge lectures and his
dictations (BBB). On May 20, 1932 – as Marion and Okada (2018) have
shown – Wittgenstein formulated a rule asserting the uniqueness of a function
defined by primitive recursion. For arbitrary terms u.x/; v.x/; w.x; y/, and S.x/
the successor function, the rule may be stated, without parameters, thus:
u.0/ D v.0/ u.S.x// D w.x; u.x// v.S.x// D w.x; v.x//
u.x/ D v.x/
:
58 PR XIV, PG , MWL, PG 397ff., BT 445ff. – Compare, however, Goldfarb, 2018a.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
43
The rule matters to Wittgenstein’s Middle philosophy because it reinforces
the idea of a widely transportable, minimal formulation of arithmetic char-
acterization in terms of quantifier-free, step-by-step operations expressing the
Uniformity Principle. Goodstein appears to have learned of this rule from Witt-
genstein, later proving that it implies mathematical induction for primitive
recursive arithmetic.59
Goodstein also developed a “bump” function leading to the characterization
of a function whose arithmetical complexity outstrips what quantified arithme-
tic can decide. This was the first “natural” example of an undecidable sentence
after Gödel’s (1931).60
What Skolem’s recursive proof indicates is the possibility of plugging in
any instance of a number one likes. One “sees” that “the proposition is a mem-
ber of the series of propositions that the final proposition of Skolem’s chain
presents.” Wittgenstein holds that this form of recognition is “not provable, but
intuitive” (PR §163). But then there appears to be no ground for the idea that
the Uniformity Principle is a general “aspect” of all such intuition: what work
the quantifiers do, as we would say today, is intrinsically more complicated.
Two nascent ideas begin to emerge.
First, the underlying question for the Uniformity Principle is “What is it to
apply the same rule to the same thing?” Wittgenstein has already admitted that
there is a way of applying a rule to an instance that is not an interpretation, but
is simply exhibited, projected, seen. If there were constantly clarifying inter-
pretations all the way down, there would be no end. The Uniformity Principle
depends upon that admission.
Second, Wittgenstein’s modal rendition of the Uniformity Principle does not
suffice to spell out what a number, in general, is. If the principle of mathematical
induction, regarded quantificationally, is not built in to our concept of number,
then there is a seeming gap about which numbers there are, and what holds their
aspects together. The “internal relation” among proof procedures and systems
that we should be able to see, in a way analogous to what we saw in the case
of Sheffer’s projection of his stroke from the concept of a Boolean Algebra, is
lacking.
According to Goodstein (1957a),
Wittgenstein with remarkable insight said in the early thirties that Gödel’s
results showed that the notion of finite cardinal could not be expressed in
an axiomatic system and that formal number variables must necessarily take
59 Goodstein, 1957b; Marion and Okada, 2018 gives details.
60 Paris and Harrington, 1977, https://mathworld.wolfram.com/GoodsteinSequence.
html.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44
Philosophy of Mathematics
values other than natural numbers; a view which, following Skolem’s 1934
publication, of which Wittgenstein was unaware, is now generally accepted.
3.5 Real Numbers: the Calculus Conception
At BT 738 we read:
“The rational points lie close together on the number line”: a misleading
picture. […]
Is a space conceivable that contains only all rational points but not the
irrational points? And that only means: Aren’t the irrational numbers pre-
judged in the rational ones? No more than chess is prejudged in draughts.
The irrational numbers do not fill a gap that the rational ones leave open.
This attack on “gap” imagery not only advocates the idea of separate Satzsys-
teme of numbers. It also rejects the extensionalist perspective that permeates
modern presentations of the real numbers. Wittgenstein’s game-comparison,
ridiculous on its face, is a therapeutic manoeuvre. He is inviting the reader to
see the relationship between rational and irrational numbers in terms of aspects:
not as one of extending a domain, or providing an adequate extension for the
concept of the number line or space, but rather as one of conceptual embedding,
the structuring of one kind of number in terms of another.
Wittgenstein encountered the language of “gaps” in Russell (1903, §§272,
343) where the theory of limits and continuity are treated (compare Russell
[1920, Chapter X]). The “gap” rhetoric is common in many other texts, starting
with Dedekind (1872, 771f.) and continuing with Waismann (1936a, Chapter
8); it pervades texts down to today, even textbooks of pure set theory (Hrbacek
& Jech, 1999, 86f.). Dedekind’s analysis of real numbers as “cuts,” or sets of
rationals, offers a satisfying way of closing off the real numbers.
But the point of these texts is to leave behind the geometrical illustration,
replacing it with a purely arithmetical conception of real numbers in which the
reals are wholly divorced from magnitudes. Like Frege, Wittgenstein resisted
this severing of an account of the real numbers from ratios (§2.4). Wittgen-
stein has no problem with individual irrational numbers like
p
2 and  when
these are determined by definite techniques of producing their decimal expan-
sion or similar means of identification. He balks, however, at the extensionalist
transition from the rational to “all” real numbers at one stroke.
Weyl criticized the impredicativity of the Dedekindian conception (1918),
and Brouwer forwarded intuitionism. Wittgenstein knew enough of Weyl’s
and Brouwer’s works to formulate responses.61 There is a whole program in
61 Marion, 1998, 2003.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
45
predicative analysis.62 And even mathematicians who do not advocate pred-
icativity or constructivism sometimes raise the question concerning the real
justification of the transition from rational to real numbers.63
Wittgenstein distinguishes sequences of numbers that the extensionalist con-
siders to be, in Cantor’s sense, “finished” ( fertig) – these are the “extensions” –
from the techniques or rules of development by means of which such enti-
ties may be produced, assessed, or individuated: let us call these “expansions.”
According to his non-extensional way of looking at things, the decimal expan-
sion for 1
3, 0:333 : : : , is regarded as a technique for developing digits. If we are
interested in particular real numbers (like ), we focus on such techniques.
Some may be purely mathematical. Others may be shaped by geometrical
considerations or applications in physics.
By contrast, the extensionalist’s interest is only in the results, the produced
sequences (let us call them, speaking extensionally), and not the possible pro-
cesses or conceptual motifs or techniques leading to them. From the extensional
point of view, expansions are mere “illustrations”: perhaps useful to know but
inessential (WH §5.5).
We may take what we regard as a purely arithmetical (i.e., nongeometric)
result – e.g., that
p
2 is irrational – to “apply” to geometry. Transposing onto the
straight line, we accept, for example, that the diagonal of a unit square does not
end in a rational point. We have a procedure “determining” a particular point in
a few straightforward geometrical steps. This has an altogether different aspect
from the “procedure” of Dedekind, which “determines” a point by approaching
it from below and from above via a “procedure” consisting of infinitely many
steps. Considered as an “application” of analysis, this obviously does not come
to an end.
There is a characteristic tension in our concepts, as Bernays (1957, 4)
remarks:
The conflicting aspects of the concepts to be determined [for analysis] are, on
the one hand, the intended homogeneity of the idea of the continuum and, on
the other hand, the requirement of conceptual distinctness of the measures of
magnitudes. From an arithmetical point of view, every element of the number
sequence is an individual with its very specific properties; from a geometric
point of view we have here only the succession of repeating similar things.
The task of formulating a theory of the continuum is not simply descriptive,
but a reconciliation of two diverging tendencies.
62 Feferman, 2005.
63 Gowers, 2017a.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

46
Philosophy of Mathematics
This sort of tension is insisted upon in Wittgenstein’s remarks.64 Even Hardy
(1941, §16), critically annotated by Wittgenstein (WH, §4.5), is sensitive to the
aspectual “conflict”: “We may think of [the real numbers] as an aggregate […]
or individually.”
But the Middle Wittgenstein cannot live with tensions (BT 763ff):
“The position of all primes must somehow be predetermined. We just figure
them out successively, but they are all already determined. God, as it were,
knows them all. And yet for all that it seems possible that they have not been
determined by a law.” – Time and again there’s this picture of the meaning of
a word as a full box, whose contents are brought to us along with the box and
packed up in it, and now all we have to do is examine them. …We use the
expression “prime numbers”, and it sounds similar to “cardinal numbers”,
“square numbers”, “even numbers”, etc. So we think it can be used in a sim-
ilar way, but forget that for the expression “prime numbers” we have given
quite different rules – rules different in kind – and now we get into a strange
conflict with ourselves.
The “strange” conflict is that we adopt the extensional viewpoint and yet simul-
taneously lean on the variety of procedures that give the real numbers their
interest for us. For Wittgenstein, there is no fudging the perspectives. And this
is an important logical point.
Considered in Wittgenstein’s way, the differing domains of kinds of num-
ber are “the logically most different structures, without any clear limits” (BT,
751). Even the irrational numbers are, among themselves, “different kinds of
numbers – as different from each other as the rational numbers are different
from each of these kinds” (BT, 761f.). This is a consequence of the Satzsystem
conception, which fixes grammar of number words completely inside a system.
The irrational numbers may, however, legitimately be regarded as being of
different “kinds.” Mathematicians distinguish “measures of irrationality” and
“hierarchies of complexity” for real numbers.65 Moreover, we may distinguish
kinds of geometrical concepts. Wittgenstein’s favorite example is the proof that
it is impossible to trisect an angle with ruler and compass alone: the proof
projects the concept of what it is to so construct a figure in to higher algebra,
shifting its aspect.66
But Middle Wittgenstein’s way of making these points costs him. He does
not want to “wipe out the existence of mathematical problems” in general, or
64 Bernays, 1959: Wittgenstein’s “main argument” in RFM offers an applicable criticism in cases
where the intensional and extensional approaches are mixed, creating “the impression of a
stronger character of the procedure than is actually achieved.”
65 http://mathoverflow.net/questions/53724/are-some-numbers-more-irrational-than-others.
66 Floyd, 1995.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
47
hold with Weyl that “the opposite” of a proved sentence “never had sense”
(PR §148). But his Satzsystem conception imbibes from the TLP the idea of
sharpness of sense, putting it together with an idea of mathematical sentences
as embedded in calculi that determine their senses. The result does wipe out the
meaningfulness of unproved conjectures. Wittgenstein also thinks that the idea
of the undecidability of a sentence in a system requires the extensional point
of view (PR §174), something he later doubts (§4.6).
The absence of anything to be said about the transition from not understand-
ing a sense to understanding it raises the spectre of Wittgenstein’s Later concern
with rule-following (§4.2). Aspects and insights are either rigidly fixed inside
a calculus, or else they run wild (PR §148):
Is it like this: I need a new insight at each step in the proof? This is connected
with the question of the individuality of each number. Supposing there is to
be a certain general rule (therefore one containing a variable), I must recog-
nize each time afresh that this rule may be applied here. No act of foresight
can absolve me from this act of insight.
This makes it sound as if mathematics is everywhere permeated by intuitions.
The idea of a “calculation” exhibiting any necessity, any sense of a “law,” then
disappears. But this compromises Wittgenstein’s ability to attend to differences
in perspectives, because this is no better than the extensionalism he resists. He
tries reformulating, saying that “a mathematical proposition is a pointer to an
insight” (PR §174). But the pointing doesn’t point anywhere in particular. So
it cannot be pointing.
Mathematics as an activity of “calculation”: everything about calculi is mere
“prose,” which has nothing to do with the workings of proof. But Wittgen-
stein’s calculus-relativism entangles him in a myth of symbolism. “Set theory
builds on nonsense” and is a “fictitious symbolism” that is “wrong” “because
it apparently presupposes a symbolism which doesn’t exist instead of one that
does exist (is alone possible)” (PR, §173f.) What is “alone possible” is this (BT
468):
In mathematics everything is algorithm, and nothing meaning [Bedeutung],
even when it doesn’t look like that because we seem to be using words to
talk about mathematical things. Even these words are used to construct an
algorithm.
Yet the limitative results of Gödel, Turing, and others would soon show that this
claim is not comprehensive, since it applies neither to the language of arithmetic
nor to first-order validity. There is also the nascent rule-following difficulty:
How do words get “used to construct an algorithm”?
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

48
Philosophy of Mathematics
For Wittgenstein, the “fairy tale” aspect of set theory resides in its having
already left behind the rules and procedures we use to discuss and apply real
numbers as magnitudes, our “calculus” (BT 468):
What a geometrical proposition means, what kind of generality it has, is
something that must show itself when we see how it is applied. For even
if someone succeeded in meaning something intangible by it [e.g., Dedekind
with his cuts] it wouldn’t help him, because he can only apply it in a way
which is quite open and intelligible to everyone.
Similarly, if someone imagined the chess king as something mystical it
wouldn’t worry us since he can only move him on the 8 x 8 squares of the
chess board.
But this dogmatic idea of an application being “quite open and intelligible
to everyone” in contrast to its “mystical” interpretation is marred by Middle
Wittgenstein’s calculus conception. Once he surrenders it, the line between cal-
culation and experiment becomes occasion-sensitive, and he must adopt a more
critical anthropological standpoint on what it means to be “open and intelligible
to everyone” (§§4.1, 4.2).
3.6 Consistency
Middle Wittgenstein’s non-extensionalism implies that there can be no central
epistemological problem about consistency (WVC 122, 196). A Satzsystem is
not an extensionally conceived set of statements, but a collection of procedures
held together by a set of grammatical rules that can (always) be unearthed and
altered. There has been much scandalized response to Wittgenstein’s remarks
on contradiction, which are revisited in his Later Philosophy. But his remarks,
even in the Middle Period, are not incomprehensible or uninteresting.
Though Marion and Okada (2018) do not differentiate the Later from the
Middle Wittgenstein, as we do, they offer a sound review of the literature and
useful responses to Wittgenstein’s critics. They rightly emphasize two main
points.
First, if one runs into a paradox in the “prose,” or logical forms used to artic-
ulate a piece of mathematics, then one can blame the prose, as happened with
the paradox in Frege’s system (WVC, 120).
Second, the most one can obtain in a relative consistency proof is that a
similarity of aspects, or internal relations, may be revealed between two calculi.
That is not to make one or the other of the systems a primary “foundation.” As
to “absolute” consistency proofs, it seems Wittgenstein never worried too much
about this. If obtained, they would not speak to Hilbert’s occasional construals
of possible inconsistencies in systems as cancerous growths that may explode,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
49
attacking the body of mathematics from within. This is too “indefinite” a fear
(RFM III §86): models are not given by one method (WVC, 148f.). Finally, it
is not clear the discovery of a paradox need not vitiate all that came before. An
inconsistent system may allow us to pursue alternative paths forward, raising
“a very exciting question” (WVC, 197), namely, “What shall we do?”
Here I draw a sharper contrast between Middle Wittgenstein and Later
Wittgenstein than most readers do – including Marion and Okada. It is difficult
to see how the Middle Wittgenstein would deal with the “excitement” of a par-
adox. For he cannot make sense of the idea of “altering” the rules of a game:
the relevant rules are constitutive of the game, not merely strategic, and to alter
them is to begin anew. (Chess played without two bishops is not chess.) But
then Wittgenstein’s impulse to downplay the epistemological weight of con-
sistency proofs cannot be articulated. Moreover, the interest of what we might
do in response is erased from view, since this would be a practical question
(hence not something mathematical).
We see some clues as to where Wittgenstein needs to move in his Later Phi-
losophy when we look at what he said, by contrast, in his 1939 response to
Turing’s objection that the use of an inconsistent system could land us in trou-
ble – say, the collapsing of a bridge (or, nowadays, the collapse of an operating
system). Wittgenstein replied (LFM, 209f.):
Now one can imagine an enormous number of rules or axioms written on an
enormous blackboard. Somewhere I have said p, and somewhere else I said
 p, and there were so many axioms I didn’t notice there was a contradiction.
Or suppose that there is a contradiction in the statutes of a particular coun-
try. There might be a statute that on feast days the vice-president had to sit
next to the president, and another statute that he had to sit between two ladies.
This contradiction may remain unnoticed for some time, if he is constantly
ill on feast-days. But one day a feast comes and he is not ill. Then what do
we do? I may say, “We must get rid of this contradiction.” All right, but does
that vitiate what we did before? Not at all.
Or suppose that we always acted according to the first rule: he is always
put next to the president, and we never notice the other rule. That is all right;
the contradiction does not do any harm.
The first thing Wittgenstein imagines is that, through the number of rules,
axioms, or inferences he has written down, he fails to properly survey the sit-
uation: there is no “perspicuous representation” of what is going on. A major
theme in his Later remarks on mathematics will be the norm of surveyability,
which he connects with the concept of proof (§4.4). The second is an anthropo-
logically oriented discussion of how people might actually arrange their lives.
His Later point is that words (and mathematical systems) must be embedded
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

50
Philosophy of Mathematics
in situations, they do not carry themselves forward without our ushering them,
and we do this with particular purposes in mind, and for a variety of reasons.
The two points are connected. Later Wittgenstein differs from Middle Witt-
genstein insofar as he attends, not to discrete Satzsysteme conceived of as
internally complete calculi, but to the embedding of these calculi in what he
calls, only after 1937, “forms of life.” That makes all the difference to his Later
remarks on mathematics.
4 Later Philosophy (1937–1951): Fluid Simplicity
Later Wittgenstein exhibits mathematical thinking against the backdrop of an
evolving sea of human activity. Invention of mathematical techniques and
ongoing informal discussion shape it everywhere. What is evident, obvious,
“unthinkable,” clear, “simple” still plays a role, but it may be contested and
shift. Simplicity is fluid.
Aspect-talk in Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy continues to voice dimen-
sions of possibilities and necessities of articulation, the “sides” or “faces” of
numbers, thoughts, situations, concepts, proofs, procedures, and so on. But now
aspects appear as part of the unfolding of what Wittgenstein calls forms of life:
the continual embedding and interweaving of mathematical concepts and signs
in life. Form is still “the possibility of structure” (TLP 2.033), but now the
modalities involve our weaving the carpet, or ribbon, of life (PPF §§2, 362).
We can swim with our concepts in an evolving, fluid setting, pursuing synthe-
ses and analyses – if we know how to move our limbs. What we require are
mathematical techniques.
The terms “technique” and “forms of life” enter Wittgenstein’s manuscripts
in 1937; he drops the notion of “culture” and introduces his Later interlocutory
style.67 Voices frame arguments and objections, revisiting and varying their
articulations over and over again. This marks a sea-shift.
In BBB, to imagine a language is to imagine a “culture,” but now it is to
imagine a “form of life” (PI §19): a specific modification of the human animal
using language to articulate. Forms of life have both a biological and an etho-
logical dimension: they are generic in human forms of life (that we chat, that
we calculate) and specific to particular ways of embedding these in particular
lives.68
Wittgenstein gets significantly beyond his Middle period just here, assem-
bling a distinctive philosophy of mathematics.
67 Floyd, 2018b.
68 Cavell, 1988; Moyal-Sharrock, 2015.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
51
4.1 Language-Games to Forms of Life
In BBB the notions of language-game and family resemblance become salient.
Criteria of identity fluctuate as the borders and seams between systems are
given an anthropological cast. The question that arose in Wittgenstein’s Middle
Period about the Uniformity Principle, videlicet, “What counts as ‘the same’?,”
is faced head-on. Uses of criteria for concepts reflect mastery of language: not
something everywhere bounded by rules. For Later Wittgenstein, this allows
for – in fact demands – the continuing invention of new techniques.
“Language-games” are simplified snapshots of portions of possible human
linguistic behavior, “objects of comparison” offering localized “logic”: aspects
of concepts and procedures. Human beings operate with signs; mathematics
consists of “what can be written down” (BBB 4,6). But the idea of “direct
symbolizing” in the sense of algorithms in Satzsysteme disappears.
There is richness and complexity in even “simple” scenarios of articu-
lation: our characterizations evolve as we re-characterize their significance
in light of our characterizations. Aspects of language-games mutually inter-
penetrate in different ways, many of them unforeseeable until subject to
further characterizations. Wittgenstein now questions whether a “complete”
specification of grammatical rules is useful or even attainable for many
concepts.
“Family resemblance” characterizes the generality of certain concepts. A sin-
gle property, a fixed-for-all-cases criterion, an explicit set of grammatical rules
– these are not required. A concept may hold together – like a family – with a
variegated, evolving series of properties (PI §§6, 236 suggests the concepts of
number and calculator as examples).
Meaning, proof, and analysis are now “occasion sensitive” phenomena.69
Declarative statements may be said to express truth-conditions sharply; one
may subscribe to bivalence and the law of excluded middle, or one may not. But
individuating which among the several possible truth-conditions expressible
with a sentence-form is expressed on a particular occasion is a matter of being
able to embed words in specific situations meaningfully.
Wittgenstein does not reject, but turns on its head his earlier idea of a truth-
condition, thereby securing and deepening it. He does not shift from taking
truth-conditions as primary (TLP) to taking assertion conditions as primary
(PI).70 Rather, in the very name of our concepts of truth and reality, forms of
life and techniques are needed to fit our concepts within life, to fill them out
69 Travis, 2006.
70 As do Dummett, 1959; Wright, 1980; Kripke, 1982; Maddy, 2014.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52
Philosophy of Mathematics
and allow them their places. This is Wittgenstein’s “realistic realism.” Plasticity
and the “friction” of life are required for truth.
Logic works not by unearthing grammatical rules of complete Satzsysteme
but by characterizing possible ways in which activities of articulation might
proceed against an evolving, dynamic backdrop of discussion, desire, action,
and need. There is a thoroughgoing reliance on taken-for-granted, informal
parameters in philosophical argument. What is simple is now that which is
taken for granted and uncontested, obvious, “the given” (PPF xi §345). This
is a norm of elucidation rather than an actuality.
The Later Wittgenstein’s idea that a variety of techniques and aspects is cru-
cial to the objectivity of logic and mathematics is not an easy one, and it did not
come easily to him. MS 160, 18r-27r (1938) contains a train of thought where
he shifts his view. First he tries to associate just one technique of applying a
sentence to each sentence (or just one application of a description). Eventually
he tells himself to “get used to seeing a variety of techniques of sign usage (i.e.,
of thinking)” in a single sentence: he must overcome a “prejudice” he used to
hold about the notion of a technique (MS 160, 27r): that it was a purely formal
or grammatical phenomenon.
Sentences have multiple faces: aspects revealed by differing techniques of
their application. Choices confront us in gauging the potentialities for how
any given sentence may be employed. This means that Wittgenstein’s older
concepts of sense, meaning, and truth are “useless” for him (MS 160, 27r).
4.2 Rule-Following: Paradigms and Proofs (RFM I)
Unlike Feyerabend’s and Kuhn’s Wittgenstein-inspired notions of a “para-
digm,” the Later Wittgenstein’s uses of this notion – ubiquitous in RFM I –
are miniaturized, signifiying partial, shiftable viewpoints, not total worldviews.
Both Kuhn and Feyerabend regarded the meanings of theoretical terms (and
concepts) to be constituted by the role played within a whole theory or at least
a whole outlook on the world (much like the Middle Wittgenstein regarded
“grammatical rules”). This form of theory-ladenness of meaning is rejected by
the Later Wittgenstein.
His grounds for this are similar to those offered by Quine and Putnam. The
two ideas that (1) a sentence’s meaning circumscribes its range of verification
sharply (whether it is an empirical sentence or a mathematical one) and (2) that
there are purely “analytic” truths, true by convention or in virtue of meaning or
stipulation alone, without entanglement in any range of experience, are dogmas.
Putnam (1962) undercut the Feyerabend–Kuhn view by emphasizing that
the range of “unthinkables” outside the reach of a conceptual scheme is porous
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
53
and evolving, liable to recast itself in the light of experience. First, phys-
ics may establish that what was once unthinkable, a priori false – e.g., “One
can reach the place from which one came by traveling away from it in a
straight line and continuing to move in a constant sense” – is in fact true.
Second, our descriptive judgments are in part normative, relying on deference
to experts and community-wide beliefs and practices. Third, concepts are not
like functions that determine, for any given object in the universe, whether or
not that object falls under the concept: they are not sequestered in thought-
systems whose logic is fixed. (Putnam eventually drew from his arguments a
rejection of functionalism, a doctrine in philosophy of mind that he himself
invented.71)
Recall that in the Middle Wittgenstein a difficulty arose with the individual-
ity of particular numbers in relation to a schema or rule. What is the universal
instantiation step from
.F.0/ & 8x.Fx/ ! F.Sx// ! 8x.Fx/; and F.0/
to
F.10/‹
Wittgenstein always rejected the idea that a quantificational account of this
necessity in terms of the “law” of universal instantiation is satisfactory: he casts
it instead as a projection of the instance as an instance of the rule. But now his
earlier ideas of “showing” and “substituting in a calculus” are to be unpacked
in light of his Later conception of occasion sensitivity. He retains the idea of
projecting a concept or number by drawing out a new aspect but widens aspect
perception beyond the incorporation or projection of one rule-governed system
into another.
Now he focuses on the fact that although the whole possible use of a con-
cept is generally never before us, we still are able to recognize, in our forms
of life, what is to count as “the same” and what not: we develop techniques,
which have a practical generality and repeatability. Techniques are required to
project aspects, and they require investigation (Wittgenstein explores at length
“the grammar of ‘technique”’ (WH Chapter 8); in LFM “technique” occurs
117 times in discussion with Turing). This allowance for plasticity in project-
ing concepts shows, not that our procedures are not rule-governed, but rather
that that notion itself requires parochial elements.
Earlier Wittgenstein’s “mistake” (PI §188) was to think that unless the grasp
of a formal rule pinned down its applications sharply and totally, the necessary
generality of logic and mathematics would be impossible. Later Wittgenstein
71 Floyd, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54
Philosophy of Mathematics
is neither denying nor radically conventionalizing phenomena of necessity and
determination – he sharply distinguishes “forms of life” from a consensus of
opinions, and techniques are neither brute stipulations nor social hardenings.
Instead he retains his non-extensionalism while rejecting his Earlier idea that
“formality” is self-standing.
Invoking Turing’s language-game-like construal of a human calculator as
a “machine symbolizing its own actions,” he criticizes the idea of a logical
“machine” whose possible movements are given like an extension (RFM I
§123ff., PI §§189ff.). Turing showed that there can be no machine that is able to
determine whether or not one sentence follows from another one formally: this
resolution of the Enscheidungsproblem is a way of mathematically grounding
Wittgenstein’s point. The “mistake” is to insist that either a formula determines
all the possible steps we may take with it (as a fixed criterion) or else it does
not determine the steps. Progress is made only when one understands that the
notion of a partial function (one not everywhere defined) is the basic, most
general notion.
Wittgenstein investigates how we ordinarily actually use the idea of the
“steps being determined by the formula” in everyday life: how the concept is
embedded. This fine-grained exploration of details may seem irrelevant to the
metaphysical question, but Later Wittgenstein has deepened his understanding
of the Uniformity Principle, taking it now to reside in our ongoing repair and
fashioning of forms of life. “Consequent” and “inconsequent” in the sense of
“having import for” are not mathematizable notions (MS 162b, 68r).
This works through to the end the question of the status of the Uniform-
ity Principle, the very basis for the generality of conclusions in mathematics
and logic. Wittgenstein wants to know wherein the very idea of “doing the
same operation over and over again” resides. Wherein lies the necessity “in”
the series “+0”, which “yields”
2; 2; 2; : : :‹
Wittgenstein comments that if intuition is needed for any formal series, it is
needed also here, in each and every step, just to hold even and do “the same”
(RFM I §3). His point is not that intuition is needed, or that language alone
covers its needed role, but that attempting to lodge necessity in one form is
a mistake: aspects emerge and concepts are projected through a variety of
possible techniques.
There is still the distinction between what Wittgenstein earlier thought of as
“synthetic” projections, which reassemble concepts, and “tautological” abbre-
viations that do not. But the distinction is dynamic relative to our training,
mathematical knowledge, and everyday regularities in our empirical world.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
55
1
2
3
3
3
3
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Figure 9 “Miscounting” strokes: 4  3 C 2 D 10
Source: RFM I §137
If lumps of cheese randomly doubled in size (PI §142) or we could suddenly
take in one million parentheses at a glance unaided by a machine, our forms of
life – even mathematics itself – would be different.
The fact that we are not struck anew by each move, that we have the capac-
ity to unquestioningly treat the recurrence of a sign as “the same sign,” is as
important as our capacity to grasp the shiftings of aspects and projections of
our concepts. Wittgenstein has come to see that even in counting the recur-
rence of a sign as “the same sign” we are exercising our capacity to see one
thing in terms of another. But in any such projection, something is unques-
tioned, passive, taken in. Seeing the duck in the duck-rabbit projects while it
reveals, setting up a whole field of necessary relations (if this is a beak then
this is the back of the head, etc. etc.). There is something to be seen, in the
sense that there is something that may be missed (like missing a solution to a
puzzle-piece arrangement). But it is both experience (knowledge of ducks and
Gestalt puzzles) and techniques (“here, trace this line as the back of the head,
see?”) that allow us to see the duck and the rabbit in Jastrow’s figure.
What is seen and what is missed may depend upon favors of fate in the empir-
ical world, on previous mathematics, and on our purposes, inventiveness, and
interests. A ruler that shrinks to half its length when taken from one room to
another might be perfect for a world that behaved oddly in the second room;
a “miscount” based on stroke notation yielding 4  3 C 2 D 10 (Figure 9)
might be used to successfully share nuts among 10 people if the distributor
gave and took away nuts in accordance with the loops (the analysis) used in
the miscount (RFM I §137). What is “unthinkable” in one scenario becomes
thinkable, mandatory, in another.
According to Kripke (1982), Wittgenstein was a sceptic about the very idea
of following (as opposed to making up) a rule, because he establishes that there
is “no fact of the matter” as to which projection is correct on a given occasion
of use. If we ask a pupil (PI §185) to carry out the calculation of the rule “+2”,
and at a certain point she “deviates” from what we regard as correct, writing
2; 4; 6; 8 : : : 1004; 1008; 1012 : : :
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56
Philosophy of Mathematics
we have no justification for calling her rule-following “incorrect.” For she may
answer us by saying that this is how she understood the command all along. In
“reality,” she meant by “+2” “quus”, rather than addition, where the quus rule
deviates from addition at a certain point.
On this view we are powerless to convey the necessity of addition through
our terminology and/or the exemplification of computations in everyday life,
not only because specifying the natural numbers and functions upon them in
everyday language requires an ellipsis,
0; 1; 2; 3 : : :
but also because, more deeply, the conveying of meaning cannot reach beyond
itself into actually uncomputed territory.
Kripke successfully rejects a number of frequently discussed responses,
including the idea that somehow speakers are wired up with material dis-
positions to react in the ways they do, “programmed” by training and/or
innateness. He denies that there could be any metaphysical fact constituting
meaning one rule rather than another on a given occasion of use. From here
Kripke extrapolates to general skepticism about any concept. This is known
as the “rule-following problem,” a seeming paradox as it appears, quite to the
contrary, that in everyday life we manage to convey necessary steps quite well.
Wittgenstein’s answer is that there must be a way of following a rule that
is not an interpretation or clarification or further analysis, but is exhibited in
life (PI §201). Our lives themselves show meaning: something not Humeanly
“brute” because it is plastic, normative, and evolving.72
Kripke attributes to Wittgenstein an Ersatz for logical and mathematical
necessity, as well as meaning generally: he takes Wittgenstein to hold that com-
munity consensus determines what follows from what, which rule was meant by
a given command (e.g., “add 2”) – and this is all that can be said: we exclude the
wayward rule-follower from the community as a “lunatic” (BrB §30). Smooth-
ness in communication and reasoning is a function of evolving consensus and
convention alone: in “fact” it has no reality.
But Wittgenstein’s point in RFM I and PI is not that consensus is inevitable
if we are to have meaning; he is not working with an idea of consensus of
opinion at all (LFM 183f.). Rather, and deeper, forms of life weave words and
lives together. The idea is that our shared natural reactions, such as they are,
the embedding of words and signs as we do it in ordinary forms of life is the
“friction” that the very concepts of agreement and disagreement – i.e., truth and
falsity – require (PI §§240ff.).
72 Fogelin, 2009, 99 regards the requirement for exhibition in life as Humean and “brute.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
57
The point about “wayward” rule-following is not the difficulty of coming to
know “their” mind or ours, but in coming to know our own in relation to theirs:
the very idea of a public needs construction before agreement and disagree-
ment, true and false, make sense. I no more possess pearls in a box of meaning
through introspection than they do. If each of us adopts the extensional point of
view, there is an impasse. Instead, we fashion our ways of meaning together,
coming to appreciate different ways of seeing and projecting “the same thing.”
If a tribe frequently “came to blows” over whether the letter  consists of
a single etch on the blackboard or repeated occurrences of uses of the sign,
they wouldn’t count as practicing “mathematics” (PI §240; LFM I). It is not
that such coming to blows does not happen. Setting up a code-language always
involves struggles. Brouwer and Hilbert came to professional blows over the
law of excluded middle in infinite contexts. Nevertheless, the routine com-
municability of procedures that can be humanly followed is a mark of the
logical and the mathematical. At some point the formation of what is “obvi-
ous” or “a normal response” is part and parcel of what thinking in logic and
mathematics are.
In Wittgenstein’s later philosophy, this points toward a naturalistic, evolving
web of contingencies on which ride the necessities of logic and mathematics.
However, it is important that pointing to any particular natural fact will not
explain or justify the development of a mathematical technique as the technique
that it is. For that, we must understand its place in mathematics and hence, in our
lives. It is notable that Turing’s analysis of taking a “step” in a formal system
assumes without fuss the living, human context of reckoning according to a rule
or technique of calculation.
To count as a technique, there must be something transportable and com-
municable, something general to be taken and applied in different cases and
contexts, adaptable to new contexts, available for tailoring. Mathematicians
sometimes speak of a “trick” in a proof: a technique is something else. The gen-
erality of techniques is not quantificational, but purposive: techniques are not
accidentally or arbitrarily concocted, but are ways of proceeding and projecting
with concepts.
RFM I refashions Wittgenstein’s calculation versus experiment distinction
(§2.5). Now it is viewed as dynamic, embedded by way of techniques in forms
of life.
If we take a pile of 100 marbles and separate them into 10 groups of 10,
that is an “experiment” in the sense of counting how many marbles are there
(RFM I §36ff.). When we begin, we do not know the answer. But if we now
film the procedure, regarding it as a paradigm of what can always be done, as a
necessary feature of there being 100 marbles, then we regard the procedure as
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58
Philosophy of Mathematics
a paradigmatic “calculation,” or proof: we have “unfolded” the implicit prop-
erties in the collection. We “see the necessity” in the procedure: the way of
regarding typical of proof. This is a shift from the aspect of experiment to that
of calculation: from a procedure of discovering in empirical fact about what
may be done with marbles and objects sufficiently like them, to the revealing
of an aspect: a configuration of concepts.
The generality in the second case is not quantificational: we do not infer
that if it works with marbles, it will work with beans, fingers, toes, and so
on. We might make an inductive (experiment) to see whether on five runs of
counting a particular subject was always able to complete the task. We might
make predictions about human behavior (even our own) based on that. But with
the paradigm of calculation something else happens: we erect a way of looking
at things that draws something new into the realm of unthinkability: that there
could be 100 marbles (fingers, toes, etc.) and no possibility of a procedure for
counting 10 groups of 10. Here by “possibility” we do not mean a “medical”
or “experimental,” but an atemporal conceptual or mathematical one.
The shift from experiment to calculation depends upon our ability to proj-
ect such unthinkability, our ability to make it real. Wittgenstein has now
transformed his Uniformity Rule into a general investigation of human forms
of life.
The site of unformalized, everyday speech in mathematics, as elsewhere, is
precisely what traditional philosophy is driven to deny and question. While no
refutation of this denial is possible, and while the grammar of everyday speech
in mathematics is neither unrevisable nor unproblematic nor complete, it is
possible to ask us to attend in more fine-grained ways to what we actually,
ordinarily, do in mathematics, and also to attend to how it is that traditional
philosophical demands undercut this fine-grained attention. The deepest ques-
tion about Wittgenstein’s mature philosophy of mathematics is whether this
attention to what we do carries genuine philosophical significance, genuine
“reality.”
4.3 Diagonal Proofs (RFM II)
In RFM II Wittgenstein explores Cantor’s Diagonal Method as a technique of
proof. He investigates the extent to which it necessarily shows us something
general, for example, that a number of a certain kind is not contained in a
particular listing of numbers.73 The issue is how far diagonalization allows us to
“transcend the limits” of a system. Wittgenstein’s answer, influenced by Turing
73 Commentary in WH Chapters 7–8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
59
(1936), is that it does not always do so, but that even when it does not, it may
reveal a new aspect of a collection. We have already interpolated Wittgenstein’s
non-extensional emphasis on the variety of “samenesses” at work in particular
diagonalizations regarded as formal series (§2.6, Figures 5–7). Now we revisit
the Uniformity Principle from the Later Philosophy’s point of view.
RFM II §2 considers the task, “Name a number that differs with
p
2 at every
second decimal place.” What kind of command is this? Is it obeyed if one says,
“Develop
p
2 and add 1 or  1 to every second decimal place”? Yes, verbally,
but it seems there is no aspect shift here taking us “beyond” where we were.
Recall Middle Wittgenstein’s “ 5!3
p
2 ”, the rule: calculate the decimal expan-
sion resulting from substituting “5” for “3” whenever it appears in the decimal
expansion of
p
2 (§3.3). He questioned whether such a “purely formal” sub-
stitution gives us a new kind of number, suggesting that the “living trunk” of
p
2 is the vital core, given its connections with measurement and trigonometry
(PR §182).
At issue with Cantor’s proof is whether the diagonal method per se forces
us to shift from a non-extensional to an extensional point of view. Wittgen-
stein rightly thinks it does not. Told to “divide an angle into three equal parts,”
we might simply have laid three equal angles together: there is no necessity in
embedding the system of construction with ruler and compass in higher alge-
bra and, having subjected it to analysis in these terms, declaring what we just
did “unthinkable.” We may take this step, and then the aspect shifts: it is now
unthinkable to trisect the angle. But there is no way to force this projection from
a new point of view (RFM II §2).
We might call this the “stubbornness” of the non-extensional perspective.
It should be placed beside the stubbornness of the extensional perspective.
There is no taking up both perspectives at once. So on one or another occa-
sion we will have to choose our “form of life.” Wittgenstein connects this
point about occasion sensitivity to the “stubbornness” of humanity’s differ-
ences amongst individuals and the stubbornness of our relying on known
and familiar techniques – both also gifts to “realism” in mathematics, as we
have seen (§4.2). Of course, Wittgenstein has his sympathies: he resists the
“style” of extensionalism.74 But his philosophical points are independent of
this preference.
The diagonal method of Cantor is a technique of proof. From the extensional
point of view, it shows that the cardinality of the real numbers is not countable,
that there does not exist a 1-1 correlation with the natural numbers. Cantor will
express the idea that the altered diagonal is “different from” all the previously
74 Bangu, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60
Philosophy of Mathematics
listed extensions. For Wittgenstein this shifts the aspect under which we regard
the listing of decimal expansions, but only if we go on to learn the calculus of
infinite numbers Cantor fashioned, accepting 1-1 correlation as a criterion of
numerical identity, and so on.
There is no problem with Cantor’s proof as a proof. The problem is that,
by a “skew form of expression,” the extensionalist insists on seeing the result
of the proof as our taking up a more extensionally adequate stance. That is
fine from within her perspective. But the method of proof does not estab-
lish the perspective. The “skew” way of thinking puffs up Cantor’s proof
(RFM II §22).
What Cantor shows from the non-extensional point of view is that there is not
just one space of techniques for expanding real decimal expansions (“I cannot
teach you all techniques through a technique” (162b, p. 1). If we suppose we
have listed all the expansions (indicated in a list all the rules), Cantor shows us
a way of constructing a further rule not on the list: unbounded ways of expand-
ing our arsenal of techniques for calculating out “new” decimal expansion
representations of real numbers.
Thus the gloss that Cantor proved the uncountability of the real numbers is,
so far as the diagonal argument technique goes, neither a logical must nor a
mere “stipulation,” as Putnam saddles Wittgenstein with saying.75 The better
angels of plasticity, the “faces of necessity” urged by Putnam himself, are apro-
pos. Before Cantor’s diagonal argument, simply being told that the real numbers
are “uncountable” in the extensional sense (“there is no bijection from this set
to the natural numbers”) would have been mathematically empty. After Cantor
has shown us the diagonal method and built his theory of cardinality, what once
seemed empty may be regarded as necessarily true.
Wittgenstein’s point is simply that Cantor’s is not the only way to regard the
situation. And he is correct: the Cantor argument may be regarded as a tech-
nique for constructing new decimal expansions. In fact, Hobson (1927, 90f.)
regarded his non-extensional way of rendering the Cantor argument as its “com-
pletion”: he takes Cantor to show that “the assumption of a finite and complete
stock of words by which any element of the continuum may be finitely defined
leads to contradiction.”
Wittgenstein explored the diagonal technique in 1938–9 probably as a result
of reading Turing’s (1936) diagonal argument, which Turing sent to him by
February 1937. Turing refers to Hobson in his §8, and Wittgenstein explicitly
framed diagonalization as a recursively specifiable technique in a notebook
(157a 17v, 1934–7).
75 Putnam, 2012, 446.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
61
Turing demonstrates that there can be no D machine, that is, a machine that
would determine, Yes or No, for any Turing Machine Ti, whether or not the
machine calculates an infinite expansion on input j.76 His argument is not the
familiar Halting argument, which derives a contradiction by building a “Con-
trary” machine that changes the coded outcome (“Halts” to “Doesn’t Halt” and
vice versa) of Ti on input j along the diagonal Tii. Instead, Turing uses a positive
diagonal argument in which the difficulty emerges directly from the character-
ization of the diagonal digits. He constructs a circular machine: when it gets to
its own number, it cannot do anything.
Wittgenstein writes the proof down in terms of language-games:77
A variant of [C]antor’s diagonal proof:
Let v D .k; n/ be the form of the laws for the expansion of decimal frac-
tions. v is the nth decimal place of the kth expansion. The law of the diagonal
then is:
v D .n; n/ Ddef: 0.n/.
It is to be proven that 0.n/ cannot be one of the rules .k; n/. Assume it
is the 100th. Then we have the formation rule
of 0.1/W .1; 1/
of 0.2/W .2; 2/
etc.,
but the rule for the formation of the 100th place of 0.n/ is/becomes
.100; 100/, that is, it tells us only that the 100th place is supposed to be
equal to itself, and so for n D 100 is not a rule.
Wittgenstein thinks, non-extensionally, of “laws” or rules for decimal expan-
sions placed on a list. .k; n/ is the nth decimal place determined by the kth rule
of expansion. For n D 1 the diagonal command 0.n/ says to calculate the first
decimal place provided by the law .1; : : : /; for n D 2 to calculate the sec-
ond decimal place provided by the law .2; : : : /, and so on. The question is
whether any of the rules of the list correspond to 0.n/.
If we think extensionally, this argument goes nowhere. For all we know,
there might be double counting going on in such a way that 0.n/ spells out an
extension already on the list of “finished” expansions.
But if we imagine – as Turing and Wittgenstein do – that we are dealing
with commands given to “machines” (i.e., human “computors”) – then there
is a problem. Suppose that 0.n/ already occurs somewhere on the list before
we characterize the diagonal (e.g., as the 100th rule). Now the command for
n D 100 is “not a rule” in the sense of the other rules on the list, for it cannot
76 Floyd, 2012b, WH Chapter 7 for rigorous reconstructions.
77 RPP I §1097, MS 135, 60ff.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62
Philosophy of Mathematics
be followed: it says “Do for n D 100 whatever 0.100/ tells you to do.” But
“Do What You Do” is empty as a command, in this context; it is reminiscent
of “autological is autological,” or the set of all sets that are members of them-
selves.78 Therefore one cannot diagonalize out of the listing of computable real
expansions.
Wittgenstein’s diagonal argument shows that the living context in which
a rule is applied must be taken into account for it to serve as a command:
the embedding in a form of life helps us to see whether or not it is a rule
that can be followed. “Computing a real decimal expansion” is an occasion-
sensitive notion. Thus even though Turing’s argument does not take us “out”
of the system of computable real numbers, it shifts the aspect under which we
regard calculating decimal expansions. The lesson is that a command cannot be
shared without being associated with some kind of usable technique. We need
a non-tautological occasion in order for tautologies to be used. There is no one
technique for all techniques of expansion.
Wittgenstein regarded the self-reflexive aspect of Gödel’s (1931) sentence
analogously.79 “This sentence is no tautology [cannot be derived in Russell’s
system] and it cannot be false” shifts the aspect under which we regard Prin-
cipia as a system in relation to arithmetical truth: we “see the face of necessity”
in his underivable sentence, which takes us beyond the idea of truth as “what
is derivable in Russell’s system” (121, 78vff). Gödel “confronts us with a new
situation” (121, 84r).
Just before rehearsing the above-quoted version of Turing’s (1936) argu-
ment, Wittgenstein reminds himself that “Turing’s ‘Machines’. These are
humans who calculate.” The human context is crucial for Turing’s analysis of
calculation-in-a-logic: it is we who bring the dynamism of a process or step-by-
step routine to the Turing Machine. Regarded extensionally, a Turing Machine
is simply a formalism or set of quadruples. Regarded non-extensionally, it is a
model of a human computor calculating in accordance with a rule.
Wittgenstein takes Cantor’s, Turing’s, and Gödel’s diagonal arguments to
show the limits, not only of an extensional perspective on mathematics, but
also on the very idea of a “purely mechanical” mode of thought. The point of
Turing’s (1936) is not to insist that we are machines, that the mind-machine
“determines mechanically” all the steps that it can possibly take with its con-
cepts: just the opposite. He explicitly eliminates any appeal to the notion of a
“state of mind” by imagining written instructions on a piece of paper (§9 III),
noting that “it is always possible for the computer to break off from his work,”
78 Floyd, 2012b.
79 Floyd, 2001.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
63
leaving “a note of instructions (written in some standard form) explaining how
the work is to be continued” by someone else.
Turing’s notion of a “machine” is built for the Hilbertian context. It is a
logico-mathematical one, not a psychological one. From Wittgenstein’s point of
view, Turing demonstrates that the human context of our capacity for colloquial
language, a social art, is essential to calculation-in-a-logic (§3.1). Even if we
can construct multiple computational routines to check one another’s outcomes,
we face at some point a basic circularity with the ideas, a need to acquiesce:
the notion of effectiveness is not self-standing without colloquial elements
in play.
The point is mathematically rigorous. Every Turing machine encoding a
function does so with a particular scheme of notation (strokes, digits, placement
of figures in electronic memory, etc.). Shapiro (1982) argues, while assum-
ing a Turing idea of “effectiveness,” that it is not possible to devise a decision
procedure for distinguishing non-computable (“deviant”) encodings from com-
putable ones. Differently put, there is always a circularity in assuming that the
relation between an integer and the expression coding it is “effective.”80 The
notion of “performing a computation” is therefore occasion-sensitive.81
4.4 Surveyability (RFM III)
Commentators have long emphasized Wittgenstein’s arguments against the
idea that Principia Mathematica’s system reduces arithmetic to logic in the
sense of explicating or justifying it.82 His objection is that the proofs in Prin-
cipia are “unsurveyable,” whereas by contrast, as he repeatedly remarks, “a
proof [or calculation] must be surveyable.” The question is, what is the target,
the content, and the force of this objection?
The issue is not whether knowing the axioms and definitions in Principia
suffices to know arithmetic, or whether knowledge of arithmetic suffices to
actually “grasp” all proofs in Principia. Wittgenstein is not making an a pri-
ori demand on proofs or knowledge or privileging elementary arithmetic in
a brute, naturalistic way. He is not insisting on anything in particular in the
order of knowledge. Rather, he focuses on shifts in our projections of possibil-
ities and necessities for the concept of proof in mathematics: the dialectic of
our techniques, our techniques with techniques, and so on. Principia brings
80 Copeland and Proudfoot, 2010; Kennedy, 2017; Quinon, 2020.
81 Turing, 1937, points out that there is no generally effective way of associating “description
numbers” with real numbers; compare WH 230 for Wittgenstein’s possible allusion to this.
82 Marion, 2011, 2007; Mühlhölzer, 2006, 2010.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64
Philosophy of Mathematics
out a larger lesson and provides him with an opportunity to put his Later
views to work.
Most agree that Wittgenstein is not denying that basic arithmetical notions
and axioms may be formally defined in terms of “logic” in Principia, and
many theorems containing translations of ordinary arithmetical truths may be
obtained by logic alone in Russell’s sense.83 Arithmetic may be, in Wittgen-
stein’s tendentious way of putting it, wrapped up in the “prose” of quantifiers,
predicate letters, and so on, and “tautologies” (pure logical deductions in the
system) thus constructed (RFM V §46). By 1939 Wittgenstein was aware that
not all truths may be so deduced, formally speaking (§4.6). But his focus on
Principia is on the non-extensional aspect of our notion of proof. How is this
notion actually used, embedded in mathematical forms of life, connected to
meaning and understanding?
Russell (1920, chap. 1) states that in logic alone may the determinacy and
applicability of arithmetical thoughts be secured: Principia’s individuation of
arithmetical content is the logicist’s way of defying Dedekind’s structural-
ism. RFM I, by contrast, recasts the idea of “determining the meaning” of
an expression as an occasion-sensitive, parochial notion demanding purpos-
ive techniques of fitting structured conceptual paradigms to forms of life. RFM
III applies this point of view to Russell’s logicist “foundation.”
For a human to calculate even an elementary sentence of arithmetic in Prin-
cipia would take thousands of symbols. Like an unwieldy code, the expression
of thoughts explodes. The same is true if we try to rewrite the usual symbol-
izations of truth-functions in terms of the Sheffer Stroke, treating it as a mere
abbreviation (§3.3), or if we actually tried to use the stroke notation suggested
by Hilbert as a kind of intuitive basis for arithmetic (even “simple” expressions
become quickly unusable with pen and paper).
Hilbert sought “certainty” and intersubjective validity, hoping to control
mathematical controversy with the demand of a touchstone in the finite, con-
crete, given symbols of a basic notation. But his point was really that it is
mathematical techniques we require to distinguish, for example, jjjjjjjjjjjjjjj
from jjjjjjjjjjjjjjjj or nonconstructive proofs from constructive ones. Wittgen-
stein accepts this point, while rejecting Hilbert’s colorful rhetoric about “con-
crete” symbolic Gestalten giving us “grounding” for certainty, or articulating
“the” technique of thought as such.
The fact that arithmetical proofs may possibly be transcribed into Principia’s
(or Principia with Sheffer’s) notation is logically and mathematically interest-
ing, pointing toward the mechanization of proof. But that interest is not to be
83 But see Steiner, 1975.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
65
articulated by actually writing out formal proofs day after day, as if that secures
certainty, increases the inductive confirmation of the transposition, or unpacks
needless abbreviations (§3.3).
Unwieldy formal proofs are not used to check elementary arithmetical sums;
rather we index quantifiers so that we apply arithmetic to a Principia proof, for
example, by counting parentheses (If .917.x/ and .924.x/) then .941.x/). We
prefer our “everyday” notation to reveal aspects of Principia notation, because
we require that what the formal proof produces may be communicated without
squabbling or questioning. If our purposes involve vast numbers, we find our
way with different techniques. We work in colloquial language to draw out the
interest of a proof (§3.1).
Wittgenstein does not discuss computer-assisted proofs (though see RFM
IV §20). Yet his criticisms of overly simplified conceptions of understanding
fit challenges that arise nowadays in higher-level languages for proof verifica-
tion as well as interactive programming.84 The dialectical interplay in demands
for simplicity and surveyability here confirms the “multicolored” character of
our techniques for “understanding the meaning” of a concept or proof (RFM
III §46ff.). The distinction between “calculation” and “experiment” shades
off in computer proofs. The unabbreviated level of machine language serves
implementation ends that, coupled with domain-specific understandings and
human–machine interaction, allow us to assemble and reassemble concepts,
furthering our own mathematical understandings.
Today the need to utilize mechanically generated models and pictures to take
in, generate, and communicate vast quantities of data is an everyday phenom-
enon in our implementation of language, one that serves pedagogical, social,
and political ends. These may be brought into play to “determine” meanings and
secure “understandings.” As computer science arguably becomes a branch of
social science, Wittgenstein’s turn toward “surveyability” becomes ever more
relevant to “foundations.”
But what is the philosophical import of this dynamic, modal understanding
of “surveyability”? By a proof (or calculation) being “surveyable” Wittgen-
stein construes it as a picture of what can (or cannot) be done. The modality
expresses his idea that the “limits” of empiricism lie in the imperative to com-
municate, in concept-formation (RFM III §71, VI §23), and not in the “medical
impossibility” (e.g.) of our surveying or computing an infinite number of cal-
culations in finite time (Russell, 1936). Wittgenstein’s aspect-talk provides a
way to speak of “experience” or “intuition” in the epistemology of mathemat-
ics both in terms of immediate apprehension of a particular and in terms of a
84 Shanker, 1987; Avigad, 2008a, 2008b.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66
Philosophy of Mathematics
procedure unfolding: it focuses on action, what can (and cannot) be done, ways
in which we compare, discuss, characterize, and regard things from a variety
of angles (RFM VII §21).
Turing remarked that his arguments rely directly on “intuition” and “experi-
ence,” something “not ideal” mathematically. He assumes, for example, that his
computors must be able to “take in at a glance” a meaningful configuration of
symbols [§9]OCN. Wittgenstein is not against this way of speaking – in fact, he
unpacks the “surveyability” of proof with the idea of a proof being “intuitive,”
or an “intuitive” procedure – but by “intuitive” Wittgenstein means something
“homespun,” down to earth, like “plain to view” (RFM III §42, IV §30).
It is “not something behind the proof,” but the proof itself, with its specific
configuration of expressions, that proves: the proof can be taken in as we use
it to project necessity and possibility. A proof may “remodel” our intuition,
in the sense of getting us to a new way of looking at things (RFM IV §30).
Therefore, a proof is not an “interpretation” of signs but a projection of a dimen-
sion of conceptual configuration: it changes the aspects of concepts, fashioning
unthinkability and unimaginability (RFM III §41). Wittgenstein’s interest is in
unpacking the complexities and practical facets of the indirection involved in
such projection. He does not think “surveyability” is always easily achieved.
Thus he uses an analogy between procedures of proof and the dynamism
of film projection to bring out the complex ways in which the necessities in
procedures (rather than temporal movements) may be exemplified. It is part
of the concept of “proof” that we aim at clarity in the unfolding of a possi-
ble procedure that creates a home for a concept: the steps must be able to be
communicated, reproduced without controversy.
In films that teach (say YouTube How-To Videos), the goal and the basic
tools are first assembled; uninteresting or lengthy temporal steps in a procedure
are cut or speeded up on film as of negligible interest to the procedure; focus,
movement of the camera angle, and images of humans performing the relevant
actions help convey a narrative for the step-by-step routine with emphases,
things to avoid, and so on. If the issue becomes whether the film’s narrator
“fully understands” the proof, this can come out in a variety of different ways:
objections and questions may be answered, examples provided, an outline of
the idea of the proof articulated, and so on. The film erects criteria of identity
for “proceeding in the same way.”
Wittgenstein does not mean that every proof can be “taken in at a glance” in
the sense of easiness, memorizability, or visual simplicity. It is not always clear
whether a proof can be re-rendered to become easier to take in or more feasible
to use. Many mathematical arguments are difficult to take in and do not contain
pictures or diagrams in the literal sense at all. What is difficult for imagination
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
67
at first becomes more insightful with further knowledge (and computational
power). Nevertheless, communication is a primary desideratum, the bringing
of mathematical proof as far as we can toward an ideal where we can lean on
everyday, colloquial language, with all its dynamism and potential vagueness.
Turing (1942–4) reported that he learned this very point from Wittgenstein’s
lectures.85
4.5 Real Numbers (RFM V)
Because of the occasion-sensitivity, Later Wittgenstein emphasizes as funda-
mental to logic and mathematics, many readers believe that he subscribes to
verificationism in spite of himself: the meaning of a proposition is its proof. It
is a quick step from here to the “anti-realism” of Dummett and Wright.86
The trouble with this reading is that it underplays the multidimensional
sense of “occasion” Wittgenstein has in mind, his aspectual realism, which
emphasizes the multiple analyzability of mathematical concepts, including the
“tensions” involved in balancing our presentation of the real numbers (§3.5). A
proof may reveal one side of a number or structure but leave us in the dark about
another. Insight and understanding in mathematics is neither flat, nor given by
sentences alone, but given through multidimensional aspects that are brought
out in techniques of their projection. If understanding is only always partial,
that does not mean that it is not real.
Middle Wittgenstein was a verificationist, and in a fairly clear sense an
“anti-realist” (§3.3). Later Wittgenstein advocates a more fluid approach to
sense-individuation, regarding the criteria for samenesses and differences
among proofs of “the same proposition” as something that we can settle in dis-
cussion, on different occasions, determining as we go whether or not a proof
simply recapitulates the idea of another proof, or whether it “does something
new.”
It is an everyday mathematical fact that there can be debate about what counts
as “the same proof” and that progress may be made in discussion of particular
cases, and that sometimes final agreement may not be reached. This confirms
Wittgenstein’s idea of the fluidity of simplicity. A relevant example is Turing
(1936): although Church (1936) had already resolved the Entscheidungsprob-
lem in the negative by the time Turing showed his proof to Newman, Turing’s
way of resolving “the same thing” used such a different approach that it was still
published. Turing had to add an Appendix to his paper proving that his “Turing
Machines” can compute any function that is -computable in Church’s sense,
85 Floyd, 2013.
86 Wright, 1980, 2001.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68
Philosophy of Mathematics
extensionally speaking. But he was still allowed to publish – the aspectual
point (§4.6).
We have already seen Wittgenstein differentiating between ways of regard-
ing Cantor’s diagonal procedure with infinite expansions and the diagonal
technique itself. Different or “the same” things are proved depending upon
which perspective we take up. When we see the other side of a concept or
proposition, we project differently, but we do not always say that there is a
completely different technique of proof at stake. Conversely, though there may
be different techniques of proof, we can sometimes say that the result reached
is “the same.” An example is again Cantor’s diagonal argument. It is very dif-
ferent on the surface from Cantor’s original (1874) topological way of arguing
for the uncountability of the real numbers, not at all “the same proof.” But ret-
rospectively, with his (1891) in hand, we can see in the collapse of two indices
into one an implicit “diagonalization” (WH 133n, 174, 214).
Did Later Wittgenstein fall back into verificationism? According to Putnam,
Yes. He cites (RFM V §41):
What harm is done e.g. by saying that God knows all irrational numbers? Or:
that they are already all there, even though we only know certain of them?
Why are these pictures not harmless?
For one thing, they hide certain problems. —
Suppose that people go on and on calculating the expansion of . So God,
who knows everything, knows whether they will have reached “777” by the
end of the world. But can his omniscience decide whether they would have
reached it after the end of the world? It cannot. I want to say: Even God can
decide something mathematical only by mathematics. Even for him the mere
rule of expansion cannot decide anything that it does not decide for us.
We might put it like this: if the rule for the expansion has been given us,
a calculation can tell us that there is a ‘2’ at the fifth place. Could God have
known this, without the calculation, purely from the rule of expansion? I
want to say: No.
Update the remark: computers have already found an occurrence of “777” in
the decimal expansion of . Note that Wittgenstein is tentative, remarking that
he “wants to say No” – but does not say it.
Putnam insists that Wittgenstein committed himself in this remark (perhaps
unwittingly) to the view that humanly undecidable mathematical propositions
lack a truth value, a “deeply problematic” idea tantamount to embracing a ver-
ificationist account of mathematical truth and thereby denying realism (2012,
356, 432). Some true differential equations of physics are likely impossible to
solve by calculation or are uncomputable, yet we say their solutions exist, either
do or do not hold of physical reality (2012, 221f., 375, 431n.). For Putnam,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
69
“to say that omniscience cannot decide a question is …Wittgenstein’s way of
saying that there is no answer to be known, i.e., it is an illusion that there must
be a right answer” (2012, 356n., 431f.).
But Wittgenstein does not say this. Instead he warns of the “harm” certain
pictures can do if they “hide certain problems.” The problems he has in mind
involve the confusion of the non-extensional and the extensional perspectives.
The idea that “God knows all irrational numbers” sounds all right, but the “all”
and the kind of acquaintance involved by its means are ambiguous.
There are several problems with the thought that from the decimal rule of
expansion of the digits of  God would know “all” particular digits of  that
humans would have ideally calculated by the end of the world – thereby some-
how similarly knowing “all” irrational numbers. One is that not all irrational
numbers may be represented in decimal expansion form if we restrict ourselves
to expansions calculable by a rule.
A deeper problem is the mixing up of differing models, differing aspects,
of the real numbers. The interlocutor couples God both with the extensionalist
idea of “seeing at a glance” all digits of  and with the idea of God as an
omniscient physicist/anthropologist. But this conflates logic, causality, and the
idea of human techniques: even God should be careful to separate these ways
of thinking. Cantor may be taken to have shown us something about human
techniques and the languages we employ to articulate our understandings of
the real numbers – i.e., there is no general technique that can show us all the
techniques of expansion we might concoct (§4.3). Moreover, there remains the
“tension” of which Bernays wrote (§3.5): the need to balance an understanding
of the continuum as a whole with the uses and construals of real numbers as
individuals.
We have already seen how unclear Wittgenstein finds the idea of “human
calculating the decimal expansion of ”: there could be a variety of substitutive
routines grafted onto the usual ways of, for example, calculating a particular
irrational decimal expansion, and it is unclear which would be “the same,” and
which “different’ (§3.3, §4.3).
Wittgenstein’s point is that the richness of mathematical aspects – the dif-
fering faces that the real numbers show us – should not be “harmed,” that is,
suppressed or flattened out, by too-quick ways of thinking of understanding,
meaning, and calculation and fitting together in one way. The occasion-
sensitivity and plasticity of our concepts is what drives our impulse to char-
acterize and recharacterize in mathematics in the first place, to fashion new
techniques. The interlocutor wipes out this richness and supposes that the exten-
sional point of view will make it inessential. In so doing, she loses what for
Wittgenstein are the “realities” of the real numbers.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70
Philosophy of Mathematics
Wittgenstein’s immediately following remark (RFM V §42) conveys some-
thing quite different from the verificationism Putnam reads into him:
When I said that the propositions of mathematics determine [bilden] con-
cepts, that is vague; for “2 C 2 D 4” forms a concept in a different sense
from “p  p”, “.8/:fx  fa”, or Dedekind’s Theorem. The point is, there is
a family of cases. (RFM V §42)
Later Wittgenstein’s point is not that incalculable decimal expansions are “inde-
terminate” or that our calculations “lack a truth-value.” Rather, mathematical
concepts are variously structured and truth-values of statements must respect
this. If God has to decide mathematical questions through mathematics, then
even God must respect the fact that there is other mathematics that is appro-
priate to use here. The idea of a rule of expansion for digits of  does not tell
us, in the relevant way, what “all” digits of  are, much less does the notion
of a rule of decimal expansion tell us “in general” what “all” irrational num-
bers are (RFM V §9, VI 41; WH 3.8). Our mathematical practices consist of a
multicolored collection of techniques.
This is why Wittgenstein adduces Dedekind’s theorem, which construes
the totality of real numbers as classes of rationals. He is not rejecting
Dedekind’s notion of a cut, even if he finds the extensional presentation
of it misleading (RFM V, WH §3.1). He is not restricting the meaning-
ful concepts of mathematics to physically calculable ones. Rather, he resists
a “harmful” and misleading mixture of pictures. The extensional point of
view, used unreflectively, encourages a disrespect for the plasticity of our
concepts.
What is merely an “illustration,” and what a true “application” of a con-
cept? The question arises at the outset of Wittgenstein’s 1942–3 annotations
to Hardy (1941) (WH §§3.1–2). Hardy states (p. 2) that the geometrical
line is merely an “illustration,” with no systematic significance for analy-
sis. Wittgenstein counters that while “illustration” is inessential, “applica-
tion” is not (WH §5.5). He does not mean by this “application in physics,”
as Putnam thinks. What he means is that geometrical considerations have
ceased to function in anything like a straightforward way in modern anal-
ysis since Dedekind and Cantor: analysis is severed from the notion of
quantity.
Hardy (1941, 8) dismisses the possibility of introducing decimal expansions
as being “hardly of the precise character required by modern mathematics.” But
for Wittgenstein decimal expansions are standard representations of irrational
numbers. Even from a really rigorous point of view, decimal expansions may
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
71
be used to represent a perfectly respectable transition from the rational to all
the real numbers.87
The (extensionalist) idea of decimal expansions of real numbers as “fin-
ished” nicely fits the geometrical image of the straight line: the finished
expansions represent points on the line. To consider only the rational num-
bers leaves open gaps, and from this point of view the filling of these gaps with
irrational numbers appears to be “prejudged” (§3.5). Yet this “gap” imagery
can be misleading in being circular. For the extensional point of view can only
regard the shift from considering the rationals to the reals as a widening of the
extension of the concept “real number”; it cannot regard the shift in any other
way. That is what Wittgenstein is pointing out.
4.6 Wittgenstein, Gödel, and Turing (RFM I, II, V, VII)
Later Wittgenstein responded guardedly and haltingly to the incompleteness
and undecidability results of Gödel (1931) and Turing (1936).88 His under-
standing of these results, however partial, helped him shift to his Later phi-
losophy. Now he regards mathematics, as well as philosophy, as “a class of
investigations,” that is, explorations where the clarity and/or extent of our
concepts is not taken for granted as clear in advance, but articulated and reartic-
ulated indefinitely (117, 51ff.).89 At the same time he continues to work out his
idea of occasion sensitivity, the multiple-aspect view of sentences, applying
many different arguments to our uses of sensation concepts, perceptions, and
even first-person ascriptions of experience.
Wittgenstein remarks that Gödel has “done a great service to philosophy,”
shifting the aspect under which we view mathematics (163, 39v-40v). The need
for reformulations of what is meant by “is a proof” in a variety of contexts is
shown in Gödel’s (1931), especially in the second incompleteness theorem,
where characterization of “consistency” and “provable” becomes an actual
task.90 Middle Wittgenstein’s relativism, by contrast, made the consistency of
the elementary propositions within a system necessary.
Often Wittgenstein is regarded as quarreling with Gödel, but that is because
he is too often read as a radical finitist or conventionalist. His remarks certainly
struggle to place Gödelian incompleteness into his way of thinking. But if we
take seriously his Later views, we see what the struggle is about, and it is not
87 Gowers, 2017b; Tao, 2006, 380–388.
88 Rodych, 2002 surveys the manuscript remarks on Gödel.
89 Floyd, 2001; Floyd and Putnam, 2000.
90 WCL 50ff.; Floyd and Putnam, 2000, 2012.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72
Philosophy of Mathematics
about refuting Gödel. There is a richness to the ways we may articulate arith-
metic, as Gödel proved, and a richness to the idea of “follows from a set of
axioms in a formal language,” as Church and Turing showed. Conventional-
ists, formalists, and logicists should admit and learn from this. For the mature
Wittgenstein, the multidimensional play comes out in our articulations of math-
ematics in everyday phraseology and its embedding in life, in the techniques
we establish and share. This is not an alternative to formalizing theories where
we can, but it is not wholly reducible to that activity.
Later Wittgenstein sees both a pluralism and a universalism in our notion of
logic. The price of unity is the fluidity of simplicity. Logic has not the formal
unity he assumed it did in TLP; nor is it, however, an archipelago of independ-
ent calculi. Instead, it evolves and is a “multicolored” collection of techniques
for projecting, building, structuring, and restructuring concepts.
Turing concocted an “object of comparison,” a language-game to resolve the
Entscheidungsproblem: he analogized a human being reckoning according to a
fixed rule “mechanically” to a machine. This brought the whole idea of a formal
system down to earth, making it plain. He could convincingly analyze, with a
mimimum degree of formalization, what is meant by the idea of a “step” in a
formal system of logic. Turing found the right parametrization of our concepts
by thinking what (and who) calculation-in-a-logic is for.
Although Gödel, Church, Kleene, and Rosser clarified the notion of “effec-
tive” before Turing, they were mathematicians thinking in terms of systems of
equations and the notation of functions. Turing’s analysis alone, in bringing
the human being’s purposes into the center, is immediate and intuitive. This
served a purpose. In order to analyze what a formal system of logic is, one could
not simply write down another formal system. One had to do something: shift
the aspect under which we regarded what the Entscheidungsproblem required.
Turing’s diagonal argument is free of any tie to a particular formalism or sym-
bolism. And it depends upon an everyday idea about rules, rule-following,
and sharing of commands, but not on any community-wide agreement or
consensus.
Turing’s diagonal argument (§4.3) shows that it is not an essential part of
our notion of taking a correct step in a formal system of logic (or calculating
according to a rule) that one does or does not subscribe to the law of excluded
middle in infinite contexts. Even an intuitionist can accept his positive diagonal
argument, the “Do What You Do” form of reasoning (§4.3). Nor is a theory of
truth required to accept his analysis. Nor any particular symbolism. What mat-
ters is the analogy between a human being, reckoning step-by-step according
to a fixed rule, and a machine. Turing’s success is partly extensional: he had
to prove that all of the Turing-computable functions are -computable, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
73
vice versa. But the most profound aspect of his success is non-extensional: he
refashions and re-projects our concepts vividly.
Gödel agreed. Not until Turing clarified what is meant by a “formal system”
of the relevant kind was the extent of applicability of Gödel (1931) clear. As
Gödel remarked, because of Turing’s
precise and unquestionably adequate definition of the general concept of for-
mal system, …the existence of undecidable arithmetical propositions and the
non-demonstrability of the consistency of a system in the same system can
now be proved rigorously for every consistent formal system containing a
certain amount of finitary number theory.91
Equally crucial, because one cannot diagonalize out of the class of Turing-
computable functions, the notion of “computable” is absolute: it does not vary
with the formal system. With Turing’s analysis,
one has for the first time succeeded in giving an absolute definition of an
interesting epistemological notion, i.e., one not depending on the formalism
chosen… In all other cases treated previously, such as demonstrability or
definability, one has been able to define them only relative to a given lan-
guage, and for each individual language it is clear that the one thus obtained is
not the one looked for. For the concept of computability, however, although
it is merely a special kind of demonstrability or decidability, the situation
is different. By a kind of miracle it is not necessary to distinguish orders,
and the diagonal procedure does not lead outside the defined notion (Gödel,
1946, 150).
But it is hardly a “miracle” that Turing’s Wittgensteinian, down-to-earth
approach defeats transcendence through diagonalization. Turing took up a form
of life perspective on the idea of a formalism. The unity of logic is a task,
constantly under repair, as we proceed through life. And “states of mind” are
shareable commands that may be followed.92
Turing’s Universal Machine does the work of all machines, but it cannot
be diagonalized out of. This indicates the ubiquity and indefinite applicabil-
ity of computational processes and modeling in our world. There are no sharp
dichotomies to be drawn between software, hardware, and data: the Universal
Machine can “adapt” to its own outputs, inputs, and internal commands with-
out limit, in the manner of our computers and certain biological, physical, and
social processes today.93
91 Gödel, 1964b.
92 Floyd, 2017.
93 Davis, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74
Philosophy of Mathematics
Turing said he had learned from Wittgenstein’s lectures about the impor-
tance of everyday language, that is, evolving phraseology, as a factor in the
evolution of logical “types.”94 The point connects directly with the “realism”
we have ascribed to Wittgenstein. Turing’s “computors” must be able to “take
in at a glance” a configuration of symbols. But the indefinite range of sym-
bolic compression for us, given computers and our social networks, makes
this an evolving target. We must surrender the ideal of a universal logical lan-
guage of the kind the TLP demanded. Instead, we should regard ourselves
embarked on what Turing (1948) described as “the cultural search”: the drive
for new techniques, creativity in phraseology, and “initiative,” (i.e. new forms
of life).
94 Turing, 1942–4; Floyd, 2013.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Abbreviations
BB, BrB, BBB The Blue and Brown Books
BEE, MS, TS Bergen Edition of Wittgenstein’s Nachlass
LFM Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics, Cambridge
1939
MWL Wittgenstein: Lectures, Cambridge 1930–1933
NB Notebooks 1914–1916
PG Philosophical Grammar
PI, PPF Philosophical Investigations
PR Philosophical Remarks
RFM Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics
RLF Some Remarks on Logical Form
RPP I Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology I
TLP Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
WH Wittgenstein’s Annotations to Hardy’s Course of Pure Mathematics: Floyd
and Mühlhölzer, 2020
WVC Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Auxier, R. E., Anderson, D. R., & Hahn, L. E. 2015. The Philosophy of Hilary
Putnam. Chicago, IL: Open Court.
Avigad,
J.
2008a.
Computers
in
Mathematics.
(In
Mancosu,
2008,
pp. 300–316.)
Avigad,
J.
2008b.
Understanding
Proofs.
(In
Mancosu,
2008,
pp. 317–353.)
Bangu, S. 2020. “Changing the Style of Thinking”: Wittgenstein on Superla-
tives, Revisionism, and Cantorian Set Theory. Iyyun, the Jerusalem Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 68, 339–359.
Barwise, J. (ed.). 1977. Handbook of Mathematical Logic. Amsterdam; New
York: North-Holland Pub. Co.
Baz, A. 2020. The Significance of Aspect Perception: Bringing the Phenomenal
World into View (vol. 5). Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG,
Springer.
Benacerraf, P. 1965. What Numbers Could Not Be. The Philosophical Review,
74(1), 47–73.
Bernays, P. 1957. Bemerkungen zum Paradoxon von Thoralf Skolem. Avhan-
dlinger utgitt av Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo, I. Mat.-Naturv.
Klasse, 2nd series, 3–9. (English translation by Dirk Schllimm and Steve
Awodey, “Considerations regarding the paradox of Thoralf Skolem,”
www.phil.cmu.edu/projects/bernays/.)
Bernays, P. 1959. Betrachtungen zu Ludwig Wittgensteins Bemerkungen
über die Grundlagen der Mathematik/Comments on Ludwig Wittgenstein’s
Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. Ratio, 2(1), 1–22.
Brouwer, L. E. J. 1929. Mathematik, Wissenschaft und Sprache. Monatshefte
für Mathematik und Physik, 36(1), 153–164.
Cantor, G. 1874. Über eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffes aller reellen alge-
braischen Zahlen. Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, 77,
258–262.
Cantor, G. 1891. Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre.
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, I, 75–78. (English
translation in Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, pp. 920–922.)
Cavell, S. 1988. Declining Decline: Wittgenstein as a Philosopher of Culture.
Inquiry, 31(3), 253–264.
Church, A. 1932. A Set of Postulates for the Foundation of Logic. Annals of
Mathematics, 33(2), 346–366.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
77
Church, A. 1936. A Note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 1(1), 40–41.
Copeland, B. J. 2002. Accelerating Turing Machines. Minds and Machines,
12(2), 281–300.
Copeland, B. J. & Proudfoot, D. 2010. Deviant Encodings and Turing’s Anal-
ysis of Computability. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 41(3),
247–252.
Costreie, S. (ed.) 2016. Early Analytic Philosophy: New Perspectives on the
Tradition. New York: Springer Publishing Switzerland.
Crocco, G., & Engelen, E.-M. (eds.) 2016. Kurt Gödel: Philosopher-Scientist
(vol. 1). Aix-en-Provence: Presses Universitaires de Provence.
Davis, M. 2017. Universality Is Ubiquitous. (In Floyd and Bokulich, 2017, pp.
153–158.)
Dedekind, R. 1872. Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. Wiesbaden: Friedrich
Vieweg und Sohn. (English translation Continuity and Irrational Numbers
in Ewald, 1996, vol. 2, pp. 766–779.)
Diamond, C. 1991. The Realistic Spirit: Wittgenstein, Philosophy, and the
Mind. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Dreben, B., & Floyd, J. 1991. Tautology: How Not to Use a Word. Synthese,
87(1), 23–50.
Dummett, M. A. E. 1959. Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics. The
Philosophical Review, LXVII, 324–348.
Dybjer, P., Lindström, S., Palmgren, E., & Sundholm, G. (eds.) 2012. Epis-
temology versus Ontology, Logic, Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Per
Martin-Löf. Dordrecht: Springer Science+Business Media.
Ebert, P. A., & Rossberg, M. (eds.) 2019. Essays on Frege’s Basic Laws of
Arithmetic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, J., & Guevara, D. (eds.) 2012. Wittgenstein and the Philosophy of Mind.
New York/Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Engelmann, M. L. 2013. Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Development: Phenome-
nology, Grammar, Method, and the Anthropological View. Basingstoke, UK:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Ewald, W. (ed.). 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations
of Mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press (2 vols.).
Feferman, S. 2005. Predicativity. (In Shapiro, 2005, pp. 590–624.)
Fisher, D., & McCarty, C. 2016. Reconstructing a Logic from Tractatus:
Wittgenstein’s Variables and Formulae. (In Costreie, 2016, pp. 301–324).
Floyd, J. 1995. Wittgenstein, Gödel and the Trisection of the Angle. (In
Hintikka, 1995, pp. 373–426.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78
References
Floyd, J. 2001. Prose versus Proof: Wittgenstein on Gödel, Tarski and Truth.
Philosophia Mathematica, 3(9), 280–307.
Floyd, J. 2005. Wittgenstein on Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics. (In
Shapiro, 2005, pp. 75–128.)
Floyd, J. 2010. On Being Surprised: Wittgenstein on Aspect Perception, Logic
and Mathematics. (In Krebs and Day, 2010, pp. 314–337.)
Floyd, J. 2011. Prefatory Note to the Frege–Wittgenstein Correspondence. In
E. De Pelligrin (ed.), Interactive Wittgenstein (pp. 1–14). Springer Science
+ Business Media B.V.
Floyd, J. 2012a. Das Überraschende: Wittgenstein on the Surprising in Math-
ematics. (In Ellis and Guevara, 2012, pp. 224–258.)
Floyd, J. 2012b. Wittgenstein’s Diagonal Argument: A Variation on Cantor and
Turing. (In Dybjer, Lindström, Palmgren, and Sundholm, 2012, pp. 25–44.)
Floyd, J. 2013. Turing, Wittgenstein and Types: Philosophical Aspects of
Turing’s ‘The Reform of Mathematical Notation’ (1944–5). (In Turing, 2013,
pp. 250–253.)
Floyd, J. 2016. Chains of Life: Turing, Lebensform, and the Emergence of
Wittgenstein’s Later Style. Nordic Wittgenstein Review, 5(2), 7–89.
Floyd, J. 2017. Turing on “Common Sense”: Cambridge Resonances. (In Floyd
and Bokulich, 2017, pp. 103–152.)
Floyd, J. 2018a. Aspects of Aspects. (In Sluga and Stern, 2018, pp. 361–388.)
Floyd, J. 2018b. Lebensformen: Living Logic. (In Martin, 2018, pp. 59–92.)
Floyd, J. 2020. Aspects of the Real Numbers: Putnam, Wittgenstein, and
Nonextensionalism. The Monist, 103(4), 427–441.
Floyd, J. 2021. Sheffer, Lewis and the “Logocentric Predicament.” (To appear
in J. P. Narboux and H. Wagner, eds., The Legacy of C. I. Lewis, Routledge
Series in American Philosophy.)
Floyd, J., & Bokulich, A. (eds.) 2017. Philosophical Explorations of the Legacy
of Alan Turing – Turing 100. Dordrecht: Springer.
Floyd, J., & Kanamori, A. 2016. Gödel vis-à-vis Russell: Logic and Set Theory
to Philosophy. (In Crocco and Engelen, 2016, pp. 243–326.)
Floyd, J., & Mühlhölzer, F. 2020. Wittgenstein’s Annotations to Hardy’s Course
of Pure Mathematics, An Investigation of Wittgenstein’s Non-Extensionalist
Understanding of the Real Numbers. Switzerland: Springer.
Floyd, J., & Putnam, H. 2000. A Note on Wittgenstein’s ‘Notorious Paragraph’
about the Gödel Theorem. Journal of Philosophy, 45(11), 624–632.
Floyd, J., & Putnam, H. 2012. Wittgenstein’s “Notorious” Paragraph about the
Gödel Theorem: Recent Discussions. (In Putnam, 2012, pp. 458–481.)
Fogelin, R. J. 1987. Wittgenstein (2nd ed.). London; New York: Routledge K.
Paul. (1st ed., 1976.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
79
Fogelin, R. J. 2009. Taking Wittgenstein at His Word: A Textual Study (vol. 29).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Frascolla, P. 1997. The Tractatus System of Arithmetic. Synthese, 112,
353–378.
Frege, G. 1879. Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formel-
sprache des reinen Denkens. Halle: Louis Nebert. (Reprinted 1964 by
G. Olms, Hildesheim. English translation by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg in
van Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 5–82 and Preface and Part I by Michael Beaney in
Frege, 1997, pp. 47–78.)
Frege, G. 1880/1881. Booles rechnende Logik und die Begriffsschrift
(1880/1881. (In Frege [1969], pp. 9–52. English translation “Boole’s Logical
Calculus and the Concept-script” in Frege, 1979, pp. 47–52.)
Frege, G. 1884. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch-mathematische
Untersuchung über der Begriff der Zahl. Breslau: W. Koebner. (English
translation by J. L. Austin, The Foundations of Arithmetic: a Logico-
Mathematical Enquiry into the Concept of Number, New York: Harper
Torchbooks, 2nd rev. ed., 1953.)
Frege, G. 1891. Funktion und Begriff. Jena: Hermann Pohle. (In Frege, 1969,
pp. 125–143. English translation by Peter Geach in Frege, 1997,
pp. 130–148.)
Frege, G. 1892. Über Sinn und Bedeutung. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und
philosophische Kritik, 100, 25–50. (English translation by Max Black, “On
Sinn and Bedeutung,” in Frege, 1997, pp. 151–171.)
Frege, G. 1893/1903. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik; Begriffsschriftlich
Abgeleitet, Volumes I and II. Jena: Verlag von Hermann Pohle. (Edited and
translated into English as Basic Laws of Arithmetic by Philip A. Ebert,
Marcus Rossberg, and Crispin Wright, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
2013.)
Frege, G. 1897. Logik. (In Frege, 1969, pp. 137–163. English translation by
Peter Long and Roger White, “Logic (1897),” in Frege, 1997, pp. 227–250.)
Frege, G. 1918/19. Der Gedanke. Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Ide-
alismus, I, 58–77. (English translation by Peter Geach and R. H. Stoothoff
in Frege, 1984, pp. 342–362 and in Frege, 1997, pp. 325–346.)
Frege, G. 1969. Frege: Nachgelassene Schriften, Band I. Hamburg: Felix
Meiner Verlag. (Edited by Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel, and Friedrich
Kaulbach.)
Frege, G. 1979. Posthumous Writings. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80
References
Frege, G. 1980. Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence. Oxford: B.
Blackwell. (Edited by Gottfried Gabriel, Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel,
Christian Thiel, Albert Veraart; abridged from the German edition by Brian
McGuinness, translated by Hans Kaal.)
Frege, G. 1983. Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel (Edited by Gottfried Gabriel,
Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kambartel, and Christian Thiel). Hamburg: F.
Meiner. (English translation in Frege, 1980.)
Frege, G. 1984. Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Frege, G. 1997. The Frege Reader. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. (Edited
by Michael Beaney.)
Gödel, K. 1930. Die Vollständigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funk-
tionenkalküls. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik, 37, 349–360.
(Reprinted with English translation in Gödel, 1986, 103–123.)
Gödel, K. 1931. Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathemat-
ica und verwandter System I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik, 38,
173–198. (Reprinted with English translation in Gödel, 1986, 144–195.)
Gödel, K. 1946. Remarks Before the Princeton Bicentennial Conference
on Problems in Mathematics. (Reprinted with English translation in
Gödel, 1990, 150–153.)
Gödel, K. 1964a. On Undecideable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Sys-
tems. (Lectures given at the Institute for Advanced Study, February–May
1934. Transcribed by S. C. Kleene and J. B. Rosser. In Gödel, 1986,
pp. 346–369, with a Postscriptum, namely Gödel, 1964b.)
Gödel, K. 1964b. Postscriptum to the 1934 Princeton Lectures, 1964.
(Postscriptum added June 3, 1964 to the reprinting of Gödel, 1964a, in Gödel,
1986, 369–371.)
Gödel, K. 1986. Collected Works, Volume I: Publications 1929–1936. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. (Edited by Solomon Feferman et al.)
Gödel, K. 1990. Collected Works, Volume II: Publications 1938–1974. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. (Edited by Solomon Feferman et al.)
Goldfarb, W. 2018a. Moore’s Notes and Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathe-
matics: The Case of Mathematical Induction. (In Stern, 2018, pp. 241–252.)
Goldfarb, W. 2018b. Wittgenstein against Logicism. (In Reck, 2013,
pp. 171–184.)
Goodstein, R. 1957a. Critical Notice of Remarks on the Foundations of
Mathematics. Mind, LXVI, 271–286.
Goodstein, R. 1957b. Recursive Function Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
81
Gowers, T. 2002. Mathematics: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gowers, T. 2017a. A Dialogue Concerning the Need for the Real Number Sys-
tem. (At www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~wtg10/reals.html, accessed January
30, 2017.)
Gowers, T. 2017b. What Is So Wrong with Thinking of Real Numbers as
Infinite Decimals? (At www.dpmms.cam.ac.uk/~wtg10/decimals.html,
accessed January 30, 2017.)
Haller, R., & Puhl, K. (eds.). 2002. Wittgenstein and the Future of Philosophy.
A Reassessment after 50 Years. Vienna: öbv&hpt.
Hardy, G. H. 1941. A Course of Pure Mathematics (8th ed.). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. (10th ed. [1952, with index] republished as
Hardy [2008].)
Hardy, G. H. 2008. A Course of Pure Mathematics (10th [1952, with index]
ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harrington, B., Shaw, D., & Beaney, M. (eds.). 2018. Aspects after Wittgen-
stein: Seeing-As and Novelty. New York: Routledge.
Hellman, G., & Cook, R. T. 2018. Hilary Putnam on Logic and Mathematics
(vol. 9). Cham: Springer International Publishing AG Springer.
Herken, R. (ed.). 1988. The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hintikka, J. (ed.). 1995. From Dedekind to Gödel: Essays on the Development
of the Foundations of Mathematics. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Hobson, E. W. 1927. The Theory of Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory
of Fourier’s Series (vol. I). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
(Revised and enlarged 3rd ed.; 1st ed., 1907, 2nd ed., 1921.)
Hrbacek, K., & Jech, T. J. 1999. Introduction to Set Theory (3rd revised and
expanded ed.). Boca Raton: CRC / Taylor and Francis.
Irvine, A. (ed.). 2009. Philosophy of Mathematics. Amsterdam/Oxford:
Elsevier.
Kennedy, J. 2017. Turing, Gödel and the “Bright Abyss.” (In Floyd and
Bokulich, 2017, pp. 63–92.)
Kennedy, J. 2020. Gödel, Tarski and the Lure of Natural Language: Logical
Entanglement, Formalism Freeness. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Krebs, V., & Day, W. (eds.). 2010. Seeing Wittgenstein Anew: New Essays on
Aspect Seeing. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kripke, S. 1982. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language: An Elementary
Exposition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82
References
Kuusela, O., & McGinn, M. (eds.). 2012. The Oxford Handbook of Wittgen-
stein. Oxford University Press.
Lillehammer, H., Mellor, D. H., & Mellor, D. H. 2005. Ramsey’s Legacy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maddy, P. 1997. Naturalism in Mathematics. Oxford, New York: Clarendon
Press; Oxford University Press.
Maddy,
P.
2005.
Three
Forms
of
Naturalism.
(In
Shapiro,
2005,
pp. 437–459.)
Maddy, P. 2007. Second Philosophy: A Naturalistic Method. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Maddy, P. 2011. Defending the Axioms: On the Philosophical Foundations of
Set Theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Maddy, P. 2014. The Logical Must: Wittgenstein on Logic. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Makovec, D., & Shapiro, S. 2019. Friedrich Waismann: The Open Texture of
Analytic Philosophy. Cham: Springer International Publishing AG Palgrave
Macmillan.
Mancosu, P. 2008. The Philosophy of Mathematical Practice. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Marion, M. 1998. Wittgenstein, Finitism and the Foundations of Mathematics.
New York: Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Marion, M. 2003. Wittgenstein and Brouwer. Synthese, 137, 103–127.
Marion, M. 2007. Interpreting Arithmetic: Russell on Applicability and Witt-
genstein on Surveyability. Travaux de logique, 18, 167–184.
Marion, M. 2011. Wittgenstein on the Surveyability of Proofs. (In Kuusela and
McGinn, 2012, pp. 138–161.)
Marion, M., & Okada, M. 2018. Wittgenstein, Goodstein and the Origin of the
Uniqueness Rule. (In Stern, 2018, pp. 253–271.)
Martin, C. (ed.). 2018. Language, Form(s) of Life, and Logic: Investigations
after Wittgenstein. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Menger, K. 1994. Reminiscences of the Vienna Circle and the Mathemat-
ical Colloquium (Vol. 20). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic/Springer Sci-
ence+Business Media.
Monk, R. 1990. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. New York/
London: Free Press/Jonathan Cape.
Moyal-Sharrock, D. 2015. Wittgenstein on Forms of Life, Patterns of Life, and
Ways of Living. Nordic Wittgenstein Review, Special Issue on Forms of Life,
21–42.
Mühlhölzer, F. 2002. Wittgenstein and Surprises in Mathematics. (In Haller and
Puhl, 2002, pp. 306–315.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
83
Mühlhölzer, F. 2006. “A Mathematical Proof Must Be Surveyable”: What Witt-
genstein Meant by This and What It Implies. Grazer Philosophische Studien,
71, 57–86.
Mühlhölzer, F. 2010. Braucht die Mathematik eine Grundlegung? Ein Kom-
mentar des Teils III von Wittgensteins BEMERKUNGEN ÜBER DIE
GRUNDLAGEN DER MATHEMATIK. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Kloster-
mann. (English translation to appear in the Anthem Studies in Wittgenstein
Series.)
Mühlhölzer, F. 2012. Wittgenstein and Metamathematics. (In Stekeler-
Weithofer, 2012, pp. 103–128.)
Mühlhölzer, F. 2014. How Arithmetic Is about Numbers: A Wittgensteinian
Perspective. Grazer Philosophische Studien, 89, 39–59.
Narboux, J.-P. 2014. Showing, the Medium Voice, and the Unity of the
Tractatus. Philosophical Topics, 42(2).
Olszewski, A., Wolenski, J., & Janusz, R., (eds.). 2006. Church’s Thesis After
70 Years. Frankfurt/Paris/Ebikon/Lancaster/New Brunswick: Ontos Verlag.
Paris, J., & Harrington, L. 1977. A Mathematical Incompleteness in Peano
Arithmetic. (In Barwise, 1977, pp. 1133–1142.)
Parsons, C. 1983. Frege’s Theory of Number. In Mathematics in philosophy (p.
150–175). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Poincaré, H. 1904. La Science et l’Hypothèse. Flammarion.
Potter, M. 2000. Reason’s Nearest Kin: Philosophies of Arithmetic from Kant
to Carnap. New York: Oxford University Press.
Potter, M. 2005. Ramsey’s Transcendental Argument. (In Lillehammer, Mellor,
and Mellor, 2005, pp. 71–82.)
Putnam, H. 1962. It Ain’t Necessarily So. The Journal of Philosophy, LIX,
658–671.
Putnam, H. 1990. Realism with a Human Face. Harvard University Press.
Putnam, H. 1992. Renewing Philosophy. Harvard University Press.
Putnam, H. 1999. The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body and World (vol. 112).
Columbia University Press.
Putnam, H. 2004. Ethics without Ontology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Putnam, H. 2012. Philosophy in an Age of Science: Physics, Mathematics, and
Skepticism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. (Edited by Mario De
Caro and David Macarthur.)
Putnam, H. 2016. Naturalism, Realism, and Normativity. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. (Edited by Mario De Caro.)
Quinon, P. 2020. Implicit and explicit examples of the phenomenon of deviant
encodings. Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric, 63(76), 53–67.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84
References
Ramsey, F. P. 1923. Review of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus by Ludwig
Wittgenstein. Mind, 32(128), 465–478.
Ramsey, F. P. 1926. The Foundations of Mathematics. Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society, Series 2, 25(1), 338–384.
Ramsey, F. P. 1930. On a Problem of Formal Logic. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, Series 2, 2–3(1), 264–286.
Reck, E. H. (ed.). 2013. Logic, Philosophy of Mathematics, and Their His-
tory: Essays in Honor of W. W. Tait (Vol. 36). Milton Keynes, UK: College
Publications.
Ricketts, T. 2014. Analysis, Independence, Simplicity and the General
Sentence-Form. Philosophical Topics, 42(2), 263–288.
Rodych, V. 2002. Wittgenstein on Gödel: The Newly Published Remarks.
Erkenntnis, 56(3), 379–397.
Rogers, B., & Wehmeier, K. 2012. Tractarian First-Order Logic: Identity and
the N-Operator. Review of Symbolic Logic, 5(4), 538–573.
Russell, B. 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge/New York: Cam-
bridge University Press/Norton. (1st ed., 1903; 2nd ed., 1938.)
Russell, B. 1914. Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific
Method in Philosophy. Chicago: Open Court Publishing Co.
Russell, B. 1920. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (2nd ed.). Lon-
don/New York: Allen and Unwin/Macmillan. (1st ed., 1919.)
Russell, B. 1936. The Limits of Empiricism. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, 36, 131–150.
Shanker, S. 1987. Wittgenstein and the Turning-Point in the Philosophy of
Mathematics. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Shapiro, S. 1982. Acceptable Notation. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic,
23(1), 14–20.
Shapiro, S. (ed.). 2005. The Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Logic and
Mathematics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shapiro, S. 2008. Identity, Indiscernibiity, and ante rem Structuralism: the Tale
of i and  i. Philosophia Mathematica, 16, 285–309.
Shapiro, S. 2012. An “i” for an “i”: Singular Terms, Uniqueness and Reference.
The Review of Symbolic Logic, 5, 380–415.
Shapiro, S. 2018. Changing the Subject: Quine, Putnam and Waismann on
Meaning-Change, Logic, and Analyticity. (In Hellman and Cook, 2018,
pp. 115–126.)
Sheffer, H. M. 1913. A set of five independent postulates for Boolean Alge-
bras, with Application to Logical Constants. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society, 14(4), 481–488.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
85
Shieh, S. 2019. Necessity Lost. Modality and Logic in Early Analytic Philoso-
phy. Volume I (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sieg, W. 2009. On Computability. (In Irvine, 2009, pp. 535–630.)
Skolem, T. 1923. The foundations of elementary arithmetic established by
means of the recursive mode of thought, without the use of apparent variables
ranging over infinite domains. (In van Heijenoort, 1967, pp. 302–333)
Sluga, H., & Stern, D. (eds.). 2018. The Cambridge Companion to Wittgenstein
(2nd rev. ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Snyder, E., & Shapiro, S. 2019. Frege on the Real Numbers. (In Ebert and
Rossberg, 2019, pp. 343–383.)
Steiner, M. 1975. Mathematical Knowledge. Cornell University Press.
Stekeler-Weithofer, P. (ed.). 2012. Wittgenstein: Zu Philosophie und Wissen-
schaft. Hamburg: Verlag Felix Meiner.
Stern, D. G. (ed.). 2018. Wittgenstein in the 1930s: Between the Tractatus and
the Investigations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sullivan, P. 1995. Wittgenstein on The Foundations of Mathematics, June 1927.
Theoria, 61, 105–142.
Sundholm, G. 1992. The General Form of the Operation in Wittgenstein’s
Tractatus. Grazer Philosophische Studien, 42, 57–76.
Tao, T. 2006. Analysis I. Gurugram, Hindustan India: Hindustan Book Agency.
Travis, C. 2006. Thought’s Footing: A Theme in Wittgenstein’s Philosophical
Investigations. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
Turing, A. 1936. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2,
1936/7(42), 230–265. Corrections in Turing, 1937.
Turing, A. 1937. On computable numbers, with an application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem: A Correction. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society, Series 2, 1937(43), 544–546.
Turing, A. 1942–44. The Reform of Mathematical Notation and Phraseology
[1944-45]. (Unpublished manuscript. In Turing, 2013, pp. 245–249; online
at www.turingarchive.org/search/, King’s College Online Archive.)
Turing, A. 1948. Intelligent Machinery. (Unpublished report for the National
Physical Laboratory. In Turing, 2013, pp. 501–516.)
Turing, A. 2013. Alan Turing – HisWork and Impact. Amsterdam/Burlington,
MA: Elsevier. (Edited by S. Barry Cooper and Jan van Leeuwen; collected
papers of Turing with commentary by experts.)
van Heijenoort, J. (ed.). 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Math-
ematical Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
(Reprinted 2002)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86
References
Van Heijenoort, J. 1967. Logic as Calculus and Logic as Language. Synthese,
17, 324–330.
Waismann, F. 1936a. Einführung in das mathematische Denken. Vienna:
Springer. (English translation by Theodore J. Benac, Introduction to Mathe-
matical Thinking: The Formation of Concepts in Modern Mathematics. New
York: Harper, 1959; Dover reprint 2003, references to this edition.)
Waismann, F. 1936b. Über den begriff der identität. Erkenntnis, 6(1), 56–64.
Waismann, F. 1976/1997. The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy (2nd ed.).
London: Macmillan.
Waismann, F. 1982. Lectures on the Philosophy of Mathematics. Amsterdam:
Rodopi.
Weiss, M. 2017. Logic in the Tractatus. Review of Symbolic Logic, 10(1), 1–50.
Weyl, H. 1918. Das Kontinuum: Kritische Untersuchungen über die Grundla-
gen der Analysis. Leipzig: Verlag von Veit und Comp. (English translation
by S. Pollard and T. Bole, The Continuum, Dover Publications, New York:
1994. References are to this translation.)
Whitehead, A. N., & Russell, B. 1910. Principia Mathematica. Cambridge:
University Press. (3 vols., 2nd ed., 1927.)
Wittgenstein, L. 1974. Philosophical Grammar. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
(Edited by Rush Rhees, English translation by Anthony Kenny.)
Wittgenstein, L., & Waismann, F. 2003. The Voices of Wittgenstein, the Vienna
Circle: Original German Texts and English Translations. London: Rout-
ledge. (Edited by Gordon P. Baker.)
Wright, C. 1980. Wittgenstein on the Foundations of Mathematics. Harvard
University Press.
Wright, C. 2001. Rails to Infinity: Essays on Themes from Wittgenstein’s
Philosophical Investigations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Acknowledgments
Mauro Engelmann and Sanford Shieh insightfully commented on early ver-
sions of this manuscript, suggesting many important improvements, with
Sanford framing for me the current debate over second-order generalization
in TLP. Zeynep Soysal and Juliette Kennedy inspired me with their writings in
philosophy of mathematics, giving me crucial feedback on the material in §4.5,
Juliette especially on the final manuscript. Felix Mühlhölzer provided me thor-
ough comments on the final manuscript and years of conversation, friendship,
and breakthrough writing about the Later Wittgenstein’s views of mathematics.
The Boston University Center for the Humanities, under the direction of
Susan Mizruchi, generously funded my time to write this Element.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
From the time Penny Rush completed her thesis in the philosophy of mathematics
(2005), she has worked continuously on themes around the realism/anti-realism divide
and the nature of mathematics. Her edited collection The Metaphysics of Logic
(Cambridge University Press, 2014), and forthcoming essay ’Metaphysical Optimism’
(Philosophy Supplement), highlight a particular interest in the idea of reality itself and
curiosity and respect as important philosophical methodologies.
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
Stewart Shapiro is the O’Donnell Professor of Philosophy at The Ohio State University, a
Distinguished Visiting Professor at the University of Connecticut, and a Professorial
Fellow at the University of Oslo. His major works include Foundations without
Foundationalism (1991), Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology (1997),
Vagueness in Context (2006), and Varieties of Logic (2014). He has taught courses in logic,
philosophy of mathematics, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of religion, Jewish
philosophy, social and political philosophy, and medical ethics.
About the Series
This Cambridge Elements series provides an extensive overview of the philosophy of
mathematics in its many and varied forms. Distinguished authors will provide an
up-to-date summary of the results of current research in their fields and give their own
take on what they believe are the most significant debates influencing research, drawing
original conclusions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Elements in the Series
Mathematical Structuralism
Geoffrey Hellman and Stewart Shapiro
A Concise History of Mathematics for Philosophers
John Stillwell
Mathematical Intuitionism
Carl J. Posy
Innovation and Certainty
Mark Wilson
Semantics and the Ontology of Number
Eric Snyder
Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Juliet Floyd
A full series listing is available at: www.cambridge.org/EPM
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108687126 Published online by Cambridge University Press

