Collins
E A P
riting
earn to write better 
academic essays
Els Van Geyte
Academic Skills Series

Collins
E A P
Learn to write better 
academic essays
Els Van Geyte
Academic Skills Series

Collins
HarperCollins Publishers 
77-85 Fulham Palace Road 
Hammersmith 
London W6 8JB
First edition 2013
Reprint 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
© HarperCollins Publishers 2013
ISBN 978-0-00-750710-8
Collins® is a registered trademark of HarperCollins 
Publishers Limited
www.collinselt.com
A catalogue record for this book is available from the 
British Library
Typeset in India by Aptara
Printed in China by South China Printing Co.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior 
permission in writing of the Publisher. This book is sold 
subject to the conditions that it shall not, by way of trade 
or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise 
circulated without the Publisher’s prior consent in any 
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is 
published and without a similar condition including this 
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
HarperCollins does not warrant that www.collinselt.com 
or any other website mentioned in this title will be 
provided uninterrupted, that any website will be error 
free, that defects will be corrected, or that the website or 
the server that makes it available are free of viruses or 
bugs. For full terms and conditions please refer to the site 
terms provided on the website.
If any copyright holders have been omitted, please contact 
the Publisher who will make the necessary arrangements 
at the first opportunity.
(=  You can trust Collins COBUILD
The 4.5-billion-word Collins Corpus is the world’s largest 
database of the English language. It is updated every 
month and has been at the heart of Collins COBUILD 
publishing for over 20 years. All definitions provided in 
the glossary boxes in this book have been taken from the 
Collins COBUILD Advanced Dictionary1.

About the author
Els Van Geyte has been working at the English for International Students 
Unit at the University of Birmingham for over a decade, where she has 
been teaching English for Academic Purposes on presessional and 
insessional courses. She has authored two books in the Collins English for 
Exams Series: Reading for IELTS and Get Ready for IELTS Reading. She 
has also published Foreign Language courses.
Acknowledgements
I’d like to thank the many people that have helped shape this book. First 
of all, I am grateful to the students I have taught and learnt from over the 
years. I’d like to mention the following people, who let me have examples 
of their writing: Ali Abdalla Elhouni, Badr Alhamdan, Becky Cai, Becky 
McCarthy, Beyan Hariri, Guido Martinez, Ibrahim Fahad A1 Dossary, 
Jack McCarthy, Maher Ghaneim Nawaf, Meng Yao, Netje Nada, Pham 
Huyen, Srwsht M . Amin, and Zhiyang Jiang. I would also like to say 
thank you to Josie Underhill and Susy Ridout who arranged for me to 
have some of the essays.
Thank you also to everyone at HarperCollins for their support, and to 
Daniel Rolph, Verity Cole and Alison Silver.
I am also grateful to the many people who have written books, articles 
and hand-outs about academic English that have helped me in my career 
and who ultimately inspired me to do the same.
As always, my heartfelt thanks to John and Becky McCarthy, and 
everyone else who has been there for me throughout my own writing 
process.

Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Essay purpose and instructions
■ understand what academic writing is
■ understand the purpose of essays
* analyse essay titles
Reader expectation and essay structure
■ plan your essay structure
■ guide your reader with signposting and cohesion
■ understand paragraph structure and how to connect paragraphs
Essay content and language
■ explain the time frame, situation and certainty
■ define key terms and concepts
■ indicate the importance of the topic and organization of the essay
■ use organizational patterns and visuals
■ understand the language of conclusions
Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
■ understand formality in register and style
■ understand efficiency in register and style
■ understand modesty in register and style
■ understand clarity in register and style
Accuracy
* improve accuracy
■ choose tlye correct tense
■ focus op/subject-verb agreement
■ use punctuation correctly
■ use articles correctly
■ become aware of common errors
Research and analysis
* develop research skills
■ identify suitable sources
■ develop note-making skills
■ decide on level of detail and what is relevant
■ develop critical thinking skills

Contents
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9
Chapter 10 
Chapter 11
Appendices
Glossary 
Answer key
Reading comprehension
■ enhance reading comprehension
■ analyse sentence structure
■ analyse noun phrases
■ identify structural and argumentational signposts 
Authority
■ develop a clear point of view
■ state your opinion
■ use ‘I’, ‘we’ and other personal pronouns appropriately
■ evaluate the strength of your own arguments
Integrity
■ acknowledge the ideas of others
■ know when to cite
■ know whether to quote or paraphrase
■ use citing and referencing techniques
■ understand plagiarism better
■ avoid plagiarism
Paraphrasing
■ use a technique to paraphrase accurately
■ use paraphrases to show own opinion
■ integrate paraphrases grammatically
■ use paraphrases to summarize
Essay process and presentation
■ the stages in the essay writing process
■ time management 
* presentation
■ other types of academic writing
Appendix 1 -  Essay examples: Taking your writing 
up to the next level 
Appendix 2 -  Responding to marking criteria and feedback 
Appendix 3 -  Useful phrases
d  POWERED BY COBUILD
76
90
100
114
132
148
158
161
165
172

Introduction
Collins Academic Skills Series: Writing will build on your existing writing skids to enable 
you to produce successful academic essays.
Designed to be used on a self-study basis to support English for Academic F imposes or study 
skills courses, it is intended for students on pre-sessional or Foundation courses as well as 
for first year undergraduate students.
The book has eleven chapters which focus on helping you understand what is expected 
of you at university. It will help you with research, planning, organization, grammar, 
paraphrasing and much more. It will make you think about:
■ 
the writing purpose (Chapter 1)
■ 
the expectations of the academic reader (Chapters 2 and 4)
■ 
content and research (Chapters 3 and 6)
■ 
academic principles (Chapters 4, 5, 8 and 9)
■ 
language points (Chapters 3, 5, 7 and 10)
■ 
the writing process from start to finish (Chapter 11)
At the back of the book you will find:
■ 
example essays: a short essay and a complete university essay, with comments on their 
strengths, weaknesses and differences
■ 
advice on how to respond to marking criteria and assignment feedback
■ 
a glossary of key terms
■ 
a comprehensive answer key.
Chapter structure
Each chapter includes:
■ 
Aims -  These set out the skills covered in the chapter.
■ 
A self-evaluation quiz -  By doing this you are able to identify what you already know on
the subject of the chapter and what you need to learn.
■ 
Information on academic expectations and guidelines on how to develop academic 
skills -  These sections will help you understand university practices and expectations so 
you know what is required.
■ 
Practical exercises -  These help you develop the skills to succeed at university. You can 
check your answers at the back of the book.
■ 
Tips -  Key points are highlighted for easy reference and provide useful revision 
summaries for the busy student.
■ 
Glossary -  Difficult words are glossed in boxes next to where the text appears in the 
chapter. There is also a comprehensive glossary at the back of the book.
■ 
Remember section -  This is a summary of key points for revision and easy reference.

Introduction
Authentic academic texts
The book uses excerpts from academic essays, written by students who study a variety of 
subjects, so that you can apply what you learn to your own academic context.
Glossary boxes
Where we feel that a word or phrase is difficult to understand, we have glossed this word 
or phrase. All definitions provided in the glossary boxes have been taken from the Collins 
CO BU ILD  Advanced Dictionary. At the end of the book there is a full alphabetical list of 
the most difficult words from the book for your reference.
Using Writing
You can either work through the chapters from Chapter 1 to Chapter 11 or you can choose the 
chapters and topics that are most useful to you. The Contents page will help in your selection.
Study tips
■ 
Each chapter will probably take between three and four hours. Take regular breaks and 
do not try to study for too long. Thirty to sixty minutes is a sensible study period.
■ 
Regular study is better than occasional intensive study.
■ 
Read the chapter through first to get an overview without doing any exercises. This will 
help you see what you want to focus on.
* 
Try the exercises before checking the Answer key. Be an active learner.
■ 
When writing your own essays, refer back to the appropriate sections and exercises in the 
book. If possible, ask a more experienced writer to give you feedback on your essay drafts.
■ 
All university departments are different. Use the information in the book as a guide to 
investigating your own university department.
■ 
Read carefully any information you receive from your department about what and how 
to write.
■ 
Don’t think of an essay as a finished product, but as a learning process. It is an
opportunity to show that you can find out information about a subject, develop your 
own ideas about it, organize your thoughts and communicate your understanding
to others. Don’t rush this process, but find out what works best for you. Adapt the 
suggestions in this book to suit your learning style and context.
■ 
With practice, writing will become easier, and your confidence will grow so that you 
can show your tutors your true ability and potential. We wish you every success in your 
academic career.
Other titles
Also available in the Collins Academic Skills Series: Research, Lectures, Numbers,
Presenting, and Group Work.
d  POWERED BY COBUiLD
7

1
Essay purpose and instructions
A im S  /  
understand what academic 
/  
analyse essay titles
writing is 
/  
understand the purpose of essays
©
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1
I understand what academic writing is.
agree
disagree | not sure
2
I understand the purpose of essays.
agree
disagree 1 not sure
3
I know the academic meaning of instruction words in essays.
agree
disagree | not sure
4
I can find key words in essay titles to help me understand 
what I am expected to write.
agree
disagree | not sure
5
I can analyse the structure of an essay question to give a full 
answer and include the right information.
agree
disagree | not sure
6
I know who to go to at my university if I need advice about 
an essay.
agree
disagree | not sure
T l P  
/  
When you start your degree, you will come across a lot of new words which
are specific to your new environment but everybody seems to think you already 
understand them. Don’t worry about this, but look them up as soon as possible. In this 
book, the words are explained in the glossary boxes and they are all in the glossary at 
the back.

1 Essay purpose and instructions
What is academic writing?
Glossary
d isse r ta tio n
(dissertations) 
N-COUNT 
A dissertation 
is a long formal 
piece of writing 
on a particular 
subject, especially 
for a university 
degree.
Academic writing is writing which is done by scholars (students or 
academics) for other scholars to read. It can take many forms: journal 
articles, textbooks, dissertations, group project reports, etc. Although 
students are increasingly being asked to write different types of academic 
text, the essay still remains the most popular type of assignment.
Essays are written by students and are likely to be read by one person 
only: their tutor. The essay can be set as a coursework assignment to 
assess a student’s understanding of a module, or as an exam question.
For more information on some other types of academic writing, see Chapter 11.
The purpose of essays
Glossary
d isc ip lin e
(disciplines)
N-CO UNT
A discipline is a 
particular area of 
study, especially 
a subject of 
study in a college 
or university.
Essays are a common form of assessment, for example in disciplines such 
as Business, International Relations, Law, Elistory, Geography, Theology, 
Communication Studies, Education and Economics.
There are many reasons why essays are still the most popular type of 
assignment. One of them is that they ask students to demonstrate more 
than just knowledge. To demonstrate the purpose of essays, let’s have 
a look at the difference between an ordinary question and an essay 
question.
Ordinary question: Why did William o f Normandy win the Battle of 
Hastingsi
Essay question: William o f Normandy’s victory at the Battle of
Hastings has often been attributed to his large and 
well-prepared army. However, without strategy and 
good fortune, he might well have lost the battle. 
Discuss. 
-po
The answer to the ordinary question could be a list of items, in no 
particular order of importance. The essay question directs the writer 
more: the student has to mention the size and the preparedness of the 
army, describe William’s strategy and the fortunate circumstances, and 
decide how important these elements were for the victory. In order to 
come to a conclusion about this, the writer has to do research. This is
9

Writing
Glossary
a ttr ib u te  to
(attributes to, 
attributing to, 
attributed to)
VERB
If you attribute 
something to 
an event or 
situation, you 
think that it 
was caused by 
that event or 
situation, 
se m in a r  
(seminars) 
N-CO UNT 
A seminar is a 
class at a college 
or university 
in which the 
teacher and a 
small group of 
students discuss 
a topic.
c o n v e n tio n
(conventions)
N-CO UNT
Academic 
conventions 
are traditional 
methods or styles 
of academic 
writing.
indicated in the language: in the first sentence ‘has often been attributed 
to’ tells the student that there are a lot of sources which she should look 
at to explain this point of view, and ‘However’ in the second sentence 
suggests that there is also evidence available for a contrasting opinion. 
The word ‘Discuss’ makes it clear that there are different points to be 
made, which should be mentioned and commented on, so that the writer 
can make a decision about which side she is on.
Clearly, a finished essay demonstrates more than just the knowledge 
students were taught about a subject. The writers will have:
■ 
found out much more than what they were taught in lectures and 
seminars
weighed up the evidence about different points of view
■ 
developed thehyown point of view
■ 
increased their knowledge and their depth of understanding
! ■ 
trained their memory to remember the important facts
* 
undertaken activities that prepare them for their future profession.
By writing the information down in essay form, they will have: 
t/ * 
organized their thoughts
V" * 
practised and improved their ability to communicate in writing
y * 
shown awareness of the reader, of academic conventions and the way
others write in their discipline.
If you plan your time so that you can read up on a topic, think critically 
about it, follow the essay instructions, and express your view clearly in a 
well-organized text, you deserve a good grade.
For more information on all these aspects, see later chapters.
Analysing essay titles
Although we called the instructions in the example essay question a 
question, there was no question mark. The ‘questions’ are really titles. 
You will need to put the full title on your first page; don’t be tempted to 
summarize the question and write your own title.

1 Essay purpose and instructions
©
Your tutor may give you a long essay title, which needs to be broken 
down into smaller parts before it can be addressed. All essay questions 
will include instruction words, such as ‘discuss’. For international 
students, these words can be particularly tricky. If you look them up in a 
dictionary, you may find a large number of meanings that do not always 
correspond exactly to the more specific meaning in the academic context, 
which is also why translations into other languages you may speak are 
unlikely to help.
For example, this is a dictionary definition o f ‘discuss’:
1 
to have a conversation about; consider by talking over; debate
2 
to treat (a subject) in speech or writing => the first three volumes discuss 
basic principles
(Source: Collins CO BU ILD  Advanced Dictionary, 2008)
Both definitions suggest that ‘discuss’ means ‘talk (or write) about’. 
However, in an academic context ‘discuss’ often means something more 
specific: in order to discuss, you need to refer to different aspects of a 
topic, look at the benefits and drawbacks of different points of view, and 
give your own conclusion.
Exercise 1
In which of these essay questions does ‘discuss’ mean ‘write about, describe’, and 
in which does it mean more? Put a tick in the correct column.
= write about, 
describe
= give different points of 
view (and your opinion)
1 Parliament today is less effective than it has evey 
been. Discuss. 
\M i
t
i s '
2 Discuss the geological history and likely method 
of formation of the Lewisian rocks.
S '
3 Discuss the circumstances that can lead to a 
dramatic change in the use of technology.
S
4 ‘Current stem cell technology is sufficiently 
advanced for use in medicine.’ Discuss.
i s
11

Writing
r " 
\ Exercise 2
In the table below, match the instruction words in the centre column with 
the correct academic meanings on the left. Some of the first and/or second 
dictionary definitions of the instruction words on the right may help you find 
their academic meaning.
! Academic meaning
Instruction word j Dictionary definition
! a state similarities and differences 
j 
: 
and draw conclusions about them, i
1 show 
j to make, be, or become visible or 
j 
noticeable
1 b point out weaknesses and strong A 
j 
points 
-■—  
/  I
x 2 compare
to regard something as similar, 
to examine in order to observe 
similarities or differences
1 C demonstrate with supporting /  
j 
! 
evidence 
j
3 justify
/  
j
to prove to be just, valid or reasonable 
j
i..................................]..................................... ;
| d decide on the value or
j 
importance of a topic by giving 
i
; 
reasons or evidence 
—  
;
4 consider
U
—
to think carefully about a problem or 
! decision
i e give information but without ...—f]
■ 
going into details 
" \  
i
^ s/criticize
/ 
/
/ 
/ 
:
1 
/ 
:
to judge (something) with disapproval, to j 
evaluate (study) or analyse (something) 
j
j f give support for an argument
6 assess -
\ J
j to judge the worth, importance, etc. of, 
j 
; to evaluate 
j
| g briefly and clearly describe the 
j 
main points 
_
\! 7 indicate
I to point out or show 
j
j h give your views about a topic 
j
8 analyse
i i 
; /
i to break down into components or 
i essential features, to examine in detail 
j 
j in order to discover meaning, essential 
j 
; features 
j
j i give detailed reasons or say why j  
j 
something is the case 
<1 ' 
/
i 
9 outline1'
1 to give the main features or general idea 
j
; j break down a topic into its 
H- 
: 
different aspects and look at how 
j 
they relate
j lO ^xplaih^
j to make (something) comprehensible, to 
j 
i justify by giving reasons for one’s actions j 
: or words 
j
T i p  
/  
Read academic texts in your own discipline to become more aware of the conventions. 
For example, the instruction word ‘sketch’ can have completely different meanings 
dependent on the context. To an engineer it can mean ‘draw’, to a theologian it is more 
likely to mean ‘give a brief description’.
12

Analysing key words and structure of essay titles
1 Essay purpose and instructions
Glossary
irr e le v a n t a d j 
If you describe 
something 
such as a fact 
or remark as 
irrelevant, you 
mean that it is 
not connected 
with what you 
are discussing or 
dealing with.
Underlining or highlighting key words is a good technique which you are 
probably familiar with. The following is an example of an IELTS-type 
essay question where the most important words have been highlighted 
(you may find a similar question in the TOEFL test):
Learning to manage money is one o f the key aspects o f adult life. 
How in your view can individuals best learn to manage their money?
(Source: Collins, Writing for IELTS, 2011)
There is usually more information in the question than you think: it can 
direct you both in terms of structure and content. Even a single word in 
the question can give you a useful clue about what you are expected to 
write in your essay. For example, look at the following essay title:
Does the media always misrepresent minority groups?
This question tells you that the media does misrepresent minority groups, 
but you will still have to briefly explain this in your essay, with examples. 
7 The question is whether this is always the case, i.e. whether there are 
examples you can give where the media represents minority groups 
correctly. You will also have to try and explain why this is or is not the 
case.
When the essay question is very long however, you should also analyse 
the structure of the question to make sure you give a full answer without 
including irrelevant information.
You could follow these steps:
a 
Look for the topic.
b  
Use your knowledge of language to find all areas and make a note of
the instruction words. (  
>e , kt-sGxftte ) <kt 
&*> ry^surt' ■
c 
Use your knowledge of language to decide what should be included
in your answer and what should be excluded.
Let’s apply this to the following question.
0
Discuss the factors that give rise to parallel trade and evaluate how 
much o f a problem this is for international marketers. Give examples 
of what a firm can do to minimize the problemI

5 
(\ 
l‘€^ovci') 
tn 
proJamX
Pj u  a a a ^
p -^ ^y -fy^ 1 
Pr^p^rfy &LO<~\<Zr. I'Y \jr ^
f r r f * * )  
n f v t s .
P4t'^w ^ t 
Y 'fc "  
-
U 
I,. „7V i ^ f ^ ( 
The topic i s ‘parallel trade’
ur\
Is I
yYwtrliAA ' P y
b 
There are two sentences. The first sentence has two parts: ‘Discuss the 
factors ... AND evaluate ...’ . The second sentence asks you to ‘give 
examples’. In total there are three parts.
Part
Instruction
What I should do
1
Discuss the factors that 
give rise to parallel 
trade.
■ define parallel trade
■ state and describe the different causes of 
(what ‘gives rise to’) parallel trade
2
Evaluate how much of 
a problem this is for 
international marketers.
■ introduce international marketing (what it is)
■ answer the questions: Is parallel trade a 
problem for international marketing? How 
much (= in which ways)? How important is 
this problem and why? (‘evaluate’ refers to 
importance and reasons)
3
Give examples of 
what a firm can do to 
minimize the problem.
■ answer the question: what can be done to 
reduce the problem of parallel trade?
■ give examples of actions that firms have taken 
(with positive results) or give suggestions 
about what they could do and say why this 
would work
Note that your knowledge of language helps you understand the 
question: ‘this’ refers to ‘parallel trade’, and ‘a’ in the second sentence tells 
you that you do not have to give examples of one specific firm, as ‘a’ here 
means ‘any’.
The word ‘and’ is very important. Normally it means that you will need 
to look at two areas separately. Occasionally you could look at both areas 
at the same time.
©
Exercise 3
Analyse the following essay question using steps a, b and c. Label your answers 
a, b and c, writing step c in a table as shown above.
What are the most important key urban planning theories of the post-war period? Outline 
in summary their key characteristics. With reference to one o f these theories, explain how 
they help us understand the nature o f planning practice.
14

1 Essay purpose and instructions
/  
Increase your knowledge of language: get into the habit of observing the way academic 
language is used by others, and think about the meaning of words and phrases in their 
context.
The next exercise shows you how, by comparing phrases in different 
contexts, you can work out the meaning.
Exercise 4
Look at the example essay titles and work out the meaning of the highlighted 
word or phrase. Choose the correct multiple-choice option.
1
Why, when Britain has one o f the richest economies, does homelessness still occur?
‘when’ here means:
A 
at a certain time 
B 
at the same time 
C 
despite the fact that 
D only if
2
How is local government financed at present and how, if at all, should that financial system be 
reformed? Discuss.
‘if at all’ suggests:
A 
we need to take everything into consideration 
B 
or perhaps this is not the case 
C 
if not
D 
in your opinion
There are support structures in place at university. You will probably be 
given the name of a personal tutor, who you can see for advice. Moreover, 
it is unlikely that you will be given very difficult titles to start with -  the 
first essays will probably require a relatively easy content and structure in 
comparison to the ones you have to write later in the academic year. You 
are likely to get a number of titles to choose from, and the ones in the first 
semester may ask you to ‘describe’, or ‘explain’, before you are asked later 
on to carry out more difficult tasks, such as ‘analyse’ or ‘evaluate’. The 
required essay length will probably also be relatively short to start with.
15

Writing
Remember that it is perfectly acceptable to ask the tutor who set the 
question if you have understood it correctly. You will, however, need to 
show that you have put effort into interpreting the question.
r \ \  Exercise 5
Look at the notes made by a student about an essay question. Put /  if you think 
he is right about it, X if you disagree, and ‘?’ if you think the student might have 
misunderstood something. Use a dictionary to help you.
An appreciation o f politics is essential to understand the opportunities for and limitations 
on development.
Analyse this statement with reference to a selected country and by reflecting on 
development theory and thinkers.
This Is. muj u n d e r sta n d in g . The question, a s k s  nee to:
1 cfw e a n  Idea of how developm en t a n d  -politics are 
related.
(In  g e n e ra l, -probably in, the In tro d u ctio n )
z  state what op p o rtu n ities for developm en t conce fro n t 
politics.
(referen.ee to m y selected country, i.e. CMlna, with 
the supporting) development theory a n d /o r  thinieers)
3  state what c o n str a in ts fo r developm en t c-ome front 
■politics.
(reference to m y selected country^, i.e. CMlna, with 
the su p p o rtin g  developm en t theory a n d /o r  th in k e rs)
'ap p reciation  of politics': I thin-te l should look. at 
the Im portan ce of politics In  order to relate it to the 
developm ent.
(somehow ! wornder i f  there is a n y  furth er m e a n in g  
than, that or how l c a n  Incorporate the app reciation  o f 
politics into m y an,swers)
The question, sa y s theory a n d  thinJeer. For the th in k e r 
part: in, m y u n d e r sta n d in g , a th in ker is a person, that 
states his/her idea about c e rtain  topics. So in, this case, 
1 c a n  u se his/her opinion, a n d  thought to support m y 
poin t, it does not have to be theory related.
16

1 Essay purpose and instructions
Tip 
/  
You will have to make many decisions about whether to include something in your 
essay or to leave it out, but you can work out the answer: remind yourself of the 
purpose of essays in general, and go back to your analysis of your specific question.
Remember
Break down the essay question to identify its exact meaning.
To analyse a question you need to look in detail and use your 
knowledge of English to understand the clues about what is expected.
Don’t be afraid to ask for help with understanding the question.
You need to demonstrate the ability to evaluate different points of 
view and demonstrate research skills.
You need to show awareness of the reader, of academic conventions 
and the way others in the discipline write.
17

Reader expectation and 
essay structure
A l m s  /  
plan your essay structure 
/  
understand paragraph structure and
/  
guide your reader through structure, 
how to connect paragraphs 
signposting and cohesion
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I know how to write an outline for an essay based on an 
analysis of the essay title.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I know what I am normally expected to include in the 
introduction to an essay.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I always write my introduction first.
agree [ disagree | not sure
4  
I know what to include in the conclusion of an essay.
agree | disagree [ not sure
5 
I know how to use signposting and cohesion to guide the 
reader through my essay.
agree | disagree | not sure
6 
I know what the parts of a paragraph usually are.
agree | disagree | not sure
Making your essay more readable
Your assessor is mainly concerned with the content of your essay. This 
partly depends on your research skills but also on your ability to get your 
points across.
You can make your essay easy to read in a number of ways, e.g. by using 
a clear structure and by guiding the reader through the text.
18

2 Reader expectation and essay structure
Essay structure
Glossary
o u tlin e  (outlines) 
N-VAR 
An outline 
is a general 
explanation or 
description of 
something, 
p r in c ip le  
(principles)
N-COUNT 
The principles 
of a particular 
theory or 
philosophy are 
its basic rules or 
laws.
When you wrote shorter essays, you learnt that the basic structure is: 
introduction / main body / conclusion, and that each separate idea 
needs a new paragraph. When you are writing a longer essay, the main 
principles are the same, but there are some differences.
The same three-part structure applies to any essay. In a longer essay, the 
introduction and conclusion will be more developed, but the biggest 
change will be in the main body, where there will be much more space to 
develop ideas. Although each new idea will still require a new paragraph, 
these separate ideas are likely to need more than one paragraph each to 
be fully developed. Before you do your research, you won’t know how 
many paragraphs you will be writing, but you are able to do an outline of 
the structure of the whole essay from the start.
The method we used in Chapter 1 can be used here to help with structure 
too. Look back at the example essay question about parallel trade and 
the three-step analysis of this question in the section Analysing key words 
and structure o f essay titles.
This breakdown will lead to your outline, which can function as a plan 
for your writing as well as a starting point for your research.
Here, it would look like this:
Introduction
M ain body
Conclusion
. p . ! . h i T.
background about parallel-trade, including definition
Paragraph 1
■ a description of each of the causes of pakallebtrade 
Paragraph 2 
^
 I ^
^
■ the aims of international-markeTers / an explanation of the 
different problems that parallel trade causes them
Paragraph 3
■ the importance of these problems, with reasons
Paragraph 4
■ possible solutions with examples
f e /
 
fu U .:-.
comments about how big the problem of parallel trade is for
and if it can be successfully minimized
.. 
i-i 
Ji-.'.j.....................................................................................................
19

Writing
Exercise 1
Write an outline for the essay title below, from Chapter 1 Exercise 3. Before 
you start the outline, look at the Answer key for Chapter 1 for the three-step 
analysis of the essay title.
What are the most important key urban planning theories o f the post-war period? Outline in 
summary their key characteristics. With reference to one o f these theories, explain how they help 
us understand the nature o f planning practice.
The last thing you want to do is confuse your reader, so it is important to 
structure your work in the order that they would expect to find it.
The introduction
In an introduction you would normally:
1 
give a description or explanation of the situation or problem (more 
general)
2 
say why this situation or problem (or a more specific aspect of it) is 
important
3 
say what your aim is, what your position on the situation or problem 
is, and whaFthe organization of your essay will be.
The main function of the introduction is to show your reader you have 
understood the question and to indicate that you will be discussing it 
fully. You do not have to go into detail yet.
It is difficult to say how long an introduction should be, but as you won’t 
be starting to discuss anything in any detail yet, it won’t be long. It is 
likely to be less than 10 per cent of the word count.
Until you have finished your research, you might not be sure exactly 
what the structure of your essay will be, so it is a good idea to write your 
introduction last.
20

2 Reader expectation and essay structure
O
Exercise 2
Look at these two introductions of 1,000-word essays. Look at the three things 
you would normally include in an introduction above and then think about how 
you would improve the introductions.
‘It would, be better not to let pupils use calculators at all in their maths lessons.’ Discuss.
Introduction A 
'
it may be a good idea wot to Let students use calculators iw maths classes, but there are 
also reasons why they caw be helpful. This essay w ill first address the role calculators 
play by cowsideriwg their beweflts, as well as possible drawbacks. Thew I shall presewt a 
simple argumewt for the use of calculators by exflku.lkb.wg the fuwdflwtewtfll purpose of aw 
educatlowal system, before cowcludlwg that we should wot reject the use of calculators lw a 
learwlwg ewvirowmewt. 
. 
. 
, i 
. 
,
^
 
^ p U r f 4
^
 
' ,v,f >
Introduction B
Calculators are useful pieces of eguipmewt a wd are very popular iw mathematical learwlwg. 
However, some of their fuwctiows have raised cowcerws with worths teachers aboutthe harmful 
effects owthe studewts' ability to improve their learwiwg. This is why the idea of forbiddiwg 
the use of calculators is beiwg discussed. I thiwfe this opiwiow isjtoo_^xtreme flwd limited.
^  
oC\r\ 
Ma-S- 
/OC *
^  
lu i* 
p atM " tfr U-'-ew
______________________ I A C tu ff-t 
'*rr"^c 
VHVl^Tf  -ytK~ 
S-i>vV
The conclusion
Your conclusion will normally consist of:
1 
a summary of the main ideas (related to the importance to the topic)
) /
2 
a summary of your evidence (with your evaluation of it)
3 
your overall conclusion / your answer to the question.
21

Writing
The conclusion will be more specific than the introduction, as you will 
already have mentioned the ideas you are commenting on. Do not add 
any new evidence or ideas: if you have more to say, then this should be 
done in the body of the text. Like your introduction, your conclusion is 
likely to contain no more than 10 per cent of the word count.
C
 
\ Exercise 3
Look at the ending of this 1,500-word essay and identify the three different 
parts of the conclusion. The first part has been identified for you.
(2?
C l)
The main body
The main body of the text consists of a number of paragraphs, blocks of 
text that develop ideas. We will look at them in more detail below in The 
structure o f paragraphs.
For more information on the language used in introductions, conclusions and the main body, see 
Chapter 3.
Guiding your reader
The longer your piece of writing is, the more important it is that you 
guide your reader through it. You can do this by telling them about 
the structure (signposting), by using language that shows that the 
different aspects of your writing relate to each other (cohesion) and by 
distinguishing clearly between paragraphs (paragraphing).
in  ooiA.cLn.si.oiv, (1) new teckivologi.es have provided a rem.ark.abLe breakthrough 
whi-ch has allowed society Itse lf to become in cred ib ly ad v an ced , they have 
n ow beoovie so hig h l y developed that they have provoked ethical questions
thTs is that they oaiv be 
controlling, but as we have seen, they are liberating at the sauce time, with 
cyborg (m echanical body parts) technology even being able to save people's 
Lves. Another area of thought is related to the area o f fem inism .: despite 
their large contribution to the -fields of science and technology, women s t ill 
have to struggle with in e q u a lity  in  everyday and scie n tific life, w h ile  new 
technologies have undoubtedly influenced postm .odem think.ing, the am ount 
of research activity in  the -field in  recent years suggests that the influence 
m ay also w ork the other w ay round.
about thei-r m orality. One o f the m a m  reas.oi^s fo r
22

2 Reader expectation and essay structure
Glossary
c o h e sio n
N-UNCOUNT 
If you write with 
cohesion, you 
use language that 
shows that the 
different aspects 
of your writing 
relate to each 
other, fit together 
well, and form a 
united whole.
d istin g u ish
(distinguishes,
distinguishing,
distinguished)
VERB
If you distinguish 
one thing 
from another 
or distinguish 
between two 
things, you 
show, see, or 
understand 
how they are 
different.
g u ild  (guilds) 
N-CO UNT 
A guild is an 
organization of 
people who do 
the same job or 
activity.
Let’s have a look at how a student did this in a short piece of writing. (He 
has made several mistakes, which are discussed below.)
This, essay w ill Look, at how you.iAg ■people c-aiA. be encouraged to vote ire 
two maitA.ways.
F irstly , the govem .m eiA .t should devise cam paigns to in fo rm  then*. aiA-d 
iwc-rease their awareness of the importance of votimg.
To start with, these cam paigns should be as in fo rm a l as possible amd 
tcse electronic media su.ch as blogs, websites or awy other meatus that 
are accessible to that geweratiow. Later on., the m edium  could also 
iiA/du.de newspapers ai/vd posters.
(fiAz additioiA,, the coiA.teiA.ts of the campaigns should iiA.clu.de the fact 
that votiiA^) is the right of every citizen, amd state the benefits of 
votircg su.ch as the ability to choose the right representative for a 
particular area. It is also importatAl to inform the you.iA,g citizens that 
it is easy for them to vote.
Finally, after all the campaigns are done through the maiA-y 
information chaiA.iA.els, the government may also promote votiiA-g 
by educating people in. colleges, stu.deiA.t guilds and other student 
organizations.
In  conclusion, by ta k in g  these approaches, hopefully more youcwg 
people w ill vote.
The student has indicated in the first sentence that there are two 
approaches he will discuss (but he could have made it dearer that these 
are media campaigns and educational programmes). He uses linking 
words to indicate the structure of his discussion: ‘Firstly’ and ‘Finally’ 
introduce the two areas he will discuss. He also uses other linking words.
Many students have been taught that linking words are very important, 
but some use these types of words too often. This is the case in this 
example. ‘In addition’ could be crossed out without it affecting the 
meaning: ‘the contents of the campaigns’ gives more information about a 
topic that was already raised, which is a natural thing to do, so the reader 
does not need to be told there is a link. It is also a bad choice of linker: 
it does not introduce an additional idea, but a more specific one. Here 
the linking words are all used at the beginning of a paragraph, making 
the text sound very repetitive (if you read it out loud, you will notice the 
pattern repeating). To sum up, linking words can be helpful to guide the 
reader, but you should only use them if they are necessary; make sure you 
use an appropriate one, and vary their place in the sentence.
23

Writing
Some of the words refer to other words in the text:
■ 
the pronouns ‘them’ and their’ in the second sentence refer to ‘young 
people’ in the first sentence
■ 
‘these campaigns’ in the third sentence refers back to the campaigns 
mentioned in the second sentence, and ‘that generation’ refers back to 
‘young people’
■ 
the article ‘the’ in ‘the medium’, ‘the campaigns’ and ‘the young 
citizens’ indicates that these ideas have already been mentioned.
(yiyU&kspsi
We can group some of the words mentioned, to show how a number of ideas 
are developed throughout the text. There are words related to the areas of:
■ 
youth: young people, that generation, young citizens
l/
■ 
education: campaigns, inform, awareness, contents, fact, information 
channels, educating, contents, colleges, student guilds, student 
organizations
■ 
media: blogs, websites, medium, newspapers, posters, information 
channels
■ 
voting: vote, citizen, choose, representative
Visually, a space has been left between each paragraph. This is the right 
thing to do, although indents are also acceptable. In this short piece of • 
writing, there was no need to have so many paragraphs. For example, the 
one that begins with ‘To start with’ develops the idea from the previous 
paragraph and should have been part of that one.
\
]
 Exercise 4
Cross out the unnecessary and/or incorrect linking words in the paragraph 
(taken from an IELTS-type essay). Do not make any other changes.
it is widely believed that the in.tern.et is mate iwg our lives easier thaw they were in, the 
■past. Furthjgfmore, the in,tern,et is used as a consultation, method for solviwg man-y 
problems. Ovo the oyft han-d, man.y people use the Ln,tern,et for consulting others who are 
in, a different location., for example, teachers, physicians an-d community researchers. 
Moreover, there are social networteing sites such as Faceboote to communicate with old 
friends, and so you can, get together with them, and other people you have wot seen, in, 
a long time. "The internet has also Led to an, increase in, opportunities for face-to-face 
communication and people can talte with each other at any time an-d an-ywhere. fd: 
l^ t, people with disabilities can, use the in-terwet to help overcome obstacles so that they 
have better access to education- an,d other services.
I  Glossary
in d e n t (indents) 
N-COUNT
An indent is 
the space at the 
beginning of a 
line of writing 
when it starts 
further away 
from the edge of 
the paper than 
all the other 
lines.
24

2 Reader expectation and essay structure
r
 
\ Exercise 5
Underline the pronouns in this text and think about how they are used to 
connect the ideas in the text.
iiA.tenA.et users caw get LiA.fbriAA,atioiA, aw y ttrue they M ed(£t)/La th e ir iiA.teriA.et 
colA-iA-ectioiA.. wheiA. the iiA.teriA.et w as -first iiAtroetucecUit^ feature w as to share 
iiA.fbrrwatiow. A s  tiiAA,e has goiA-e by. kwore fWcctioiA.s aiA-d toots have beeiA. added. These 
iiAe.tw.de blogs. w hich allow  users to sharercheir coiAA.iAA.eiA.ts awct opiiA.ioiA.s. aiA.d so cia l 
wetwortes. w hich enable people to p ass o ia. kwessages g u icle ly .
The structure of paragraphs
Glossary
obstacle
(obstacles) 
N-CO UNT 
You can refer 
to anything that 
makes it difficult 
for you to do 
something as an 
obstacle.
A paragraph normally has three parts:
1 
a sentence that introduces the topic (and possibly links it to the 
previous paragraph)
2 
a number of sentences that develop the topic (with analysis, evidence 
or detail)
3 
a sentence that concludes the topic (or links it to the next topic/ 
paragraph).
Have a look at some examples, where the sections have been numbered
(1),(2) and (3).
(1) Corruption is the most important point to focus on, because this 
originates where the power is. (2) Corruption can take many forms: 
political, which involves corruption in a country’s legal system and 
police force, and economic, for example misuse of taxes and foreign aid 
money. (3) A country with a corrupt government is not able to develop.
(I) Another obstacle facing the developing nations today is capital 
flight. (2) This is the rapid movement of investments out o f a country. 
This can be for economic reasons, such as an increase in taxes. It 
often also happens as a result o f political problems such as internal or 
external wars. (3) It has a negative impact on the trust that people have 
in their governments, and investors tend to invest in other countries.
25

Writing
T i p  
/  
Did you notice how common the pattern of three is? There are three parts in an
essay, three parts in an introduction, three parts in a conclusion, and three parts in a 
paragraph. When you plan and write your essays, the three-part structure can help you 
order and shape your ideas.
Connecting paragraphs
Glossary
argument
(arguments)
N-VAR
An argument is 
a statement or 
set of statements 
that you use 
in order to try 
to convince 
people that your 
opinion about 
something is 
correct.
measure
(measures)
N-COUNT
When someone, 
usually a 
government or 
other authority, 
takes measures 
to do something, 
they carry 
out particular 
actions in order 
to achieve a 
particular result.
policy (policies) 
N-VAR
A policy is a set 
of ideas or plans 
that is used as a 
basis for making 
decisions, 
especially in 
politics, 
economics, or 
business.
When you start a new paragraph, you are indicating that the previous 
point is finished and you are starting something new. However, this new 
paragraph is not completely separate from the previous one, and you 
will have to indicate what the relationship is. For example, if you start 
with ‘Another argument in favour of calculators is 
then the language 
you have chosen clearly indicates to the reader that you are discussing a 
different argument (‘Another’) with the same purpose (‘in favour’).
When you use a construction like ‘another argument is’, what you are 
doing is summing up what has been said previously and naming it 
(‘argument’). You are also announcing what you are going to be doing 
next (‘another argument’), or perhaps indicating that you are going to 
give more specific information (‘This argument ...’).
The following are examples of words like ‘argument’, which are often 
used with the word ‘this’ (or ‘these’, when used in the plural) in this way.
analysis, approach, concept, context, data, definition, environment, 
evidence, factor, function, interpretation, issue, measure, method, 
period, policy, principle, procedure, process, research, response, sector, 
structure, theory
Here is an example of how this pattern can be used. Note that some 
information has been left out of the paragraphs.
The government wanted to introduce social security as part of a larger 
policy to improve society. [...] Another important message was that 
they felt that the state and the individual should work together. This 
meant that social security was not intended to discourage people from 
taking responsibility for improving their lives [...].
These guiding principles [...].
26

2 Reader expectation and essay structure
Note that the first sentence of a paragraph will normally show how it 
fits in with the overall structure of your plan, and may indicate what will 
happen next.
/  
Check the logical construction of your own writing by highlighting the most important 
sentences in each paragraph. If you just read those, would the essay make sense? If not, 
make changes.
For more information on the language used to introduce, develop and connect paragraphs, see 
Chapter 3.
Remember
Essay structure -  introduction / body / conclusion. The body is likely 
to have a large number of well-developed and linked paragraphs.
Planning -  do an initial outline based on an analysis of the essay 
question; a more detailed one can be done after the research.
Introduction -  includes an explanation of the situation and its 
importance, as well as a statement of the aim of the essay and an 
indication of its structure.
Conclusion -  includes a summary of the main ideas, a review and 
evaluation of the evidence, and an answer to the question.
Paragraphs have a three-part structure with their own introductory 
and concluding sentence(s), and analysis, evidence or detail 
in between; they often refer forward and backwards to other 
paragraphs.
Readability becomes very important in long essays. The reader needs 
to find the right information where they expect it; they also need to 
be told about the structure of the essay and find cohesive text, divided 
into paragraphs and signposted throughout.
Linking words need to be used in longer text; they need to be chosen 
carefully and used only where necessary.
27

3
Essay content and language
Aims /  
explain the time frame, situation 
and certainty 
/  
define key terms and concepts 
</ 
indicate the importance of the topic 
and organization of the essay
/  
use organizational patterns and 
visuals
/  
understand the language of 
conclusions
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I think the first sentence of an essay should be very general.
agree ] disagree | not sure
2 
I know how to define key terms and concepts in an 
introduction.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I can indicate the importance of the topic in an introduction 
correctly.
agree | disagree | not sure
4 
I know how to introduce the aim and organization of the 
essay.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I can use organizational patterns and visuals in an essay.
agree ! disagree | not sure
6 
I understand how to use tenses correctly in a conclusion.
agree | disagree | not sure
Content and language
In Chapter 2, we discussed how your essay question can be analysed 
to produce an outline that shows in which section of your essay you 
will discuss each part. Here we look at the content and language of 
introductions, the main body and conclusions.
28

3 Essay content and language
The beginning of the essay
The essay has to introduce the topic, so must start with a relatively 
general comment. The trick is not to over-generalize, otherwise the 
comment becomes meaningless. For example, the following first sentences 
of an essay are too vague or general.
vWiou ^
First sentence of essay
Comments
Possible improvement
1 Most people hold 
firm ly to the belief 
that the English 
language is one of 
the m-ost popular 
Ianguages in,the 
world.
English being ‘one of the most 
popular languages in the world’ 
is a fact, not a belief. The student 
wanted to use ‘hold firmly to 
the belief’, but this language is 
not right for the content. The 
statement also seems to be too 
general: it is not clear what this 
essay will be about.
The 6 rvgli.sk 
Ianguage is spoteen 
as a first or secorvd 
language by 
m illions of people, 
a red is becoming 
even more popular 
because of its 
use in  electronic 
communication.
2 Nowadays, m any 
people spen-d their 
time watching 
TV or suyfiiAZ) the 
in.tem.et.
As in the previous example, this 
sentence says something that 
most people know, but it does 
not clearly introduce the topic of 
the essay. The word ‘nowadays’ 
is over-used at the beginning of 
essays.
In the past few 
decades,, traditional 
pastimes suck as 
reading bootes kave 
become less popular 
tkan technology- 
based activities suck 
as watching TV and 
surfing the internet.
3 The n-eed to have a 
higher degree has 
often- been- debated 
recently.
L,/
The student says something that 
perhaps is not really true: has this 
reallyoften been debated recently? 
It looks as if she wanted to use the
The recent rises in  
tuition fees for first 
and higher degrees 
kave led to sharps
language ‘has often been debated 
recently’, which could be said 
about any topic (the need to use 
cleaner energy, the need for more 
public transport, etc.). Even if it is 
true about the debate, the sentence 
is not saying much.
drops, in  student 
lAjuywbers.
The following examples get it just right: they are not too general, nor too 
specific.
j 4  (globalization a 2±st century pkenomenon, Is having a great impact on 
j 
countries, n o tju st economically, but also culturally, educationally and socially.
; 5 c-ont-pared to the p ast we are livin g in, an. educated era, with more people 
j 
attending universities an-d in creasin g num bers goin-g abroad to stu d y .
29

You will have noted from the comments about examples 1-3 that it is 
not a good idea to memorize words or phrases (‘nowadays’, ‘has been 
debated’) to insert your ideas into. It is better to start from your ideas and 
then to think about how they are best expressed. To do this, you need to 
think about the time frame, the situation and the certainty.
Although you are generalizing, don’t be vague about the situation and 
when it happened.
If we analyse what the verbs describe in examples 1-5 above (looking 
at the improved versions in the column on the right for 1-3), we will 
find the present continuous tense (is becoming, is having, are living) in 
examples 1, 4 and 5, which describe ongoing processes. In examples 2 
and 3 the present perfect is used, to link a past situation with the present 
(have become, have led). There is also an example of the present passive 
form (is spoken) in example 1. Notice that generalizations are unlikely to 
be expressed in the past tense, unless they are about historical situations.
For more information on tenses, see Chapter 5.
Notice that generalizations often use plural nouns (people, tuition fees, 
student numbers), and uncountable nouns, i.e. a noun that has no plural 
form (globalization). It would be strange to use a singular countable noun 
(person, student), unless it represents a larger category as in the example 
‘A student needs to be able to raise thousands o f pounds a year’, where the 
word ‘student’ does not relate to a particular student, but to 'any student’. 
The sentence has the same meaning as ‘Students need to be able ...’
In the original sentence in example 2, the writer states a truth, without 
saying what the relevance of it is for the essay. The addition of 
‘technology-based activities’ in the improved version tells the reader why 
surfing the internet and watching TV are mentioned, especially as there 
is also a contrast with ‘traditional pastimes’. This adds an element of 
precision, even though the sentence remains general.
Precision is also present in example 4: we know which aspects of 
globalization the writer is going to discuss. By mentioning the four 
categories, the writer also indicates the structure of the essay.
You need to indicate very clearly what is fact and what is not.
The claim in (improved) example 1 is that the English language is 
popular, and the evidence for this is that it is spoken as a first or 
second language by millions of people and that it is used in electronic 
communication (which makes it become even more popular).

3 Essay content and language
Glossary
c a u tio u s a d j 
If you describe 
someone’s 
attitude, 
language, or 
reaction as 
cautious, you 
mean that it is 
limited or careful.
Definitions
The writer of example 1 presents a fact and evidence. In example 3, we 
can read about a cause and its effect. These claims are strong, as evidence 
is provided.
When less evidence is available, it is better to be cautious and use 
language that expresses your degree of certainty. This can be done 
through adverbs (usually, often, undoubtedly, probably, unlikely), 
adjectives (most, some, certain) and modal verbs (can, may, might).
For more information on cautious language, see Chapters 8 and 9.
Definitions can occur in the introduction or the main part of the essay. 
Key concepts are most likely to be defined in the introduction.
It is normal practice to define your key terms, but it becomes especially 
important to include definitions if you use the words in a meaning which 
is different from the usual interpretation, or if you are using one meaning 
when there are many.
Look at the following ways to define an important concept:
synthesis
is
the process of combining
is commonly defined as
objects or ideas into a 
complex whole
is generally understood 
to refer to
can be described as
the process of combining 
objects or ideas into a 
complex whole
is called
synthesis
is known as
is referred to as
Notice how the passive form is often used (is defined, can be described, is 
called, is known, is referred to). Typical mistakes that are made with the 
passive are forgetting the form of ‘to be’ and not using the past participle 
(e.g. writing define where it should be defined). Remember that passive 
forms have a form of ‘to be’ followed by the past participle of the verb.
31

Writing
Study the tables above. Then try to do Exercise 1 without looking back at 
the tables.
\
\
 Exercise 1
Define the word ‘comprehension’ (= the act or ability to understand) in two 
ways: once starting the sentence with the word, and once ending the sentence 
with the word. Use passive forms of the verb each time.
Definitions often use relative clauses after a noun to indicate which 
person or which thing we are talking about, for example:
Notation is a method o f recording music, which is based on naming 
the notes by letters and also includes ways o f distinguishing the value 
o f notes in terms o f duration.
The relative pronoun that is used here is ‘which’. Other relative pronouns 
that are often used after a noun in this way are who, whose (which 
expresses possession), and that.
s
32
Exercise 2
Fill in the missing relative pronouns in the following definitions. Choose from
that, which, whose and who.
1 
The wines of a bird or insect are the two parts of its body 
tV<l  ^  Ua. 
uses for
flying. 
/t v v f
2 
A wing of an organization, especially a political organization, is a group 1 f| 1'* ' '' -l' ■'** is
part of it an d  
T  
'-yfV-'has a particular function or particular beliefs.
3 
In a theatre, the wings are the sides of the stage 
 
are hidden from the
audience by curtains or scenery.
J>
4 
A choir is an organized group of singers ^  K°_______ usually sing in church services.
5 
A long, thin container 
 
yOU Squeeze in order to force paste out is referred
to as a tube.

3 Essay content and language
If you are using a particular definition or interpretation, perhaps from a 
choice of many, you will need to use longer structures to explain this, and 
may need to include a justification of your choice. Some examples are:
Using definitions
■ 
For the purposes of this essay, I w ill be usIia^j Kotler's deflrcitlorc of 
societal marteetiwg, because o f its focus owthe orgawizatioiA/s taste to 
meet the weed o f the clients awd to '... deliver the desired satisfactions 
more effectively and efficiently than competitors, in  a w ay that 
preserves or enhances the coi^sunter's and the society's well-being.'
■ 
Although m a n y  different d efin itio n s of marteeting have been 
suggested over the years, ! w ill be u sin g  the one by HCotler 
because o f ... .
■ 
Throughout th is essay, I w ill be u sin g  the word 'cognitive' to refer to 
the different types o f intellectual behaviour.
■ 
In  this essay, the term  'relia b ility ' is used to m ean ...
Indicating the importance of the topic
Superlatives can be useful to indicate that the topic is a relevant one:
(one of) the most 
I significant
i causes o f ...
i is ...
; important
j problems o f ...
(some of) the most 
!
I conditions for ...
i are ...
; aspects o f ...
... is
(one of) the most
significant
important
causes o f ... 
problems o f ... 
conditions for ...
aspects o f ...
The following adjective and noun combinations can also be useful: 
Adjective and noun combinations
an important part, a key role/factor, a great/major problem, a central 
area of, a common problem, an increasing need/concern, heightened 
awareness, rapid development, a dramatic increase, renewed/ 
unprecedented interest, a serious effect/impact on, increasing concern
33

W riting
You can also use the following combinations with adverbs:
is becoming increasingly important, has been extensively researched
Introducing the aim and the organization of the essay
You could use the following patterns:
This essay
will
attempts to
The aims of this essay
are to
examine whether ... 
determine whether
j This essay
i examines whether ... 
j
i determines whether ... 
i
; argues th a t... 
i
I In this essay
; I argue th a t... 
j
i I will discuss ... 
i
i it will be argued that ... 
j
Notice how ‘will’ and present tenses are used (will examine). ‘Will’ is used 
to announce what is to come. Present forms are used (examines) to state a 
fact about the organization of the essay.
There is a choice between passive forms (it will be argued that) or active 
forms with ‘I’ (I will argue that).
When you announce the structure of the essay, the form with ‘I’ is 
common. For example:
l w ill first discuss the reasons why c^ale^ on gl^aiLij becai-we popular lu. the 
secou-d section, I w ill offer expUu'watiorvs for his ervdurirvg popularity, after 
which I w ill explain the part that was play ed by the church arvd the state.
34

3 Essay content and language
The main body: Organizational patterns
Essays can be organized in a variety of ways. Some examples of 
organizational patterns are: comparing/contrasting, problem/solution, 
chronological, description, exemplifying, classifying, themes, definition, 
process, cause/effect, advantages/disadvantages, strengths/weaknesses/ 
opportunities/threats (SWOT).
In shorter essays, it is more likely that a pattern is used throughout the 
whole essay. In longer essays, you are more likely to use a combination.
For example, if you are writing an essay about the Cadbury Company, you 
could use a chronological pattern, in which you write events in the order in 
which they occurred. Within the different periods, you might use cause and 
effect, you could include extended definitions of different business models, 
you could recount a SWOT analysis that was carried out, etc.
{ 
\ Exercise 3
Match the language on the left with the functions on the right.
I Glossary
c h r o n o lo g ic a l
A D J
If things are 
described 
or shown in 
chronological 
order, they are 
described or 
shown in the 
order in which 
they happened
1 A good illustration of this is the study carried out by De Carvalho 
(2012). 
,
2 There are three factors that can explain why the practice haYnot 
become more^widespread. Firstly,... 
\<$~
3 This demonstrated that a different perspective on the problem cat; 
give rise to alternative decisions being taken. 
v__
4 Whereas in Western societies this is the most important factor in 
deciding attractiveness, in Eastern societies this is less so.
listing/classifying 
^giving cause/effect 
exemplifying 
yi comparing/contrasting
Using visuals
Glossary
fig u r e  (figures) 
N-CO UNT
In books, 
journal articles, 
and essays, 
the diagrams 
which help to 
show or explain 
information are 
referred to as 
figures.
In your essays, you may not always need to include visuals, but when you 
do they will be in the main body. You always need to introduce the visual 
in your text before showing it. After the visual, you need to describe 
the most important information contained in it. This may be done by 
comparing or contrasting, describing change over time, interpreting 
statistics, etc.
35

Writing
Glossary
compile
(compiles, 
compiling, 
compiled) v e r b  
When you 
compile 
something such 
as a report, 
book, or table, 
you produce it 
by collecting and 
putting together 
many pieces of 
information.
The visuals could be either tables or figures. The title (also sometimes 
called ‘caption’ or ‘figure legend’) of a table needs to be put above the 
table, but it needs to be put underneath the information for a figure. You 
will need to indicate the source of the table or figure. If you have designed 
or compiled it yourself, then you need to indicate this in the text. For 
example:
The following figure shows an overview o f the different opinions 
expressed in both studies. I have put the negative ones on the left 
and the positive ones on the right.
The language of conclusions
Look at the following conclusion:
The iiA.stLtu.te for Wealth improvement has idetA,tifi£d that a n  opeiA, visitiiA g  
•policy Lia. LiA.tetA.sLve care u n its Ls ciia. im portant aspect of g u a lity  Improvement. 
(±) The aim  o f th is paper was to evaluate an d  compare the benefits an d  ristes 
o f opetA. an d restricted v isitirvg  policies. (2.) A lthough the advantages and 
benefits o f v isito rs fo r patients have been reported in  vario u s stud ies, the ris k s  
and disad vantages have also been discussed.
(3) It ts difficult to adapt the sam e visiting policy across intensive care units 
and every situation should be assessed on an individual basis. TO avoid 
any adverse effects of visits on staff and patients, staff should be educated 
on visitor needs and behaviour and also brochures should be developed and 
provided which outline the visiting policies.
Notice how the student repeats the aim of the paper in sentence (1).
He also says what type of evidence has been discussed in the essay in 
sentence (2). The overall conclusion and recommendations come at 
the end (3).
Have a look at the tenses used in the underlined words in the conclusion 
above. The aim has now been fulfilled, so is referred to in the past simple. 
The essay itself is not completely finished yet, so the present perfect 
isjised: this tense provides a link between the past and the present.
In conclusions that refer to concrete facts, the present tense is used. 
Recommendations are often made by using ‘should’.
36

3 Essay content and language
r
 
\ Exercise 4
Answer the following questions.
1 
Fill in the correct verb forms in the following sentences, taken from conclusions,
a 
This essay (to discuss) 
 
the economic factors that contributed to ...
b 
In this essay, I (argue) ^  
P > 
that globalization is not a recent phenomenon.
C 
This essay (explore) 
___________ the causes of the conflict...
2 
What tense did you use in sentences a-c? 
^a_ 
I kT  p r* pvr/
3 
The following sentences summarize the evidence and give an indication of their
importance. You need to use a different tense here. Which one and why?
a These findings (to suggest) ^ iA-vpri-vh 
th at...
b The evidence (to seem) 
to indicate th at...
C A consequence of this (to be) 
M _______ th at...
Remember
At the start of your essay, don’t give any details but say something 
meaningful.
The language you use (tenses, singular or plural, modal verbs, etc.) 
will depend on the situation you are describing, its time frame and the 
strength of your claims.
Define your concepts, indicate the importance of the topic, and state 
the aims and organization of the essay in the introduction.
Decide on the best organizational pattern for your essay and 
remember that most essays will use a combination of patterns.
Integrate visuals into your essay by introducing them before inserting 
them, labelling them correctly, and explaining the most significant 
information in them.
Use the correct tenses in conclusions to sum up what the essay 
discussed and comment on its importance.
37

Formality, efficiency, modesty 
and clarity
Aims /  
understand formality in register 
/  understand modesty in register
and style 
and style
/  
understand efficiency in register 
/  understand clarity in register
and style 
and style
9
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1
I often use words like ‘big’, ‘good’, ‘a lot’ in my essays.
agree
disagree
not sure
2
It is generally acceptable to use idioms and contractions in 
academic writing.
agree
disagree
not sure
3
I always proofread my essays to make sure I haven’t repeated 
myself.
agree
disagree
not sure
4
I know how to use cautious and impersonal language to 
make my writing modest.
agree
disagree
not sure
5
It is acceptable to use words like ‘thing’, ‘kind of’, ‘stuff’ in 
academic writing.
agree
disagree
not sure
6
I feel I need to write long and complex sentences to write in 
an academic style.
agree
disagree
not sure
38

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
Four principles of academic writing
Glossary
g e n r e  (genres) 
N-CO UNT
A genre is a 
particular type 
of literature, 
painting, music, 
film, or other 
art form which 
people consider 
as a class because 
it has special 
characteristics.
In Chapter 2 we looked at what the person marking your work wants. 
One aspect of this is that you need to demonstrate that you understand 
the conventions of the academic genre.
In this chapter we will be looking at what all academic readers want, i.e. 
the type of register and style that is expected from all scholars.
We will look at four principles of academic writing: Formality, Efficiency, 
Modesty, and Clarity, and consider what they mean for the academic 
writer. For each principle, you will find examples of mistakes students have 
made, followed by explanations and corrections. Try to work out what the 
mistakes are and how you could correct them before you read on.
Formality
Glossary
fo r m a lity
N-UNCO UNT 
If you talk about 
the formality 
of a person’s 
language or 
writing style, 
you mean that 
they are using 
extremely 
formal academic 
language.
Before starting university, students are already aware of the need for 
formal language in essays. The problem is that it can be difficult to know 
what is formal and what is not. You can try to think about it in this way: 
words that are used a lot when speaking (e.g. ‘big’, ‘good’, ‘well’, ‘a lot’), 
or a technique that is used a lot in speeches (e.g. asking the audience 
L-—
questions) are unlikely to be used in formal writing.
what else can, we^expect fronc the in,tew,et? the first thii/cg which we expect au-d 
hope to have is an- improvew-en-t of the services in, the n-earfu.tu.re.
The student asks a question here and then answers it. This is a technique 
used in speeches to involve the audience. In academic writing, the 
writer does not address the audience. An improvement would be: ‘The 
future of the internet will be decided by the needs of its customers. One 
development is therefore likely to be service improvement.’ This takes out 
the question, the word ‘hope’, which is quite personal, and the need for 
‘we’, which-refers to internet customers.
39

Writing
Glossary
analogy
(analogies)
N-COUNT
If you make or 
draw an analogy 
between two 
things, you show 
that they are 
similar in some 
way.
metaphor
(metaphors)
N-VAR
A metaphor is an 
imaginative way 
of describing 
something 
by referring 
to something 
else which is 
the same in a 
particular way. 
For example, if 
you want to say 
that someone 
is very shy and 
frightened of 
things, you might 
say that they are 
a mouse.
sec.oiA.clly, we need to redu.ce the iiA.teriA.et service access fees. Moreover; there are 
alw ays technological develo-pm.eiA.ts In the pipeline.
This follows on from the previous text about the internet, so we can 
avoid the ‘we’ by saying ‘Another customer requirement is a reduction 
in access fees.’ The second sentence contains an idiom, ‘in the pipeline’, 
which means ‘in the process of being completed, delivered, or produced’. 
Idioms are very rare in academic writing, and it is better if you don’t use 
them. The sentence could be improved as follows:
‘Technological advances can also be expected, as companies are always 
developing their systems in order to stay competitive.’
A n a ly sis of a n n u a l fin a n c ia l reports Is a n  art, which liA-volves maiA-y 
complexities. even when they are looking atthesam -e iA.atu.ral beauty, 
am ateur painters an d  great m asters w ill have completely different 
interpretations. differen t people m igh t obtain different conclusions whew 
readiwg the sam-e report.
This student is using an analogy: financial analysis is compared to an 
art form with many complexities. It is not wrong to use an analogy, as 
it involves comparison, which is an academic skill. However, analogy 
and metaphor can be quite poetic in nature, in which case they are 
not academic. The student is going too far in the second sentence. An 
improvement would be: ‘The analysis of financial reports can be said 
to have more in common with art than with science, as it relies on 
interpretation and not just facts. This is why different analysts may reach 
different conclusions.’
Then, there 1s anotherproblem : dLfferent parties' Interests often correspond 
with the fiiA.aiA.clalperform.aiA.ee of the compaiA-y.
‘Then’ is used here to list items (‘First, ... Second, ... Then, ...’). This is 
often done in presentations, but in writing it sounds too informal. The 
sentence can be improved as follows: ‘Another problem is that different 
parties’ interests ...’.
in order to fin d  out more information about the statement, the reader can 
breale It down into its different aspects.
40

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
Glossary
phrasal verb
(phrasal verbs)
N-CO UNT
A phrasal verb 
is a combination 
of a verb and 
an adverb or 
preposition, for 
example ‘shut 
up’ or ‘look 
after’, which 
together have 
a particular 
meaning.
Notice how one-word verbs sound more formal than phrasal verbs: ‘In 
order to investigate further, the reader can analyse the different aspects of 
the statement.’
in c-om^amies. with alternative working environments there seems to be a lot 
more respect for the management.
‘A lot’ is so common in speech that it is best avoided in academic writing. 
It can simply be replaced with ‘much’ in front of an uncountable word 
(fiEehespect’ in this sentence), or ‘many’ if it is countable (e.g. ‘many 
people’).
H-owever, every enterprise cannot develop without the support of society and the 
natural resources of the environment.
]\}v t  
'  ' 
(hflrrrx 
J  (\) 
^
-----
There is a grammatical mistake here: you wouldn’t say ‘every X  cannot’. 
One way of correcting this is saying ‘an enterprise cannot...’. This can be 
made to sound more formal by using ‘no’ instead o f ‘not’: ‘... no enterprise 
can ...’.
 
________________________________________________________
there are not m any recruitment managers vyho would actually use social 
networking sites to gather information aboutpotential employees.
In a similar way to the previous example, we can replace ‘not’ to make 
the sentence more formal: ‘Few recruitment managers would ...’. Where 
‘not ... much’ is used in an essay, it can be replaced with ‘little’.
Firstly, the leader should implement systems which enable the staff to tackle 
their problems together.
An improvement would be: ‘... enable the staff to solve their problems 
together’. ‘Tackle’ is often used in the context of sport, and is quite an 
informal word. There is a good alternative available, so it is better to use 
that here.
patients can't alwaysjudge accurately what is expected of them.
Using abbreviated forms of verbs {can’t, shouldn’t, won’t, etc., instead of 
cannot, should not and will not) is fine in informal writing such as emails, 
but contractions are not acceptable in academic writing.
41

Writing
Tip /  
It is easy to check for contractions when you are proofreading: you can do a software 
search for the apostrophe (’) and, if it is part of a contraction, you can replace it easily.
Formality is not about writing difficult words and constructions. If you 
try to over-complicate your language, it may give the impression you 
are not being respectful of the reader. Instead, when you are explaining 
something in your text, start off simply, then rephrase parts to make the 
writing more formal.
\ 
\ Exercise 1
Is the style in this book formal or informal? Find examples to illustrate your 
answer. Why do you think this style has been chosen?
Efficiency
Glossary
efficiency
N-UNCOONT
Efficiency is the 
quality of being 
able to do a task 
successfully, 
without 
repetition or 
wasting time or 
energy.
Efficient writing fulfils its purpose without saying too much. You 
should use the minimum amount of language that is required, and 
not repeat yourself. When you were writing shorter essays for exams, 
you might have been worried about writing enough words in a small 
amount of time, which may have led to repetition. Avoid this by careful 
proofreading.
To c.om.pare these two theories, several examples of siw-cilar coI'cteivt oaiA, be 
■pointed out between these two theories.
There was no need to repeat ‘theories’. An improvement would be: ‘When 
comparing these two theories, it becomes clear that there are many 
similarities.’
T l P  
/  
Although you are not expected to know every word, the words that relate to the essay 
topic will have featured in the materials you read during your research. Make a note of 
useful vocabulary as you read.
42

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
If you look carefully at academic writing, you will notice that many noun 
phrases are used. Here is an example:
‘In a study, the effect o f weight loss without salt restriction on the 
reduction o f blood pressure in overweight patients was examined.’
Nearly half of the words in that sentence are nouns. Using nouns is 
efficient: you use less space if you are talking about processes (salt 
reduction) without describing the action (they have reduced the salt).
Modesty
\ ' 
\ Exercise 2
Make these sentences more academic by using nouns instead of verbs where 
possible. Underline the verbs first, then transform some of them into nouns, e.g.:
The country would benefit if corporations increase the amount they produce.
An increase in corporate productivity would benefit the country.
1 
The company will have to train their staff hetter so that they can be more efficient., 
» i 
«r- 
<5 
•'•ccvi „ , ^  ^
 
ia a U - 
J)
In this case, there is a difference betvyeen cultures so they need to communicate by using 
varied strategies, 
kyhc- v
TW  
\  
^  
C^'Sh
If they adopt this strategy, they may reduce the costs.
If they create such a unitj jth^y may have better access to marketing information.
 
VpT? '../ _____ ~ : ^.p -»\,■*-________________________________
Glossary
m o d e s ty
N-UNCO UNT 
If you write with 
modesty, you 
use impersonal 
and cautious 
language in your 
writing.
In academic writing you need to be respectful of the ideas of others. In 
your essays it is very unlikely that you would say something like ‘These 
researchers were completely wrong.’ Instead you might say ‘More recent 
research has shown that this is not the case.’ You are supposed to look at 
different angles and say whether you agree or disagree, but you always 
need to remain modest about your opinion. Look at some examples on 
the next page: 
.
Trait theory is the^es^ leadership theory.
43

Writing
Glossary
cite (c ite s, c itin g , 
c ite d ) v e r b  
If y o u  cite  
s o m e th in g , 
y o u  q u o te  it 
o r  m e n tio n  it, 
e s p e c ia lly  a s  a n  
e x a m p le  o r  p r o o f  
o f  w h a t  y o u  a r e  
sa y in g .
(
This statement is too strong: even if the student can explain why this 
theory is useful in comparison to other theories, another scholar could 
easily argue that another one is better. The statement is too confident. The 
student should not use the word ‘best’ and should explain why this theory 
is useful.
stw.oleiA.ts are vgryAveak in  their basic, vo.athtvo.atlc.al knowledge due to over- 
deyeiA.oleiA.ee on, calculators..
This is the student’s opinion, but she cannot write this without evidence. 
She could cite studies that have shown this to be true, or she could 
adjust her language: ‘Some students’ mathematical knowledge may suffer 
because of their over-dependence on calculators.’
A way to ensure academic modesty is to use cautious language. This 
is also called ‘hedging’ language, because ‘to hedge against something’ 
means to protect yourself from its consequences.
in, order to en.courage consum ers to try their goods for the first time, a n-w.rn.ber 
o f promotional methods should be applied as follows: (...)
The student says that the company ‘should’ do something, where he 
should really have made a suggestion (‘could’).
The next step Is to conduct a long-term, observation, am ong the workers to find 
out if  they show a more creative and conscientious approach in  their daily work.
Here, ‘is’ is too strong. The student is saying what he thinks is a good 
idea, so it really is a suggestion. He could have used ‘may be’ or ‘could 
be’.
For more information on cautious language, see Chapter 8.
A common mistake that students make is to use cautious language where 
itis not. necessary. They use ‘would’, ‘might’, ‘likely to’, etc. because they 
have learnt that these verbs are common in academic writing.
A n n u a l fin an cial reports m isfit include information from, financial 
statements and other sources. '
44

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
Glossary
sh a r e h o ld e r
(shareholders)
N-CO UNT
A shareholder 
is a person who 
owns shares in a 
company.
s ta k e h o ld e r
(stakeholders)
N-COUNT
Stakeholders 
are people who 
have an interest 
in a company’s 
or organization’s 
affairs.
c r e d ito r
(creditors)
N-CO UNT 
Your creditors 
are the people 
who you owe 
money to.
Even without knowing much about the subject, we can assume that the 
purpose of financial reports is to give financial information. The verb 
‘might’ needs to be taken out of the sentence.
It would come across as immodest if your essay were to state ‘I did 
I did ..., I did 
Even if you use the ‘we’ form, this would not improve 
matters much. It is possible to use ‘I’ and ‘we’ in certain circumstances, 
however.
For more information on when it is appropriate to use ‘I’ and ‘we’, see Chapter 8.
Here though, we will work on the basis that ‘I’ and ‘we’ should be 
avoided where possible and we will be looking at examples of writing 
where language is used that is not objective enough.
V As we all know,)an enterprise is com.poseet of m any different groups, 
including management (such as the board of directors, the chief executive 
officer; other executives), shareholders, and other influential stakeholders 
(including Uv^d&rs., suppliers, employees, creditors, c,\Asto\M.t\-s, av^d the 
conuccunity).
This is an interesting one: the student is including the reader by saying 
‘we’, so she is making her comment quite personal and suggesting that if 
readers do not know there may be something wrong with them. We can 
say the same thing but make it more impersonal: ‘It is commonly known 
that an enterprise ...’
in my opinion, the company should do this, because it would offer direct 
business benefits.
The student could say ‘If the company did this, they would receive direct 
business benefits.’ There is normally no need to say ’in my opinion’ as 
your whole essay is a development of your opinion.
For more information on developing a clear point of view, see Chapter 8.
Non-shareholder stakeholders also play an important role in  corporate 
governance. A s i mentioned before, stakeholders include employees, suppliers, 
local aom.i^tu^ltle& and local governments.
Here, ‘I’ can easily be left out, so it is best to do so.
45

Clarity
Writing
Glossary
clarity
N-UNCO UNT 
The clarity of 
something such 
as a book or 
argument is its 
quality of being 
well explained 
and easy to 
understand.
If your writing has clarity, it means that you have expressed yourself 
clearly and there is no doubt about what you mean.
Your choice of words needs to be specific and precise.
th Is on w.ld help stakeholders to u.ic.derstai/cd the health of public companies, 
by m.eans of a Balance sheet, incom.e .statei-went, statem-ent of c h a f e s  lie. 
FliA.aiA.cial Position and other dbscriptfofiis. -
It is not clear what the student means by the word ‘descriptions’, as he 
seems to be referring to financial information.
We now need to consider how enterprises perform, successfully, (n m.y opinion, 
good corporate governance is the m,ain reason.
At first sight the two sentences don’t seem to relate as the words ‘how’ 
and ‘reason’ do not connect with each other. With careful rereading it 
becomes clearer that the student is saying that good corporate governance 
is the main reason why enterprise^ that operate successfully manage to do 
so. An improvement here would be ‘In the next section we will consider 
the reasons why enterprises are successful and the central role of good 
corporate governance.’
The first owe depends on the situation: they m,ay need to change the leader if 
his style is not suitable.
/7\
The student has chosen ^hisp but this cannot be what she wanted to say, as 
leaders can be male or female. She probably did not want to write ‘his or 
her’ because that is quite awkward. However, there are other solutions: 
‘companies may need to change leaders if their style is not suitable’, orfa_ 
company may need to change its leader if their style is not suitable’. The 
w  plural can be used to refer to a singular person in this type of sentence.
in, short, there are always two sides to every coin.
It is tempting to use sayings, as they often express exactly what you want 
to say in few words. However, they are best used when speaking, not in 
formal writing. In this example, the saying is used as the conclusion of
46

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
Glossary
saying (sayings) 
N-CO UNT
A saying is a 
sentence that 
people often 
say and that 
gives advice or 
information 
about human life 
and experience.
a paragraph, but this is a poor ending. The main reason for not using 
sayings is that they tend to express universal truths or commonly held 
beliefs, and therefore do not demonstrate original, research-based or 
critical thinking. They are also often used in speech, which makes them 
sound informal.
iw con fu sin g the role of author editor etc. t>lba refers, to the I'Rulti-plicXty of the 
text.
The abbreviation ‘etc.’ is not very common in academic text, because it 
forces the reader to come up with more examples themselves. Academic 
writers need to be clear and precise. Here it is hard to imagine what other 
roles the writer is referring to.
The steam. ewgliA,e w as a reliable power source at that tirwe awd used iw mii/u.wg, 
eottow,_railways, etc.
If the steam engine was only used in mining, cotton and railways, then the 
student should simply have put a full stop rather than ‘etc’., but there are 
probably more examples to be given. Here, an improvement would be: ‘... 
used in mining, cotton, railways and other industries.’
There are rwai/u-i things that need to be tateen into consideration, f  
-----------= —  ---------------------------- — 
€■ -o rr s-go
The word ‘thing’ is very imprecise, and there is never a need to use it. 
Simply say what it stands for. Here, the word ‘factors’ could be used. 
Other vague words and phrases to avoid include ‘kind of’ and ‘stuff’.
©
Exercise 3
Replace ‘thing’ in these sentences with a more specific word or phrase.
1 
Non-verbal behaviour has significant effects on every living thhig. 
^ 
^ ^
2 
This environment is non-living things like rocks, water and air. 
C5 
It is necessary from a social point of view to talk about unimportant things sometimes. 1
3
4  
Giving pupils more responsibilities during an already stressful time may not be the wisest 
fhing to do. 
j 
f a J e J L
Stress may not be as negative a thijag for our health as previously thought.
■Mr
47

Writing
Tip 
/  
If you are an international student, you may worry that you might make more
mistakes than native speakers, but everyone makes mistakes. The key is to try your 
hardest to avoid them. Careful proofreading will raise the standards of your work.
Glossary
sub-clause
(sub-clauses) 
N-CO UNT 
A sub-clause 
or subordinate 
clause is a clause 
in a sentence 
which adds to 
or completes 
the information 
given in the 
main clause. It 
cannot usually 
stand alone as a 
sentence, 
dense (denser, 
densest) a d j 
If a text or 
sentence is dense, 
it contains a lot 
of information in 
a small or short 
space.
We have already talked about the need for clear structure and guidance in 
Chapters 2 and 3. Organization is a very important aspect of clarity.
Some students think that academic language is more difficult, and they 
therefore attempt to write very long sentences with many sub-clauses, 
passives and other constructions which are quite complex.
It is true that academic sentences are quite long in comparison to some 
other written genres. They can also look quite dense, because using a lot 
of nouns means including a lot of information in a short space.
It may take you some time to get used to the level of difficulty in the texts 
that you read. However, when you are writing, the principle of clarity is 
more important than considerations of length or complexity.
For information on the academic principle of Accuracy, see Chapter 5.
As a writer, if you write too many impersonal constructions, passives, 
noun phrases and long sentences, you will make it harder for your reader. 
The most important aspect of academic writing is the reader. They will 
prefer a variety of constructions and sentence lengths. They will also 
prefer a shorter, simple sentence that is easy to understand to a complex 
one which does not make much sense or is full of mistakes.
In this chapter we have looked at a number of language issues to avoid.
It is not a full list, but you don’t need one. By doing research, you will see 
what others do and learn from them.
For information on the academic principle of Authority, see Chapter 8, and for information on the 
academic principle of Integrity, see Chapter 9.
T ip  
/  
Focus on the academic principles (e.g. ‘be modest’), not the individual guidelines (‘use 
“may” ’). Observe how others write: each time you read an article, think about its style 
in relation to the academic principles. This way, you will develop a better ‘feel’ for 
academic writing and you will find yourself automatically making the right language 
choices.
48

4 Formality, efficiency, modesty and clarity
0
Exercise 4
Rewrite the following paragraph to make it more academic:
Children who are of school age should do a lot of practice at home by working on their skills and by 
practising and solving a large number of mathematics problems. We should only allow them to use a 
calculator when they want to find out whht the answer to the~ problems was. Sometimes, when-they 
dsxadongxakulatien, the calculator should also be used because not many students would be able to 
do it without one. The impact of this practising is to help them to improve their knowledge and not 
always to rely on the calculator all the time!
Remember
The same academic principles -  formality, efficiency, modesty and 
clarity -  matter in your essays as before, but at university you need to 
be more aware of them and they are even more important.
Formality -  use a formal, academic style.
Efficiency -  avoid repetition of phrases and ideas; careful 
proofreading is essential.
Modesty -  the language needs to be impersonal and cautious where 
appropriate.
Clarity -  although some academic authors write texts that may be 
considered complex, you are expected to write essays that express 
your ideas clearly and precisely.
49

Accuracy
Aims 
/  improve accuracy 
/  use punctuation correctly
/  choose the correct tense 
/  use articles correctly
/  focus on subject-verb agreement 
V become aware of common errors
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I always check the tense of the verbs I have used in an essay 
before submitting it.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I know how to check for subject-verb agreement.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I can use punctuation correctly in my essays.
agree I disagree | not sure
4  
I feel confident about when and when not to use the articles 
‘a ’ and ‘the’ in my writing.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I am aware of common errors and how to avoid them.
agree | disagree | not sure
The academic principle of Accuracy
Glossary
accuracy
N-UNCO UNT 
The accuracy of 
information or 
measurements 
is their quality 
of being true or 
correct, even in 
small details.
As we said in Chapter 4, accuracy is considered important in all types 
of academic writing, and it is even more of an issue when your writing 
is being assessed. An essay which includes avoidable language mistakes 
and looks like a draft will annoy your reader, and may even prevent them 
from understanding what you are trying to say.
50

5 Accuracy
Tenses
Choosing the correct tense for the verb in your sentence can be difficult. 
There is more about this in Chapter 10. Here, we focus on accuracy.
The following tenses are wrong. Read the examples and think about why 
they are wrong.
1 
X According to these documents, the council has considering it
since the 1980s.
2 
X They demonstrated that the council had communicating its
intentions before 1982.
3 
X Their engineers were draw up the plans as far back as 1984.
4 
X Normally, the tourist market will been more affected in an
economic recession.
5 
X In this essay, the Human Fertilization and Embryology Act 1990
will be consider from different points of view.
The simplest answer is that these forms don’t exist, e.g. ‘has considered’ or 
‘has been considering’ are possible combinations, but ‘has considering’ is not.
Subject-verb agreement
A common error is a lack of agreement between the subject and the verb. 
The verb needs to ‘match’ or ‘agree with’ its subject, e.g. it is ‘I believe’, 
‘the director believes’, ‘they believe’. Look at the examples. The subjects 
are underlined and the verbs are highlighted.
X First of all, the company need to interview the employees who have 
been involved in the training programme and gather feedback about 
the course from them.
/  First of all, the company needs to interview the employees who 
have been involved in the training programme and gather feedback 
about the course from them.
X Sales of sweets and other types of junk food has decreased 
throughout the country because of successful national campaigns.
/  Sales of sweets and other types of junk food have decreased 
throughout the country because of successful national campaigns.
51

Subjects and objects often consist of nouns or noun phrases. The verb 
needs to agree with the most important word in the subject, the head 
noun. In order to find this, you need to be aware of the construction of 
noun phrases.
Nouns are often pre-modified or post-modified, i.e. they are described by 
words that come before them and after them.
Exercise 1
Find the head noun in the subject and choose the corresponding form of the verb.
1 
Complex and currently unresolved issues arising in research on innovation in complex 
organizations is / are also to be examined.
2 
Lastly, a possible solution of the horizon, flatness, homogeneity and isotropy problems in 
cosmology is / are suggested.
3 
Hundreds of reliable focal-mechanism solutions for deep and intermediate depth 
earthquakes was / were analysed.
For more information on how to identify the verb and the subject, see Chapter 7.

5 Accuracy
Punctuation
Glossary
defining relative 
clause (defining 
relative clauses) 
N-COUNT
A defining 
relative clause 
is a subordinate 
clause which 
gives information 
about a person 
or thing, 
explaining or 
specifying which 
person or thing 
you are talking 
about.
Punctuation can be important as it has an effect on the reader’s 
perception of a piece of text.
Occasionally, a small change in punctuation can affect the meaning of a 
sentence, as in the following examples:
1 
In high-risk patients, who attain large benefits from treatment, 
expensive drugs may be cost effective.
2 
In high-risk patients who attain large benefits from treatment, 
expensive drugs may be cost effective.
In sentence 1 the writer says that all high-risk patients attain large benefits 
from treatment. The clause ‘who attain large benefits from treatment’ is 
put between commas and is a non-defining relative clause that gives extra 
information. If you read the sentence without the extra information, you 
can really see how the information applies to all high-risk patients: ‘In 
high-risk patients expensive drugs may be cost effective.’
Sentence 2 means that expensive drugs may be cost effective only for 
those high-risk patients who attain large benefits. The clause ‘who attain 
large benefits from treatment’ is not preceded by a comma and is a 
defining relative clause. There is no ‘extra’ information, just essential 
information, so you cannot read the sentence without the relative clause.
In most cases, punctuation does not have such a great effect on meaning. 
However, it can have a very negative impact on the reader if it is used 
incorrectly. For example, the reader may be annoyed if there are too many 
basic errors.
The reader may also be confused if the clarity of the text is affected by the 
way punctuation is used. The following is an example of a sentence that 
goes on for too long.
X 
There is also a problem with the sales, despite the attractive low 
prices, sales are heavily dependent on the season.
/  There is also a problem with the sales. Despite the attractive low 
prices, sales are heavily dependent on the season.
53

Writing
Glossary
a b b r e v ia t io n
(abbreviations) 
N-CO UNT 
An abbreviation 
is a short form 
of a word or 
phrase, made by 
leaving out some 
of the letters or 
by using only 
the first letter of 
each word, 
p o s s e s s io n  
N-UNCO UNT 
Possession is the 
state of having 
something 
because you 
have obtained 
it or because it 
belongs to you.
/  
If you are not sure about punctuation, read the relevant section out loud. If there 
is a natural pause in the sentence, you probably need a comma. Longer pauses are 
represented by a full stop.
Punctuation is a large area, and there is not enough room here to 
describe all its aspects. However, here are some guidelines for the use of 
punctuation in academic English.
Sentences that can stand on their own are separated by a full stop. 
Full stops are also used in abbreviations after letters that are not the 
last letter of the word.
Sentences that can stand on their own but have a strong link can be 
separated by a semi-colon. Semi-colons are also used in longer lists 
that include commas.
5
Items in lists, parts of sentences, extra information and some 
adverbs are often separated by commas.
?
Lists, long quotes and explanations are often preceded by a colon.
Possession is indicated by an apostrophe.
J
If you are adding your own words into a quote, you should use 
square brackets.
1 1
Additional information can be given between round brackets (but 
do not do this too often in academic English).
( )
Capital letters are used at the beginning of sentences and proper 
names.
A,B, ... 
instead of 
a, b, ...
When you omit words from a quotation, use ellipsis.
Exact or special words are indicated by single quotation marks.
(  
3
In British English, when you quote within a quote, you use double 
quotation marks.
<C 
33
Special concepts or titles can be indicated by italics.
italics
Some students are not clear about the distinctions between the use of 
colons, semi-colons and commas in sentences. Here are some examples of 
the use of these punctuation marks in academic English.
54

5 Accuracy
Semi-colons (;) are used between sentences that can stand independently:
■ 
to distinguish different parts of series that contain commas
There are three areas that interest us: the introductory part, with 
its introduction o f the topic, its generalizations and definitions; 
the middle part, which can have subdivisions, different patterns or 
structures; and finally, the conclusion.
■ 
when you connect two sentences that are closely related in meaning 
without using a connecting word
Some customers preferred source code; others wanted to continue 
with pre-packaged product binaries.
■ 
when two independent sentences are connected with a transition 
signal
Some customers did not want to use source code; therefore most 
manufacturers kept producing pre-packaged product binaries too.
Colons (:) draw the reader’s attention to the next words:
■ 
to introduce a list
We will look at essay structure: introductions, main body and 
conclusion.
Note that we do not use a colon after a verb:
X The reasons that are most often cited are: resistance and 
intolerance.
/  The reasons that are most often cited are resistance and intolerance.
■ 
to introduce a subtitle
Treatment o f asthma in children: a critical analysis 
■ 
before direct quotations and in some citations
As Farb (2011: 32) states: ‘You have to act quickly. The longer you 
draw out one of these crises and let it drag on, the weaker you get.’
Farb (2011:32)
55

Commas (,) are very common within sentences, but be careful not to use 
them instead of full stops between independent sentences. Commas are 
used:
■ 
in reference lists
Sbida, K. and Nanno, M., 2008. Probiotics and immunology: 
separating the wheat from the chaff. Trends Immunol. 29: 565-573
■ 
in some citations, numbers and dates
(McCarthy, 2010)
13,500,000
on 23 September, 2013
■ 
between items in a series of more than two (note: in British English 
not before ‘and’, but in American usage also before ‘and’)
A PEST analysis looks at the political, economic, social and 
technological aspects o f a situation.
■ 
with certain transition signals (e.g. use one after in fact, for example, 
however, but not after despite, even though)
Moreover, all principles and theorems o f inductive logic are analytic.
■ 
to separate parts of sentences but not whole sentences
Despite the attractive low prices, sales are heavily dependent on the 
season.
■ 
before and, but, so, or when they connect clauses
These databases provide a widely used source o f data for health care 
research, but their accuracy remains uncertain.
■ 
to separate non-essential information
Allergic asthma, which is present in as many as 10% o f individuals 
in industrialized nations, is characterized amongst other symptoms 
by chronic airway inflammation.

5 Accuracy
Glossary
possessive
(possessives) 
N-CO UNT 
A possessive 
is a word such 
as ‘my’ or ‘his’ 
which shows 
who or what 
something 
belongs to or is 
connected with, 
or the possessive 
form of a name 
or noun which 
h a s’s added to it, 
as in ‘Jenny’s’ or 
‘cat’s’.
Apostrophes (’) are confusing for many writers. Here is an overview of 
their use in possessive forms.
’s is used to express possession. It is put immediately after the noun it 
refers to. For example:
the committee’s decision 
the men’s decision
If the noun already ends in s, the apostrophe is used on its own. For 
example:
both committees’ decisions
Jones’ decision (Jones’s decision is also correct)
Note that pronouns do not have an apostrophe: s is simply added to a 
word to form yours, hers, its, ours, theirs.
The form it’s exists, but it is the contraction for it is.
Notice the use of full stops (.) in the following commonly used 
abbreviations in academic English:
cf. compare
ibid. in the book or article already
ch. Chapter
mentioned
e.g. for example
n.d. no date available
ed. editor (but no full stop in
no. number
eds: editors)
para, paragraph
et al. and others
p. page
etc. and so forth
pp. pages
fig. figure
viz. namely, that is to say
i.e. that is
vol. volume
57

Writing
\ " 
\ Exercise 2
Add the punctuation to the following paragraph. The first two have been done.
To begin with, it is essential to understand what the feminist approach is, why it has emerged and 
what its positions are according tcxSaratankos (2005*71) the feminist approach is defined aS an 
established type of research which has the specific purpose of studying women and their status in 
the community, put differently women are the dominant research subject of the feminist approach 
which aims at attaining economic^social and political equality between the sexes emancipating 
women and increasing peoples understanding of blatant sexism.
Articles
Glossary
d e te r m in e r
(determiners)
N-CO UNT
A determiner is 
a word which 
is used at the 
beginning of 
a noun group 
to indicate, for 
example, which 
thing you are 
referring to or 
whether you are 
referring to one 
thing or several. 
Common English 
determiners are 
‘a’, ‘the’, ‘some’, 
‘this’, and ‘each’.
d e m o n str a tiv e
a d je c tiv e
(demonstrative 
adjectives) 
N-CO UNT 
Demonstrative 
adjectives are 
the words ‘this’, 
‘that’, ‘these’, 
and ‘those’.
Knowing when to use the articles a(n) or the and when not to use an 
article is very difficult for most non-native speakers.
There are too many rules to memorize and too many exceptions to them, 
so in this section we will focus on what is most important. As always, 
it is the impact on your reader you need to think about. Occasionally 
the incorrect use of articles can cause confusion, so it is important to try 
to get it right. More commonly, mistakes with articles are likely to be 
annoying for the reader, especially if they seem to be basic mistakes. We 
are therefore going to focus on the main rules about articles.
1 You cannot have a singular countable noun in your text without 
something preceding it.
Check your work for singular words that are countable in their context. You 
will either need to put them in the plural form or put something in front of 
them -  an article (‘a’ or ‘the’) or other determiner (possessives such as ‘my’, 
demonstrative adjectives such as ‘this’, quantity words such as ‘each’).
X Tube needed to be labelled.
/  Each tube needed to be labelled. /  The tube needed to be labelled.
2 If you put an article in front of a singular noun, decide between ‘a’ or ‘the’.
Use ‘the’ to refer to something known or specific, e.g. something that has 
been mentioned before or something that is defined immediately afterwards.
X The tubes needed to be labelled with a name provided.
/  The tubes needed to be labelled with the name provided.

5 Accuracy
3 Check that plural forms are preceded by ‘the’ if they refer to something 
specific.
X Tubes used in this experiment were labelled ‘T1 ’, ‘T2’, T3’, and so on.
/  The tubes used in this experiment were labelled ‘T l’, ‘T2’, T3’, and so on.
Let’s apply this to the following paragraph. First of all, we have 
highlighted all the singular nouns (excluding proper names):
M.uny researchers have started to Lkv.vesti.0ate the rote of social kwedia 
in c-risis cokM.kwu.iA.LcatLokvs. w ith  m.ore and more people on sites sutch 
as Faceboote, Twitter and youTube, technology has fundam entally 
chakvged the way people cokvi/vect with each other ai/vd how they 
communicate. Compared to traditional media -platform, social kwedia 
eipjoy the advantages of low cost, fast information sh arin g and more 
opportunities to communicate even globally (W right and tfinson,
2 0 0 5 ). More importantly, this information ca n  be shared by a large 
nnnvber of people gulctely or even in  real tikw^ withont the work, of 
jo u rn a list (Colley and Collier 2.005). "This ca n  be extreknely toxic for 
cokw-panies when they are facing major crisis, o n  the other hand, if  
cokwpanies can  handle it well, there are benefits to be found in crisis 
kw-anagekwent. (veil, B>u.ehner and Palenchav; 20 11).
The singular, countable nouns are: role, way, platform, number, 
journalist, crisis.
Note that the others are nouns that don’t have a plural form in this 
context (technology, information, time, work, management) or words 
that are part of fixed expressions where we cannot make a change to the 
use of the articles (it is always ‘on the other hand’).
The student has correctly included the following articles with the 
countable nouns:
‘the’ role: we know what ‘role’ specifically refers to (‘of social media’)
‘the’ way. this specifically refers to the way in which people connect with 
each other
‘a ’ number-, we know this is about a number of people, but it does not 
refer to a specific group of people.
However, the student cannot leave the other three countable nouns 
without determiners.
■ 
platform: this would work better in the sentence as the plural form 
because the media has more than one platform: platforms.
59

Writing
■ 
journalist: this should be the plural, journalists, as they are not 
talking about a particular journalist, or they could say ‘a journalist’, 
in which ‘a’ refers to any journalist.
■ 
crisis: this is likely to refer to one crisis at a time, so the plural form 
does not work so well. ‘A’ is the correct article here, again because it 
could refer to ‘any’ crisis; the idea of a crisis is being introduced.
If you make it a habit to check the singular countable nouns in your 
essays as you write, you are likely to avoid some of the mistakes that look 
basic to native speakers and might annoy your reader.
Tip 
/  If you are not sure if something is known/specific or not, check if you could list it. If
you can, then it is specific and you need to use ‘the’.
For example, you would use ‘the’ in the first example below, because you could name the 
projects (underlined), but you would not use ‘the’ in the second sentence because it would 
be impossible to list them all.
1 
The other research projects in the Biosciences department at Birmingham University ...
2 
Other research projects in Bioscience departments in the country ...
Common errors
Glossary
re sp e c tiv e ly
ADV
Respectively 
means in the 
same order as 
the items that 
you have just 
mentioned.
The following are some more examples of incorrect language use, taken 
from student essays, which may have a negative effect on the reader.
Sentence structure
X The government should help with 
education should be obligatory 
until the age o f 18.
X School should be obligatory until 
the age o f 18 is very important for 
everyone.
These sentences have two main verbs where 
there should only be one. The solution is to 
split them into two separate sentences (or 
two clauses linked with a coordinator such 
as ‘and’) or to use a main clause and a sub­
clause in the sentence:
/  The government should help with 
education by making it obligatory until 
the age o f 18.
/  School should be obligatory until the age 
o f 18 as education is very important.
Prepositions
X There are many reasons of 
adopting an immediate strategy.
X Doctors and patients regularly 
need to discuss about routine 
clinical decisions.
/  There are many reasons for adopting an 
immediate strategy.
/  Doctors and patients regularly need to 
discuss routine clinical decisions.
60

5 Accuracy
Connectors
X In an ideal situation, students 
woirid work long-term with a 
native speaker. But this is just not 
possible for whole classes.
X It would not be a practical solution 
for dehydration. Because o f its 
excessively salty taste.
In informal written English (e.g. emails), 
people often start a sentence with ‘But’, 
‘So’, ‘And’ or ‘Because’ to relate a sentence 
to the preceding one. In academic English, 
it is better to use ‘However’, ‘Therefore’, 
‘Additionally’ and ‘This is because’ 
respectively. Another solution, which is 
better in the case of short sentences, is to 
create one sentence instead of two:
/  In an ideal situation, students would 
work long-term with a native speaker, 
but this is just not possible for whole 
classes.
y/ It would not be a practical solution for 
dehydration because o f its excessively 
salty taste.
Note that you can use some of these words 
at the start of the sentence but they must 
relate to what comes after and not to the 
previous sentence:
/  Because o f its excessively salty taste, it 
would not be a practical solution for 
dehydration.
T ip  
/  
It is important to identify which types of common errors you might typically make, 
and try to avoid them. Although these can be different for each individual, be aware 
of the types of errors that are often made by speakers of your first language. For 
example, Chinese speakers are more likely to choose wrong word combinations (e.g. X 
suffer from critical problems, X develop new customers), whereas Arabic speakers are 
more likely to forget the verb ‘to be’ (e.g. X Marketers who prepared generally perform 
better, instead of /  Marketers who are prepared generally perform better).
Remember
Check your work for:
correct tense choice 
subject-verb agreement 
correct use of punctuation
correct use of the articles ‘a(n)’ and ‘the’, including whether or not 
you actually need to use an article
common errors.
61

Research and analysis
Aims /  
develop research skills 
/  decide on level of detail and what is
/  
identify suitable sources 
relevant
/  
develop note-making skills 
/  develop critical thinking skills
©
Qui z
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I prefer to decide what my answer to an essay question is 
while I carry out my research.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I know how to identify suitable sources.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I feel confident about how to take notes.
agree | disagree | not sure
4 
I know how to decide how much research I need to do and 
what information is relevant to include.
agree | disagree ( not sure
5 
I know how to demonstrate that I can think critically in my 
writing.
agree | disagree | not sure
Research skills
Once you have got your first outline, you can start your research. Don’t 
look for every book or article related to your general topic. Instead, you 
need to search for resources in the library and online to find answers to the 
specific questions your essay needs to address. This stops you wasting time 
and will help you to make your essay more focused. You will need to:
■ 
identify^ reliable resources that cover the specific areas you need to 
write about
■ 
note down the full details of the resources
■ 
read the useful sections only 
« 
make clear notes.
Glossary
r e lia b le  a d j
Information 
that is reliable 
or that is from a 
reliable source is 
very likely to be 
correct.
62

6 Research and analysis
Glossary
te n ta tiv e  a d j
Tentative 
answers, plans, 
or arrangements 
are not definite 
or certain, but 
have been given 
or made as a first 
step, 
in itia tiv e  
(initiatives) 
N-COUNT 
An initiative is 
an important act 
or statement that 
is intended to 
solve a problem.
Doing this involves a variety of skills.
Have your essay question and outline with you when you do the research. 
This way you will keep your research purpose in mind.
It is very important to try and decide what your answer to the question is 
BEFORE you start on the research. You can use this tentative answer to 
guide your research; ultimately it will help you organize your essay better 
and make a stronger argument.
For example:
Critically assess car speed reduction initiatives in the UK countryside and 
determine the way forward.
ntroduction
■ the problem of traffic speed: consequences
■ the particular issues in the countryside
Vlain body
■ a description of the different initiatives so far
■ for each initiative: a discussion of its strengths, weaknesses 
and ultimate success, with examples and other evidence
■ mention the current and predicted traffic situation and 
future speed reduction plans
Conclusion
■ answers to the questions: Which initiative has worked best 
so far? Can it be continued?
■ recommendations
Before you start looking for sources, you should ask yourself what 
you already know, e.g. consider what you have learnt in lectures. What 
initiatives do you know? What has worked in your country or local area? 
What would you like to see done more often and why?
If you can answer these questions, you have developed a line of argument 
for your essay and given yourself a focus for your research.
In this example, you may know about vehicle-activated signs (flashing 
lights that remind drivers of the speed limit and let them know that they 
are going too fast), but you have noticed that even though they go off 
all the time, people seem to ignore them. You think that the same is true 
for normal signs and reminders. Imagine that you feel passionately about 
the countryside. You would want to emphasize that the countryside is 
different to the city, and that initiatives that work in urban areas should 
not just be transferred to the countryside: it needs its own solutions.
63

Writing
You would not want anything spoiling the look of the countryside, yet 
you would want traffic to go slowly. You would therefore be in favour 
of anything that works but is not highly visible, and you have heard of 
places where they make the road seem narrower, e.g. by using different 
colours for footpaths.
Without doing this thinking first, your essay might have looked like a 
description of what schemes exist and what evidence there is to show that 
they work. Now that you have a line of argument for the whole essay it 
will be a lot stronger: you will argue that the countryside is a special place 
which needs appropriate initiatives. This will help you formulate criteria 
so that you can critically assess the existing initiatives.
You now also have a focus for your research. Rather than listing the 
initiatives that you read about, you can organize them as soon as you find 
them. These ideas could look like this, with the ideas you already had in 
bold:
General initiatives
Initiatives that may be particularly 
suitable for the countryside
■ vehicle-activated signs
■ speed limit reminders
■ 30 mph speed limits £
■ cameras
■ speed bumps and rumble strips
■ traffic islands and mini-roundabouts
■ detection
■ all speed limit signs on wooden posts
■ removing road markings
■ making the road appear narrower
-  different colours for footpaths
-  putting bushes closer to the edge
■ 20 mph speed limits in villages
■ community police presence
In your essay, you might want to talk about the general initiatives first, 
discussing their strengths and weaknesses, before looking at initiatives 
that work best in the countryside.
Suitable sources
Before you start looking for sources, consider what you already have. 
Apart from some ideas of your own, you may have lecture notes, 
textbooks, and recommended sources on the reading list for your module. 
If a book is on your reading list, this does not mean that you have to 
read all of it, but that there are sections of it which will be useful for your 
module.
Glossary
c r ite r ia
(criterion) 
n -p l u r a l  
Criteria are 
factors on which 
you decide or 
judge something.
64

6 Research and analysis
Glossary
p e d a g o g y
N-UNCO UNT
Pedagogy is the 
study and theory 
of the methods 
and principles of 
teaching, 
sy n o n y m  
(synonyms)
N-CO UNT 
A synonym 
is a word or 
expression which 
means the same 
as another word 
or expression, 
a u th o r ita tiv e  a d j 
Someone or 
something that 
is authoritative 
has a lot of 
knowledge of 
a particular 
subject.
For this particular essay you will need examples of traffic initiatives. You 
may find information from local councils online. You could also look at 
sources from organizations that promote the countryside or that work to 
prevent road accidents. Textbooks might be useful for information about 
traffic speed problems in general. You will also need statistics about traffic 
initiatives and road accidents; there may be studies about this in academic 
journals.
Use your online library catalogue to look for more books and journals by 
entering a key word related to your essay. Have a look at the following 
essay question and decide which search terms you would enter in the 
library catalogue before you read on.
How can an understanding o f sociology contribute to the development 
o f effective pedagogies in physical education and sport?
The key words in the question itself are ‘sociology’, ‘development’, 
‘pedagogies’, ‘physical education’ and ‘sport’. On their own, they would 
generate many resources but they are likely to be too general. Entering 
them as combinations will lead to better results, e.g. ‘sports pedagogies’, 
‘sports sociology’, ‘physical education pedagogies’. Also think of 
synonyms and different word forms to do your searches, e.g. ‘exercise’ 
and ‘pedagogy’ could be useful here.
Your lecturer or librarian will also tell you about electronic databases. 
You may need a password for these, after which you will have access to 
more resources that are related to your discipline. You can then look at 
the different issues of a journal and do a search for your particular essay 
topic.
You also need to decide which sources are reliable. Academic writing 
needs to be authoritative. Your writing can only be reliable if the sources 
that you have used are trustworthy.
For more information about the academic principle of Authority, see Chapter 8.
To determine if a source can be used, ask yourself what the purpose of 
the original text was, and what your purpose is. If you study English and 
want to analyse the type of language that companies use, then company 
websites are the right source. However, if you are a business student 
writing an analysis of an aspect of a company, then a company website is 
unlikely to be helpful. Instead, you would look at the company’s annual 
report as well as other independent sources.
65

Writing
Glossary
a n o n y m o u s  a d j 
Something that 
is anonymous 
does not reveal 
who you are.
Websites are not more or less reliable than printed sources. The annual 
report that was just mentioned would look exactly the same online as it 
does in print. However, websites do not always give their authors’ names 
and even when we do know, they may not be an authority in their field. 
They may therefore not be reliable enough.
Wikipedia is not considered an academic source, because anyone can 
change information about a certain topic. This is its strength in many 
ways, as people are building knowledge together and responding to 
what is current, but often the information is not complete or accurate 
enough. The contributions are anonymous and some of them are wrong, 
sometimes deliberately. The other reason that Wikipedia is not academic 
is that its purpose is not the same as yours: it tries to inform the general 
public, whereas you are writing for scholars. You cannot use the site as a 
source for your academic writing, but it can be useful to get an overview 
of a topic and some ideas about other sources that might be more 
trustworthy.
Printed encyclopedias are more reliable, because a publisher was prepared 
to print the information. However, the information is likely to be too 
general for your academic purpose (in the same way that dictionaries 
are). Moreover, knowledge changes very quickly, so the information may 
no longer be correct.
If books and journals are published you can trust them because the 
information was checked before publication. Some online sources look 
trustworthy, e.g. because they present themselves as a journal, but you 
still need to double check. Look on the site for publisher’s information, 
the name of the authors and other information. If you can’t find any, 
then certainly don’t trust the site. The website address can give you some 
clues: if it ends in ‘ac.uk’ it was authored by a higher or further education 
institution in the UK, ‘gov’ is a government website, ‘sch’ a school, ‘co’ or 
‘com’ a company.
It is not always necessary to read primary (= original) sources, rather than 
secondary sources (= those that report the original research). However, 
it is a good habit to get into: if the original source is important in your 
discipline, then you really should have read it. Also, if you are working at 
postgraduate level, then you are expected to read the primary sources.
66

6 Research and analysis
If all your sources were published decades ago, you have probably not 
been reading widely enough. You need a variety of sources, but recent 
ones are particularly important, as they will reflect current thinking. As 
always, your purpose is important -  a historian will of course need to 
examine older texts.
/  
Google Scholar (http://www. scholar, google, com) is a search engine that looks for 
academic sources rather than general sources. Although you should still check that 
these are reliable, using this tool is a good place to start if you are looking for a journal 
article on a particular topic. It has a particularly large database of medical sources.
Once you have identified the relevant sources, you can start reading.
Note-making skills
First of all, you need to write down the bibliographic information of each 
source: the author’s surname and initials, the full title, the publisher, the 
year of publication, the place of publication, and sometimes the chapter 
or pages. For books this information is on one of the first pages when 
you open it. Because of the academic principles of Authority -  where you 
show that you have knowledge about the subject so can be trusted -  and 
Accuracy, you need to focus on the details and copy everything correctly. 
Get into the habit of doing this first, as you don’t want to forget and have 
to look up the details again when you are writing your essay.
For more information about the data you need for each type of source, see Chapter 9.
Tip 
/  
Create a separate document in which you put all the bibliographic data of your 
sources. This can then be tidied up when you put your reference list together.
67

W riting
The following information was found by a student of theology. Did she copy 
enough information and is it correct? Make the necessary changes to the column 
on the right.
Exercise 1
Source information
Student’s notes
Article
Trauma, Transference and ‘Working through’ 
in Writing the History of the ‘Shoah’
Saul Friedlander
History and Memory
Vol. 4, No. 1 (Spring -  Summer, 1992),
pp. 39-59
Published by: Indiana University Press
Article title: Truuvua, Traresferrerece a red 
'Wortelreg through' Ire Wrltlreg the History 
of the shoah
Author: Frledlareder s .
loecrreal: Hi^torij ared Merreory, volrtrvee A No. 
±, 1^5 2., (redlarea Press 
3^  ~<5’ s5^)
Book
The Democratic Ideal and the Shoah: The 
Unthought in Political Modernity
Trigano, Shmuel
Production by Eileen Mehann
Marketing by Fran Keneston
Published by: State University of New York 
Press, Albany
2009 State University of New York
B-oote title: the tserreocratlc (deal ared the shoah; 
the u.rethou.ght Ire-political rvcoderrelty
Authors: Sarreu.el Trldareo, Flleere Meharere
Publisher: State University of New yorte Press, 
Alba rey
Tips 
/  
Names can be difficult. One issue is that you may not know whether the name you
find is the author’s surname or first name, especially if they are foreign names for you. 
If the names are separated by a comma, then the first name you read is the surname. If 
you really cannot work it out, look up the author’s books online, e.g. check via Google 
Scholar if academic authors have cited the same source in their reference lists. You can 
then cite the sources in the same way.
/  Another issue can come up when you need to refer in your text to an author as ‘he’
or ‘she’; you may not be certain about the gender of an author if it is a foreign name 
for you. Make a note when a source refers to another author as ‘he’ or ‘she’ -  this 
information may be very useful when you are writing the essay.

6 Research and analysis
Glossary
p a r a p h r a s in g
N-UNCO UNT
Paraphrasing 
is when you 
express what 
someone else has 
said or written in 
a different way. 
s p id e r g r a m  
(spidergrams)
N-CO UNT
A spidergram 
is a drawing to 
show facts or 
ideas, which has 
the main topic 
in a circle in 
the centre with 
other important 
facts on lines 
drawn out from 
this central 
circle.
Making notes about content is both a reading and a writing skill. It helps 
you while reading because it makes you concentrate and think about 
what the text means and why it is important.
Do not copy the author’s language, but use your own words to summarize 
what they have said. This is an important part of the paraphrasing 
process. When you do write down the exact words of the original text, 
so that you can quote them later, make sure you note the page numbers 
(and the bibliographical data) as you will need those in your essay. It is 
important that you make it very clear in your notes which are your words 
and which are quotes.
There are different ways of making notes. This can vary from making a 
small comment in the margin to using a new page to visually represent 
the structure of the text. Don’t start making notes in the first reading 
stage, but wait until you are ready to do more detailed reading, otherwise 
you may make too many notes and include irrelevant information.
M ost people have a preferred note-making style. However, you need to 
keep your purpose in mind and ask yourself which types of notes would 
be best. You will save a lot of time when you are writing the essay if you 
have chosen the best format to present the information. Here are some 
questions to help you decide:
■ 
what will I use these notes for? (e.g. paraphrasing, quoting, 
summarizing)
■ 
am I likely to need notes from the whole text or just certain sections?
■ 
can the text easily be represented visually? (e.g. a table with two parts 
for advantages and disadvantages, a flow chart for the explanation of 
processes, a spidergram for topics with many subdivisions, a timeline 
for chronological information or other sequences, linear notes (with 
title, subtitles and numbers) to show which items are more important 
than others)
For more information on paraphrasing, see Chapter 10.
69

Writing
Read the following text. Look at the questions above to help you decide what 
types of notes would be best. Shorten the text, use abbreviations and symbols, 
and use your own words. Compare your notes with the ones in the Answer key.
\ 
\ Exercise 2
A group of climate scientists and engineers from the UK’s Royal Society are investigating a number 
of ideas to solve the climate change problem. One idea is to put giant mirror^ into space to reflect 
sunlight away from the Earth. Another is to put tiny particle^ into the Earth’s atmosphere to block 
the Sun’s energy. Yet another idea is to put iron filings into the ocean to encourage the growth of 
plankton, which would then absorb carbon dioxi3e~(C02) from the atmosphere. However, the 
research has been criticized because the scientific solutions might discourage individuals from taking 
responsibility and trying to reduce their carbon dioxide emissions.
There are some standard ways of making notes:
■ 
leave out articles, prepositions (in, on, ...) and other grammatical 
words (e.g. ‘there is a need for positive experiences in youth sports’ 
could become ‘youth sports: need pos. experiences’)
* 
common symbols (e.g. v for ‘because’, .\ for ‘therefore’, —> for ‘leads 
to’, = for ‘equals’, < for ‘smaller than’)
■ 
common abbreviations (e.g. C. for ‘century’, BC for ‘before Christ’, 
e.g. for ‘for example’)
■ 
discipline-specific abbreviations (e.g. ‘CT scan’ in medicine, AI for 
‘artificial intelligence’)
■ 
use colour, capitals and other ways to indicate what is important, and 
leave plenty of white space so that the notes are easier to read and 
can be added to.
Do use your own symbols and abbreviations as well, but make sure they 
always mean the same, e.g. if ‘div.’ stands for ‘division’ in your notes, it 
should not have any other meanings (e.g. diversity, dividend, divorce,...).
M aking notes is an important part of doing research, especially as many 
of your notes will be transformed into paraphrases in your essay. The 
following exercise gives you some more practice.
Tip 
/  
To make it easier to remember what your abbreviations of longer words stand for, add 
the last letter of the word, e.g. ‘div"’ (for ‘division’).
70

6 Research and analysis
Rewrite the following text in note form, using bullet points. Follow the 
information in the tip and use abbreviations where possible. Make a separate 
note of useful subject-specific language.
\ Exercise 3
Retailing (the sale of goods from a fixed location) is changing: shopping is becoming a leisure activity 
as much as a necessity, along with the rise of home delivery services saving time and journeys. 
Convenience is a powerful motivator for shoppers’ behaviour.
During the last two years, independent retailers have struggled more than the chain stores. Research 
suggests over 12,000 independent stores closed in 2009. Economies of scale (it is cheaper to buy 
stock in bulk, so big shops can charge lower prices) are one part of the issue. Supermarkets have a 
stronger control over the supply chain and can manipulate prices more effectively. As a result of the 
decline in smaller stores, there are now many empty shops in most town centres, some of which have 
been vacant for some time, and have whitewashed windows.
On a separate page, you may also want to note subject-specific 
vocabulary to use in your future essays. For example, a student of 
Business might write down free enterprise system, market forces, 
operating units, middle management. It is important to think about 
collocations, i.e. common word combinations, and you could also note 
other academic phrases such as This is particularly true in the case of 
This framework allows its users to 
These approaches are based on the 
assumption th at...
Deciding on level of detail and what is relevant
In addition to knowing how to choose the right sources and deciding on 
your approach in order to research only what is necessary to answer the 
question, there other ways to decide what to include.
The word count tells you the level of detail that is needed. If you are 
required to write a short essay for example, you are not expected to do 
too much in-depth research, as you will need to come to the point quickly 
and focus on the most important aspects of the topic.
It can help to imagine the reader as another student, but from a different 
department. This is an intelligent person who does not know about your 
topic yet: you need to explain it step by step, making sure you include all 
the information that is relevant, without repeating yourself.
71

Writing
Critical thinking skills
The word ‘critical’ has many meanings, one of which is described in the 
Collins COB UILD Advanced Dictionary as follows: ‘A critical approach 
to something involves examining and judging it carefully.’ We have already 
discussed that you have to be critical when you are choosing sources. When 
you read them, you are then expected to think critically, i.e. question what 
you read, think logically and draw yourow njtoncl usi ons. Even though you 
will have selected reliable sources, you may disagree with them. In your essay, 
you should indicate where you agree and disagree with a particular author.
For example, imagine that you wanted to include a general definition at 
the start of your essay, but there are many definitions to choose from.
You can show that you can think critically by selecting a definition and 
explaining why you want to use that one. This could be because it is 
the most cited one, the one most commonly used by other scholars, the 
most comprehensive one, the one that picks up on aspects related to your 
specific question, etc. Your justification will demonstrate that you have 
read widely, understood what you have read, questioned what the authors 
wrote and thought about how the issues related to your essay question.
Every essay needs to demonstrate your ability to argue, i.e. to put your 
points across and defend them. Arguing means showing evidence of your 
critical thinking: weighing up evidence, thinking logically and making 
your point in a clear and organized way.
It is useful to think about arguments in terms of a three-part structure again.
1 
M ake your point.
2 
Give your evidence.
3 
Explain further (e.g. say more about your point or evidence, explain 
how your evidence supports your point).
The three stages are indicated in the following paragraph from a student 
essay.
(±) It is essewtialforpeopleto learn, awd uwderstawd body lawguage, 
especially if  they have certaiwjobs or circurwstawces. (2.) For in state, a 
persow who is oftew iw a w iwterwatiowal ewvirowmewt such as a jourwalist, 
busiwess persow or diplorwat weeds to be ruore careful thaw a persow who wortes 
ow their oww. (s) if a busiwess persow travels to a foreig w cou-i^tty but does wot 
uwderstawd the la wguage there awd cawwot iwterpret the body lawgwage, this 
w ill lead to cowfusiow awd erwbarrasswtewt.
72

6 Research and analysis
The three stages do not need to be in that order. The student could also 
have written:
(2.) People whosejobs iwvolve iwterwatiowaltravel, such as busiwess people, 
journalists awd diplomats may come across difficult situation. (3) They 
m ay fiwd themselves iw cowfusiwg or embarrassiwg situations if  they 
have travelled to a country where they do wot understand the language and 
cannot interpret the body language. This is why (1) it is essential in  certain 
professions to be able to learn and understand body language.
Note that this example is from a pre-university essay. The stages are often 
longer in university essays, consisting of more than one sentence.
\ 
\ Exercise 4
Identify the three stages of the argument in the following paragraph. Mark them 
(1) (point), (2) (evidence) and (3) (explanation).
if
Although this approach has been criticized by many researchers who argue that it is not effective 
(j) 
enough to teach and learn a second language, it is still useful for teaching sjyokerCEnglish grammar. 
•^Firstly, if the teachers want to use this approach to teach features of spoken grammar, they should 
clearly know what the features of spoken grammar are and have coursebooks based on spoken 
English grammar. Otherwise, it is very difficult to use this approach in their teaching activity.
A common pattern when arguing is to say what other people’s opinions 
are before saying where you stand. You will have used this technique in 
previous pieces of writing. Here is an example taken from the start of a 
pre-university essay.
Some, people tatee the view that terrorism, is the greatest threat that the HSA 
is faciwg. others say that global climate chawge or ewvirowmewtal issues 
pose the most serious lowg-term cowcerws. However; the uosA is too vast awd 
powerful for a wy owe s,o\axc,t to presewt much dawger.
Notice how the word ‘however’ indicates the change from the thoughts of 
others to the opinion that the author wants to develop.
73

In longer essays this structure is also common, but may be developed over 
several paragraphs. There could be several paragraphs that develop the 
thoughts of different authors who look at an issue in one way, followed 
by paragraphs about those who look at it differently. You will need to 
make it clear where you stand on the matter.
When you read, you need to be able to follow the author’s point of view. 
One way of doing this is by noticing the counter-argumentation in a text: 
the common pattern is that first there will be a point of view that has 
some merit, but is not the one that the author agrees with.
Authors make claims and comment on the ideas of others. Let’s have a 
look at an example of writing by a university student.
Research has s Ia o w ia, th at th at the m-eu-tal prooessiiA^ o f the i^ te n v a l stru.etu.re 
o f seiA.teu.ces by learners is  affected by maiA-y perform.aiA.ee facto rs dun-u-g 
real tim e p ro d uctio n  (L y o n s, 
. t>espite th is  f in d in g , m ost research on
the developm ent o f la n g u a g e  ig n o res the in te rn a l stru ctu re  o f processing 
events, w hich m a y  be due to a belief th at 'com prehension is  m easured at the 
end o f a n  u tterance, ra th e rth a n  as it is  being heard' (T y le r a n d  M a rsle n - 
v vilso n , 
21: 4 0 0 ). H-owevev; it is  im p o rta n tto  focius on m en talp ro cessin g , 
as the a b ility  to process the in te rn a l stru ctu re  o f sentences in flu e n ce s to a 
large extent the developm ent o f la n g u a g e  use in  le arn e rs' miiA-ds as th eir 
proficieiA.cy increases.
This student agrees with Lyons’ finding that mental processing is affected 
by performance factors. This is clear because he says ‘Research has 
shown’. He then says the finding is ignored and quotes research (from 
Tyler and Marslen-Wilson) that gives an explanation as to why this is the 
case. The last sentence has not been attributed to anyone, so it must be his 
opinion. He explains why it is important that the finding is not ignored.
Even when reading academic and therefore authoritative texts, you 
should not believe everything. Critical thinking means questioning what 
you read. Do this as you move through the text.
Let’s evaluate the above example. We identified the last sentence as the 
opinion of the student. He says that the ability to process the internal 
structure of sentences influences the development of language use in 
learners’ minds as their proficiency increases. Ask yourself: has he 
provided evidence for the link with proficiency in this paragraph and is it 
strong evidence? The answer is that he has not provided evidence yet. We 
will expect to find the evidence in the next paragraph. If it is not provided 
there, it would be a good idea to make a note about the lack of evidence 
for this particular point.

6 Research and analysis
\ u i -
Evaluate the following paragraph as follows:
1 
Identify the writer’s opinion.
2 
Comment on the strength of the evidence.
Exercise 5
Their projects were wot effective because of lim,ited budgets o f the Trustees and conflicts 
am^^sua^lX-pr^erty-owners-in-H-aiifax who often held the membership o f the Trustees 
(Maslen, i 2--4-3; t^alby, ± 253.). Iw ig ,'f2rthe H alifax Municipal-feorough Corporation toote over 
th^jw w jm stees.' worte. However, this corporation, was also restrained by the budget, and it 
suffered from  the conflicts between economists and supporters for social improvement within 
co±u^cJMe>xs-OMi aldermew (-Ranger ± 2 5 ±; iwama, 2.003). so, the individualprojects raised 
public awareness o f social improvement in  the urbaw environment of H alifax.
Remember
In the research stage, you need to think your own ideas through first, 
then locate relevant sources.
It is important to choose reliable sources because you will use them to 
give more authority to your ideas.
You need to select the best type of note organization for each source.
Note-making needs to be systematic: references need to be noted, text 
needs to be copied or paraphrased with precision, and information 
from different sources needs to be organized into categories.
The level of depth of your research should be determined by both the 
word count and the amount of explanation about the topic that an 
intelligent reader will need.
You are expected to think critically, so always judge your sources 
carefully. Look for the author’s opinions and judge the strength of 
the evidence. In your essay, explain and justify why you have used the 
sources.
75

7
Reading comprehension
Aims /  
enhance reading comprehension 
/  
identify structural and argumentational
/  
analyse sentence structure 
signposts
/  
analyse noun phrases
Qui z
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I can reduce a sentence to its basic parts to understand its 
meaning.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I can find what is important information in a sentence and 
what is not by identifying main subordinate clauses.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I can work out the meanings of words through an awareness 
of the different relationships between the nouns in noun 
combinations.
agree | disagree | not sure
4 
I can work out the meanings of words made up of adjective 
and noun combinations.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I can identify structural signposts to work out the function of 
the section of text I am reading.
agree | disagree | not sure
6 
I can identify argumentational signposts to see how a section 
fits into the overall argument the author is making.
agree | disagree | not sure
Analysing sentence structure
Academic language is efficient and a lot is said in few words. This is 
why academic texts tend to give a lot of information in a short space. 
When you come across long or difficult sentences during your research, 
and you think these may be stating an important point that you need to 
understand and perhaps paraphrase in your essay, reduce them to their 
basic sentence pattern, and then build them back up, bit by bit.
76

7 Reading comprehension
Glossary
c o m p le m e n t
(complements)
N-CO UNT
The complement 
of a link verb 
is an adjective 
group or noun 
group which 
comes after 
the verb and 
describes or 
identifies the 
subject. For 
example, in the 
sentence ‘They 
felt very tired’, 
‘very tired’ is 
the complement. 
In ‘They were 
students’, 
‘students’ is the 
complement, 
a d v e r b ia l a d j 
Adverbial means 
relating to 
adverbs or like 
an adverb.
Look at the following example:
Control o f immigration to New Zealand is divided into two areas: 
visas for temporary stays, such as for tourists or business visits, and 
residence permits, which allow a person to settle.
If we strip the sentences of all the details and look at the underlying 
grammatical framework, all this is really saying is: ‘Control is divided into 
two areas: A and B.’
We can then think of the extra information bit by bit: Control (of 
immigration to New Zealand) is divided into two areas: (A) visas (for 
temporary stays, such as for tourists or business visits) and (B) residence 
permits (which allow a person to settle).
As you can increase your comprehension of longer sentences by reducing 
them to their essentials, it is worth looking at the basic sentence types in 
English, as shown in these sentences.
1 
subject / verb
The sea / is calming.
2 
I subject / verb / object
The sea / reflects / the sunshine.
3 
[subject / verb / complement
The sea / is / beautiful.
4 
subject / verb / adverbial
The sea / glows / in the sunshine.
5 
subject / verb / object / object
The sea / gives / me / beautiful thoughts.
6 
[subject / verb / object / complement
The sea / has made / people / happy.
7 
[subject / verb / object / adverbial
The sea / offers / different things / at different times.
77

Writing
Note that the different items are not always in that order, and that there 
could be more adverbials in the sentences.
Look at the following examples:
Shopping is becoming a leisure activity as much as a necessity.
The main idea is ‘shopping / is becoming / a leisure activity’ -  pattern (2): 
subject / verb / object.
Subjects and objects can consist of noun phrases: a head noun and more 
information about the head noun. In the sentence above, the head noun in 
the object is ‘activity’, and ‘leisure’ tells us what type of activity it is.
The following example is a longer sentence:
The growth o f CCTV cameras, o f the use o f private security firms and 
o f the blurring o f public and private land has been an issue in cities 
such as Exeter.
The main idea is ‘the growth / has been / an issue’ -  pattern (3): subject / 
verb / complement.
We can find this structure quickly by looking for the verb first. We need 
to look for ‘conjugated’ verbs, i.e. verbs which tell you something about 
‘how many’ or ‘when’, e.g. drinks (about the present, and referring to one 
person), drank (referring to the past), are drinking (about more than one 
person, referring to the present). Verb forms ending in -ed and -ing (i.e. 
participles) and fo-forms are not conjugated verbs, but they can be part of 
conjugated verbs (e.g. is drinking. has drunk. have lived).
In the second sentence, ‘blurring’ is not a conjugated verb, but a gerund: 
a verb used as a noun. The main verb is ‘has been’: ‘has’ is a conjugated 
verb in the present perfect form that tells us that the subject is singular 
(referring to one person).
Once we have found the conjugated verb, it is easy to find the subject that 
corresponds to it. The subject in the second sentence is a very long noun 
phrase (‘the growth of CCTV cameras, of the use of private security firms 
and of the blurring of public and private land’). The way to find the head 
noun, and to reduce the sentence to its basic form, is to say: ‘what or who 
+ verb?’ Here this would be ‘What has been (an issue)?’ The answer is 
‘growth’.

7 Reading comprehension
P
 \ Exercise 1
Reduce these sentences to their basic parts. What is the basic sentence pattern in 
these sentences? The first one has been done for you.
1 
The demand for labour has fallen in almost all the periods of structural and economic 
change, the demand / has fallen / in the periods: pattern 4
2 
A regulator gene controls the activity of an operator gene by the production of a repressor 
substance^or of in inactive substance taking part in regulation. 
22
3 
The treatment of the difficulties of means testing and designing targeting mechanisms is 
discussedjn O ’Connor (2012).
4  
The evidence on the effect of employment schemes on women in the developing economies 
in these regions is not conclusive.
5 
Trade brings mutual benefits to all countries.
All the sentences in the exercise were simple clauses (groups of words 
containing a verb), i.e. they were not combined with other clauses.
Let’s look at some examples of possible clause combinations.
In the following example, the clauses are equally important, so they are 
combined with a coordinating word. This word is ‘but’, which expresses 
contrast:
Trade brings benefits to all countries, but to some more than to others.
Notice how in sentences like these, information is sometimes left out, 
because there is no need to repeat it:
Trade brings benefits to all countries, but (trade brings benefits) to 
some (countries) more than to others.
Notice also how the two clauses could stand on their own, i.e. they are 
grammatically complete sentences:
Trade brings benefits to all countries.
Trade brings benefits to sobie countries more than to others.
79

Writing
Here is another example of coordinating clauses:
The previous evidence was not conclusive and the current data also 
show a mixed result.
The two independent clauses are:
■ 
the previous evidence was not conclusive
■ 
the current data also show a mixed result
The coordinating word here is ‘and’, which expresses addition. Another 
common coordinating word is ‘or’, which links alternatives.
In the following examples, one clause is more important than the 
other, which is indicated by the type of word that is used to link them. 
The clause which is less important, the subordinate clause, gives 
background information. When you are reading your sources, be aware 
of subordination, as this will help you to see what is important and to 
follow the author’s argument.
The following are examples of subordinating words:
■ 
that, what, who, whom, which, whose (these introduce relative 
clauses and are often used in clauses that have a noun or adjective 
function)
■ 
when, since, after, while, because, so that, although, even, whereas, 
while, if, unless, provided that, assuming that, in order that, i f ... 
then (these are subordinators that are often used in clauses with an 
adverbial function)
Let’s look at some example sentences:
Some towns are supported by campaigns which were started by 
residents who are concerned for the future viability o f their town 
centre.
If we try to reduce this sentence to its basic pattern, we can see that 
there are three conjugated verbs: ‘are supported’, ‘were started’ and 
‘are concerned’. However, the words ‘which’ and ‘who’ tell us that
80

7 Reading comprehension
the information that follows is less important information. The most 
important information in the sentence therefore is:
towns / are supported (by campaigns)
■ 
‘which’ refers back to campaigns; the additional information is that 
they were started by residents
■ 
‘who’ refers back to residents; the additional information is that they 
were concerned
When the current o f air creates a pressure which distorts the diaphragm, 
air pressure can be detected, which allows the speed o f the air current to 
be determined.
The conjugated verbs are ‘creates’, ‘distorts’, ‘can be detected’ and 
‘allows’, but the most important part of the sentence is ‘pressure can be 
detected’ -  the other verbs are part of subordinating clauses. The first one 
‘when the current... diaphragm ,...’ expresses a condition, and the second 
‘which allows ... determined’ gives more information about the whole 
situation (that air pressure can be detected under certain circumstances).
The second example shows that it would be quicker to separate the 
sentence into clauses, before looking for conjugated verbs.
Being aware of what is important or not according to an author can 
enhance your reading comprehension and help you to paraphrase 
correctly, staying true to the point that the author wanted to make.
Use the following techniques to understand complex academic sentences:
■ 
If there is only one conjugated verb, break the simple sentence down 
into its main components (head nouns, verb).
* 
If there are two conjugated verbs or more, find the most important 
clause (i.e. ignore the sub-clauses), and break this down into its main 
components.
■ 
Start building the sentences back up: what extra information is there 
around the head nouns, what background information is provided in 
the sub-clauses?
In your analysis, be aware that there may be omissions, and think about 
what pronouns refer to.
81

Writing
Analyse sentences 2-4 using the technique outlined above. The first one has 
been done for you.
1 
M ass is directly proportional to volume for solids and liquids, so that the ratio mass/ 
volume is constant on any observation, which shows the relationship between mass and 
volume.
■ mass / is / (directly) proportional (to volume) (for solids and liquids) [main clause] 
[extra information: consequence]
■ 
the ratio (mass/volume) is constant (on any observation) [sub-clause]
[extra information: ‘is constant’]
■ 
this shows something (the relationship between mass and volume)
2 
Found in bony fish, a swim bladder is a bladder which is situated in the roof of the 
abdominal cavity.
3 
Notation is a method of recording music, which is based on naming the notes by letters 
and also includes ways of distinguishing the value of notes in terms of duration.
4 
Traditional models of urban zones, such as the models by Burgess (1920s) or Hoyt 
(1930s), place the Central Business District (CBD) in the middle of the town, which is 
unsurprising.
J  Exercise 2
Possible difficulties
Some words have the same noun and verb forms, which can lead to
confusion. Read the following sentences, in which the highlighted words
have the same noun and verb forms:
1 
The problem of consistency of the maximum position estimates has 
been treated in the literature by several authors.
2 
Examination of the collected data for concentration measurements in 
public water supplies shows more than 20,000 positive readings.
3 
The biomass increases of this type of macro fauna are harder to 
measure.
4  
A mathematical expression has been developed to relate the 
field contrast with other data related to the surface.
82

7 Reading comprehension
Did you have to read them more than once? Sometimes our first 
interpretation is wrong. For example, in sentence 1, you may have read 
‘estimates’ as a verb, but it is a noun in the subject.
r
\
 Exercise 3
Are the words in bold in sentences 2-4 nouns or verbs?
Sentences that contain reduced relative clauses can also cause some 
confusion. Read the following sentence and decide whether it is correct 
and finished.
The organizations support the patients’ meetings and clinics by 
providing printed information about heart disease and support 
available.
Did you think that the ending was wrong, e.g. that it should say ‘available 
support’, or that it should continue (e.g. ‘support available medical staff’)?
The sentence was in fact correct. The underlying meaning is ‘... by 
providing printed information about heart disease and [about] support 
[that is] available.’ In a reduced relative clause, the relative pronoun and 
verb are left out.
Analysing noun phrases
Noun phrases are commonly used in academic writing. We have already 
discussed that they can occur in the subject or object of sentences. In 
Chapter 5 we also mentioned that it is important that you can identify 
the head noun in your own phrases, to make sure that your subject and 
verb agree. Identifying head nouns is also important for your reading 
comprehension.
When you are reading, you may have to work out the meaning of new 
words, so it is important that you are aware of the different relationships 
between the nouns in noun combinations.
83

Writing
Glossary
b lu e s  N-PLURAL 
If you have got 
the blues, you 
feel depressed, 
c h a r ity  (charities) 
N-CO UNT 
A charity is an 
organization 
which raises 
money in order 
to help people 
who are ill, 
disabled, or very 
poor.
fa tig u e
N-UNCO UNT 
Fatigue in metal 
or wood is a 
weakness in it 
that is caused 
by repeated 
stress. Fatigue 
can cause the 
metal or wood to 
break.
Look at the following examples, which all give examples of restaurants:
1 
Fast food restaurant
2 
Neighbourhood restaurant
3 
Palace restaurant
In the first example, a fast food restaurant sells fast food, it is all about 
fast food. The relationship between the nouns is topic.
The second example is different: the restaurant doesn’t sell 
‘neighbourhood food’, it is in the neighbourhood, and also for the 
neighbourhood. The relationship expressed by the nouns is location and 
purpose.
The last example is different again: the restaurant is not related to a place, 
it is not serving food to a palace, or based in a palace. ‘Palace’ is the name 
of the restaurant.
Topic, purpose, location and name are only some of the relationships 
between nouns. A few other ones are: material (sea spray -  the spray 
consists of sea water); possessor (student debt -  the debt belongs to the 
student); time (winter blues -  the blues happen in winter); agent, i.e. 
the person who does something (charity campaign -  the campaign is 
organized by the charity); characteristic (metal fatigue -  the weakness 
is a characteristic of the metal); subtype (plant cell -  a plant cell is a 
type of cell). Notice how the first or the second noun can express the 
relationship, e.g. in ‘winter blues’, the first noun ‘winter’ expresses the 
time relationship; in ‘metal fatigue’, the second noun’ fatigue’ expresses 
the characteristic.
When you have three nouns, you need to think about how all the nouns 
relate to each other, e.g. ‘heart rate monitor’ can be divided up as follows: 
‘heart rate / monitor’: it is a monitor that measures heart rate, not a ‘rate 
monitor’ for the heart.
84

7 Reading comprehension
Z *1— | 
-y
\
\
 Exercise 4
Match the noun combinations with the relationships they express.
For example: 
1 university policy -  c topic : the policy is about the
university
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
location
purpose
topic
name
material
possessor
time
agent
university 
summer term 
customer complaint 
customer receipt 
university library 
toothpaste ~r—
almond paste,_ 
Bernouilli principle
a
d
f
— 2>§ 
— h
The same issue occurs with adjective and noun combinations. In 
the example ‘chopped Moroccan herbs’, you need to work out that 
‘Moroccan’ is an adjective not the noun referring to a Moroccan person: 
the herbs are Moroccan and chopped, and no Moroccans were chopped. 
Moroccan and herbs go together: this is about ‘chopped / Moroccan 
herbs’, not ‘chopped Moroccan / herbs’. If you are buying ‘dry cat food’, 
you are getting cat food that is dry, not food for dry cats. Both ‘dry’ and 
‘cat’ function as adjectives in front o f ‘cat’.
Thinking about which words go together in sentences can help you make 
sense of texts.
85

Writing
\
\
 Exercise 5
Insert a line (/) to indicate which words go together.
5 
data/tream  systems
6 
sociaj/stience issues
7 
humaryfesource management
8 
economic/growth theory
It is normally not difficult to find the underlying general structure of a 
source, e.g. in articles and books, titles and subheadings are used to steer 
you in the right direction. Within the different parts, you may find a 
three-part-structure: introduction, main part and conclusion.
For more information on three-part structure and signposting, see Chapter 2.
You may find signpost words such as ‘in conclusion’ which clearly show 
you the function of the section that you are reading, but this is not always 
the case. The following sentences have been taken from an academic 
source. They are the first sentences of the different parts of the text (which 
can be identified by paragraphing and subtitles). Notice how they follow 
a pattern from the general to the more specific, and how they give clues 
about the rest of the section.
Identifying signposts
86

7 Reading comprehension
For the past 150 years, the increasing 
inequality o f incomes has beeri a clear 
tfencTm ihe_glgbqLs.cnnainy.
general introduction of the topic
Two case studies, developed for this 
report, will illustrate the likely future 
employment trends.
clear indication of a two-part structure 
in the following text
In industrial countries the problem is 
relatively recent.
one area -  raises the expectation that 
j 
other areas will also be looked at
Although governments have to work 
within national constraints, the choices 
they make can help increase national 
incomes.
conclusion -  this starts to answer part 
j 
of the question the student was asked, 
j 
about the role of governments in 
j 
creating employment and incomes
If you do not understand a section of the source text, look for clues in the 
language to see how the section fits into the overall argument.
For example, in the following section, you should be able to find the 
point, the evidence and the explanation.
Tanzania has been recognized internationally 
for its success in Economic Empowerment 
o f Women.
first sentence: point
The Global Gender Gap Report 2006 ranked 
Tanzania number 1 in terms o f women’s 
economic participation (World Economic 
Forum, 2006). The World Bank (2007) cites the 
National Bureau o f Statistics (2002) in stating 
that women have been playing an important 
role in Tanzania’s economy, especially in the 
agricultural sector where women make up 
82%  o f the labour force. Overall, the 80.7%  
participation rate o f Tanzania’s women in the 
labour force is slightly higher than that o f the 
men’s rate o f 79.6% .
following sentences: evidence
This suggests that the government’s efforts to 
achieve gender equality have been successful.
last sentence: explanation
Another clue is the presence of counter-argumentation -  as we saw in 
Chapter 6, this often precedes an author’s actual claim.
87

Here are some examples of contextual clues that indicate counter­
argumentation and other arguments presented by others:
K"
Indicating counter-argumentation
One study has emphasized the need for ...
So far there has been limited agreement only on ...
Some studies have challenged this concept.
There is continuing debate about the value o f ...
The literature shows some contradictory findings in this area.
For more information on argumentation and counter-argumentation, see Chapter 6.
It can be worth looking for the following patterns to enhance your 
understanding:
■ 
the background, e.g. previous research
* 
the position of the author: which previous research they agree / do
not agree with
■ 
the claims that the author makes
■ 
the evidence that is offered for each claim
* 
the comments that are made about each claim and/or evidence.
Claims the author makes
There are several drawbacks ...
There is not enough reliable evidence th at... 
These are the most dangerous substances ... 
One o f the most significant patterns is ...
For more information on claims the author makes, see Chapters 8 and 10.
If you can identify what the function of a particular section is, you will be 
able to understand the individual points better.

7 Reading comprehension
Remember
To really understand your source material, you need to use a 
combination of general and detailed analysis.
A detailed analysis can be useful for a section that is difficult or that 
you may want to paraphrase.
You can use your knowledge of sentence structure to break down the 
section into smaller components that are easier to understand, before 
putting it all together again.
To avoid misinterpretations, bear in mind that some nouns and verbs 
have the same form, that words might be left out in relative clauses, 
and that noun phrases may need careful analysis.
For the more general analysis, look for structural signposts that tell 
you the function of the section of text you are reading.
Look for an argumentational pattern to see how the section fits into 
the overall argument the author is making.
89

V
8
Authority
Aims /  develop a dear point of view
V state your opinion
V use T , ‘we’ and other personal pronouns 
appropriately
/  
evaluate the strength of your own 
arguments
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1
When writing an essay, I put all the information I have found 
together first, and then draw a conclusion from it.
agree
disagree
not sure
2
I know how to use cautious language to state my opinion.
agree
disagree
not sure
3
I know how to use personal pronouns appropriately to show 
my position on a subject.
agree
disagree
not sure
4
I can evaluate my own arguments to see if evidence needs to 
be provided and if it is strong enough.
agree
disagree
not sure
The principle of Authority
A question that students frequently ask is how an essay can be personal, 
when they are supposed to read similar sources and answer the same 
question as other students, and write in an impersonal style. In this 
chapter and the next we will look at how writers create their own identity 
in their writing.
The easiest way to answer the above question is that no two essays are 
ever the same. Two students may have used similar sources, and may 
write about the same solutions to a problem, stating the same evidence. 
However, they may still receive different grades. Here are some examples 
of what makes each essay unique:
■ 
the exact sources that have been used
■ 
the way the sources have been presented, e.g. the order in which they 
are used, the information that has been selected from them, how
90

8 Authority
the essay writer has related them to each other, the strength of the 
arguments, how the writer has explained the arguments, whether 
different opinions have been included to give a balanced view, which 
arguments have been relied on most, and which ones have been 
emphasized
■ 
the language that the writer uses to organize and present views
■ 
the e«say writer’s opinions and reasoning.
Developing a clear point of view
A student who has written an essay with a clearly developed point of 
view, which has been argued well through the use of sources, and who has 
made connections between the sources throughout, will receive a better 
grade than a student who has provided a list of the opinions of others 
without much comment on them.
It would be wrong to gather a lot of information, put it together and then 
draw a conclusion from it. To speak with authority, you should do the 
exact opposite: form an opinion, based on preliminary reading if need be, 
and then use sources to justify it.
Let’s have a look at two examples taken from pre-university essays.
The students were asked to think about car usage and consider whether 
private car ownership is still justified in the modern world or cars should 
be banned. Two students worked together and came up with advantages 
and disadvantages of cars, and put them in a table. They then wrote 
their short essays individually. Which essay just lists opinions, and which 
speaks with more authority?
Advantages of cars
popular: ownership keeps increasing
convenient: they can get you from door to door, always available 
used by individuals and by businesses
Disadvantages of cars
damage to environment: pollution from manufacturing process, from driving cars 
and road building, petrol (oil) will run out 
cost: price of new car, cost of repairs, rising petrol prices 
risks to human health: more people die in car accidents than other transport 
accidents, increase in asthma and other illnesses 
traffic problems: too many cars, traffic jams cause delays and stress
Glossary
p r e lim in a r y  a d j
Preliminary 
activities or 
discussions take 
place at the 
beginning of 
an event, often 
as a form of 
preparation.
Glossary
b a la n c e d  a d j
A balanced 
report, book, or 
other document 
takes into 
account all the 
different opinions 
on something 
and presents 
information 
in a fair and 
reasonable way.
91

cars have beew debated for m-awy years, som e say  that they are 
cowvewiewt, whereas otherpeopLe say  that they are expensive, awd oau.se 
problems for traffic, hw.rn.ar. beiwgs awd the ewvirowm,ewt. A s they 
cause so m.awy problems, goverwmewts should baw cars.
M aw y people have cars because they are available whew awd where they 
wawtthem . (f they wawtto go awd v isit fa m ily  iw  a differewt city, 
they caw jw st take their car awd drive to the rig h t address, if  they took 
a traiw, they would s t ill weed to get to the statiow, awd the traiw  weight 
wot stop close to the address they wawt. Traiw s awd buses do wot travel 
at w ig h t so they would wot be able to v isit fa m ily  at certaiw times. 
B»usiwesses also rely ow road trawsport. c a rs give people cowvewiewce, so 
they dow't u su a lly  m iwd that they are expewsiveto buy awd m aiw taiw  
(repairs awd petrol) because it is worth it fo r them.
H-oweveu cowvewiewce is the owly advaw tagethat cars offer, awd there 
are m aw y disadvawtages. F irstly , people die because of cars. More 
people die owthe road thaw iw  othertypes of accidewts awd m aw y are 
childrew ow their w ay to school. People also die iw road rage iwcidewts 
whew people get aw gry with other drivers fo r driviw g badly. They cow Id 
also die or su ffe r fro m  the pollwtiow that cars cause, e.g. asthm a is 
iwcreasiwg.
secow dly, pollutiow  causes dam age to the ewvirowmewt. Most cars 
s t ill use petrol, which causes dawcage. Moreover buildiw g cars awd 
wtotorways is bad fo r the ewvirowwiewt too.
L astly, these problems are goiwg to iwcrease because there are too m aw y 
cars alre a d ij awd owwership w ill keep iwcreasiwg. t+aviwg more oars 
also mea ws more tra fficja m s, which w ill have a wegative iwfluewce ow 
bwsiwess i f  they m ake busiwess people m iss appoiwtmewts.
iw cowclusiow, the disadvaw tages outweigh the advawtages, so cars 
should be bawwed.
312 words
Essay A

8 Authority
Essay B
.since their Invention In the late i^th ce n tu ry , ■people have owned and 
en joyed drlvin g  cars. This has claused welt-publicized problems both fo r 
society as a whole a n d  fo r in d iv id u a ls, yet car ownership Is still o n  the 
inc-rease. Although b a n n in g  the c a r w ould solve m a n y  problems, the 
popularity o f the car suggests that this Is wot a practical option.
in  theory, people should be In fa v o u r  o f banning cars. There would be 
-fewer deaths on the roads, few er in c id e n ts o f road rage, a n d  a red u ctio n  
in  illn e sse s su c h  a s  asthma and stress-related conditions cau sed  by 
tr a ffic  delays. Apart fro m  hum an health, the natural e n v iro n m e n t 
would also Improve. First o f a ll, pollution- w ould decrease, a s  there 
w ould be few er c a rs b ein g m a n u fa c tu re d  a n d  driven , a n d  the network. 
o f ro ads w ould no lo n g e r need to be expanded, we would also have less 
need fo r  oil, which Is not a renewable resource. These are all benefits 
for society a n d  fo r in d iv id u a ls , o n  a more personal basis, people 
would also save m on ey , a s  they would no lo n g e r have to pay for ca rs 
th em selv es or be responsible for car-related costs such as Insurance, 
repairs and fuel.
t+oweveie despite the fact that b a n n in g  cars would protect the 
en v iro n m en t a n d  sav e lives a n d  m on ey 
political agenda. There are probably a n u m b e r o f re a so n s fo r th is, but 
the m a in  issu e  is that cars have become too m u ch  a part o f o u r lives, we 
ca n  rely on th em  w henever we tike to do business, travel and socialize. 
For over a ce n tu ry  we have developed e m o tio n al co n n ectio n s with these 
m ach in e s, p u ttin g  o u r p e rso n a l con ven ien ce before the needs o f so ciety . 
w h e n  the targe m a jo rity  of people do this, personalpreference becom es 
p ublic preference, and change becom es Impossible, w e should not try to 
ban cars, but perhaps we should have banned cars while we s t ill could.
310 words
, It has never been part o f a n y
93

Writing
Glossary
a u th o r ita tiv e  a d j
Someone or 
something that 
is authoritative 
has a lot of 
knowledge of 
a particular 
subject.
Although students A and B use similar arguments, based on the same 
research, they have worked in very different ways.
Student A has put the arguments in favour and against next to each other 
and because there are more arguments against, she-has concluded that 
cars should be banned.
Student B developed an opinion first. He personally would not want to 
ban cars, and thought this through: most of his friends had the same 
opinion, and political parties also don’t suggest banning cars. He decided 
to argue against banning cars, but would have to find ways to explain 
why. He decided that the reason why nobody seems to want to ban cars 
had to be emotional attachment, as the rational arguments do not seem 
to convince anyone. He also thought that the reasons might be historical, 
because we have had cars for so long and also that perhaps the majority 
of people put their own interests and comfort first.
Whereas student A was merely listing the arguments, student B’s essay 
is stronger because it focuses more on reasons. You need to have an idea 
and then use your evidence to support it (as in essay B), rather than put 
the evidence you have found together and draw a conclusion (as in essay 
A). Student B was using a thought process which is closer to what is 
expected at university.
Note that both essays should have included references to sources. In the 
next chapter, we will look at essay A again for this reason.
To show your reader where you stand on a subject, you need to 
distinguish your opinions from those of others. By using appropriate 
evidence from the work of published authors to develop your own 
arguments, and acknowledging the sources you have used correctly, you 
make your own views more convincing and make your own identity 
stronger in your essay. This makes your writing more authoritative.
For more information on how to correctly include and acknowledge the ideas of others in your work, 
see Chapter 9.
94

8 Authority
Stating your opinion: cautious language
Glossary
anti-
discrimination
A D J
An anti­
discrimination 
action is an 
action that 
shows that you 
are opposed 
to the practice 
of treating one 
person or group 
of people less 
fairly or less 
well than other 
people or groups.
Look at this example from a student essay:
The Implem-eiAtcitLoiA. of awtl-dls.anwd\n,ntlow actions, with loi^g-term. effects 
Is. therefore forgotten where m.a ungers have to deal with other urgent tssu.es, 
such as n-ew competitors.
The word ‘forgotten’ is probably too strong (and imprecise) here. Better 
choices would be ‘delayed’ or ‘put on hold’.
We have already mentioned cautious language in the context of academic 
modesty. By using the language of possibility (rather than certainty), 
scholars acknowledge that their views are not the only ones, that they 
are open to being challenged, and that they respect other opinions and 
research. Remember that toning down a statement does not make it 
weaker, but more persuasive, and therefore academically stronger.
Here are some examples. Compare the two versions before you read on.
1 
Psychologists and anthropologists tend to have a different 
interpretation o f what is realistic.
2 
Psychologists and anthropologists have a different interpretation o f 
what is realistic.
Sentence 2 is a generalization, which readers may feel is too strong and 
they could easily say that it is incorrect. Sentence 1 says there is a pattern 
(‘tend to’), not a fact, so it does not claim this is always true. Readers will 
be more easily persuaded about the truth of this statement.
There is another reason for cautious language: sometimes it indicates that 
we are reading the writer’s interpretation or opinion, as in the following 
example:
The ratings were 4 or 5 for every aspect o f the course. This 
is normally interpreted as evidence that the students are very 
'satisfied with the course. However, here the relatively fast speed of 
completion and the lack o f differentiation, i.e. the absence o f ratings 
o f 1 and 2 may also be an indication that the students did not take 
the questionnaire seriously enough.
95

Writing
The use of
Glossary
sta n c e  (stances) 
N-CO UNT
Your stance on a 
particular matter 
is your attitude 
to it.
in te n t (intents) 
N-VAR
If you state your 
intent in a piece 
of writing, you 
say what you 
intend to do in 
the writing.
Notice how the cautious language is used to comment on data: ‘normally 
interpreted’ is contrasted with what happened here, which the writer 
thinks ‘may be an indication’ of something completely different.
In the following example, the writer is using cautious language to draw 
conclusions and make recommendations:
In other words, this method o f PR is likely to be more effective and the 
company could benefit from using it to avert future crises.
For more information on cautious language, see Chapter 4.
I' and ‘we’
In Chapter 4 we discussed that it is good to avoid ‘I’ and ‘we’ where 
possible, mainly because of academic modesty, but that sometimes they 
are appropriate. The use of these personal pronouns is also linked to 
identity, so we need to look at them again. Here we will concentrate on 
how they, and other personal pronouns, are used by writers to show their 
stance.
Personal pronouns such as I, we, my and our are used in several ways 
to bring the writer and their identity into the text, which is appropriate 
in certain contexts. As can be seen in the following examples, they are 
used to:
■ 
make personal views clear: My concern is ...
* 
contrast the writer’s approach with other people’s methods: My 
definition ... is based on Munson’s but combines this with ...
■ 
write about the personal actions of the writer (e.g. research, 
experiments): Experiments have been carried out by Nelson and 
Smith (1993) and Ojha and Mazumder (2008). In our experim ent...
■ 
refer to people in general, ‘all of us’: We know th at... has 
consequences ... that are still apparent... today ...
■ 
relate the reader to the writer: As we have seen, ...
They are also used to organize the essay, state its intent, and distinguish 
between the opinions of the writer and those of others, as shown in the 
following examples.
96

8 Authority
Glossary
scandal
(scandals)
N-CO UNT
A scandal is 
a situation or 
event that is 
thought to be 
shocking and 
immoral and 
that everyone 
knows about.
In the first example below, the student has been asked to look at the way 
the media has reported on a particular British political scandal of her choice 
and the people involved. Compare the two versions before reading on.
1 In this essay the ‘cash for honours’ scandal was chosen, because it 
was the first time that a prime minister was interviewed by police 
investigating corruption. First, the background o f the scandal will 
be given, followed by the way the different media reacted, especially 
to the involvement o f the prime minister, Tony Blair.
2 I have chosen to discuss the ‘cash for honours’ scandal, because it 
was the first time that a prime minister was interviewed by police 
investigating corruption. I will give the background of the scandal 
and an account of the way the different media reacted, with a 
particular focus on the involvement o f the prime minister, Tony Blair.
The first example is not wrong, but it sounds strange. When reading the 
passive construction ‘was chosen’, the reader may wonder who chose it. 
Also, in this introduction to the essay, the writer is telling the reader what 
will come next. At this point, it is natural to refer to the person who has 
done this organization and use T .
The following example is also from an introduction, where the writer 
states his intent.
1 
In this essay I argue that the worth o f humanities as a subject of 
study cannot be measured just by economic considerations.
2 
This essay argues that the worth o f humanities as a subject o f study 
cannot be measured just by economic considerations.
Both versions are acceptable, but note that the use of T  in the first 
sentence makes the identity of the writer stronger. This works well here as 
it emphasizes the value of the research, perhaps in contrast with the views 
of others (who measure economic considerations only).
For more information on showing your stance in writing, see Chapter 10.
Evaluating your own arguments
To make your essay stand out, you have to show your point of view in the 
ways that we have discussed above. However, even if you express yourself 
clearly and explicitly and are using the right language, you will only speak 
with authority if your arguments are strong. You should evaluate your

Writing
O
\
arguments in the same way as you look at those of others by considering 
whether evidence needs to be provided and if it is strong enough.
Exercise 1
Read the following short pre-university essay, which lacks authority because of 
problems with the arguments. Answer the question.
Which o f the following can you find in this essay? They should all be avoided 
in essays because they are not academic ways o f arguing. The first one has been 
done for you.
1 
bias: looking only at the evidence that confirms your belief
This essay is biased because it does not consider the evidence against the 
writer’s opinion.
2 
subjectivity: making claims without evidence, using negative or 
stereotypical (lacking originality) language
3 
personalization or anecdotal (containing anecdotes rather than research) 
evidence: using a personal example (‘this happened to me so this is what 
happens to everyone’)
4  
using absolutes (no one, ever, a ll...)
5 
attacking the person who makes the argument rather than arguing against 
what they say
6 
being in favour of/against an argument because a lot of people are in 
favour/against
7 
being in favour of/against an argument because an important person is in 
favour/against
8 
misrepresenting a view so that it is easier to reject it
9 
saying that something is true because there is no evidence that it is false
~&eca use of the spread of the world's economic crisis, more and more people are astei ng for 
a single world currency system, therefore, it is a good idea to implement this.
First, the ristes involved in foreign exchange would no longer exist if we had a single 
world currency, in international trade, enterprises always face exchange rate ristes.
The Loss caused by the -floating exchange heavily counteracts their profit. Sometimes 
trading loss occurs in a very short time.
second, it would be very convenient if we had a single world currency, people would 
not need to exchange money or pay service charges in the future, everybody wants 
convenience above everythin else when they travel, so one currency is better.
Last but not least, the competitive -power of enterprises would improve if the prices for the 
goods and services were in same currency, it would be beneficialto social development.
some say that it would be difficult to manage the currency, but these are the usual 
pessimistic economists, Ljiventhe evidence above, l still thinte that a single world 
currency should be put into practice in the future.
98

8 Authority
Tip 
/  
Use the above list to help you evaluate the arguments in your essay.
Remember
Your essays will receive a good grade if you don’t just refer to 
different sources, but also comment on them and make connections 
between them.
You can make your writing more authoritative if you select sources to 
develop your own argument rather than just list the information you 
have found about your topic.
Using ideas from published authors to support your own arguments 
makes your writing stronger, not weaker.
Equally, expressing your ideas cautiously, by talking about what is 
possible rather than what is certain, will make them stronger.
Personal pronouns can be used to indicate a personal point of view, 
perhaps in contrast with that of others; and to distinguish between 
activities of the writer and others.
Certain ways of arguing are not acceptable (e.g. showing bias, using 
personalization) and you will need to provide solid evidence.
99

9  
Integrity
A i m S  
«Z acknowledge the ideas of others 
/
Z  know when to cite 
/
V know whether to quote or paraphrase 
/
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I know what citing and referencing are and why they are 
important.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I know the difference between information that is common 
knowledge and information that needs a citation.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I know the difference between a quote and a paraphrase.
agree | disagree | not sure
4 
I know when to quote and when to paraphrase.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I am aware of the reasons why plagiarism needs to be 
avoided and of techniques to avoid it.
agree | disagree | not sure
6 
I feel confident about using citation formats.
agree | disagree | not sure
The academic principle of Integrity
In Chapter 8 we discussed the principle of Authority and considered how 
important it is to distinguish your opinions from those of others.
The other academic principle that applies here is Integrity, which is about 
honesty. By distinguishing between your point of view and that of others 
and referring to the sources you have used correctly, your writing will 
also demonstrate Integrity, as you are being honest about the extent of 
your own contributions.
First of all, we will look at the ways in which sources used in academic 
writing are acknowledged.
Glossary
integrity
N-UNCOUNT 
If you have 
integrity in 
academic writing, 
you are honest 
about what is 
your point of 
view and what is 
the point of view 
of other people.
use citing and referencing techniques 
understand plagiarism better 
avoid plagiarism
100

Citing and referencing
9 Integrity
Citing is mentioning a source in your essay, such as an article or book, 
especially as an example or proof of what you are saying. It is an 
academic convention that the ideas of others are treated as intellectual 
property: they are owned by the people who expressed them first in that 
way.
Citing can be done through quoting or paraphrasing. Quoting is repeating 
what someone has said in exactly the same words, whereas paraphrasing 
is expressing what someone has said in a different way. Quotes are put 
between quotation marks.
When you quote, you need to give the name of the author, the year and 
the page number, e.g.
Wood (2011: 23) describes their textile industry as “flourishing”, yet 
some analysts are indicating that it is in decline.
When you paraphrase, you don’t need to give the page number, just the 
name of the author and the year, e.g.
Whereas Wood (2011) has a positive view o f the current state of their 
textile industry, some analysts are indicating that it is in decline.
Referencing refers to the list of references you have to provide at the end 
of the essay, i.e. the details of the sources that have been used. One of 
the reasons for doing this is that your readers could then easily find the 
sources to read them too.
Acknowledging the ideas of others
Your essay reflects your opinion throughout, except where you indicate 
that you are giving the views of others. This is why there is no need to 
use language such as ‘I think’ or ‘I know’. However, essays also rely on 
common knowledge, and this does not have to be cited.
Your essay will be a combination of common knowledge, the original 
thoughts of others (cited), and your own unique synthesis and 
interpretation.
these ideas or 
styles.
Glossary
synthesis
(syntheses)
N-CO UNT 
A synthesis of 
different ideas 
or styles is a 
mixture or 
combination of
101

Writing
Glossary
reference work
(reference 
works) N-COUNT 
A reference 
work is a book, 
journal, or 
article that you 
look at when 
you need specific 
information or 
facts about a 
subject, 
verify 
(verifies, 
verifying, 
verified) v e r b  
If you verify 
something, you 
check that it is 
true by careful 
examination or 
investigation.
It can be difficult to know whether you can assume that something is 
common knowledge, i.e. does not reflect a particular person’s ideas, or 
whether you need to cite it. Here are some guidelines and examples:
Some types of common knowledge (no need to cite)
a general fact that most people know
Aristotle and Plato were Greek 
philosophers who ...
a scientific fact that most people know 
or has been accepted for a long time
Every water molecule is made up of two 
units of the element hydrogen and one 
unit of the element oxygen.
a subject-specific fact that has been 
known or accepted for a long time
97%  of the water covering the Earth is 
salt water found in the oceans.
a commonly used term or concept in 
your discipline
The meniscus, a small piece of cartilage 
that acts as a cushion in the knee 
jo in t,...
information that can easily be found in 
general reference works
Advertising is a profession in which 
information about commercial products 
or services is produced.
a well-known quote from a famous 
source
Einstein said that e=mc2.
You will need to cite in the following situations:
■ 
when you would not have been aware of the information without a 
source (e.g. you actually used a general reference work to verify your 
information)
■ 
when others are unlikely to accept what you say without evidence 
from a source
■ 
when you have used a source in which the author presented common 
knowledge in a more personal way, e.g. by interpreting it differently; 
by adding an interesting insight; by presenting the information in an 
unusual format or order, or with a different approach; by phrasing it 
in an original or controversial way.
/  
Get into the habit of thinking critically about whether something is common
knowledge or not. If a statement is not common knowledge, it will need a citation.
102

9 Integrity
/
 
' N y
r \ \  Exercise 1
Which of the following would you provide a citation for?
1 
History refers to events from the past.
2 
History refers to the collection and organization of information that relates to past events.
3 
History is a record or account, often chronological in approach, of past events,
developments, etc.
4 
History is the version of past events that people have decided to agree upon.
5 
History is an account, mostly false, of events, mostly unimportant, which are brought
about by rulers, mostly knaves, and soldiers, mostly fools.
\ 
\ Exercise 2
Which of the following would you provide a citation for?
1 
There are three states of matter: gases, liquids and solids.
2 
Plaque, a substance containing bacteria, can be removed from the teeth by brushing and
flossing.
3 
Ice melts at 0°C.
4  
Ice does not melt at 0°C.
5 
Advertising is any paid form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods 
and services through mass media such as newspapers, magazines, television or radio by an 
identified sponsor.
6 
Advertising is just manipulation.
7 
Galileo did experiments with balls of different sizes and weights.
8 
Galileo was a man who was either loved or hated.
It can be a good idea to work with others to find sources and think about ideas.
However, you need to think about the principle of Integrity: unless you are told to 
work on a group assignment, you should develop the ideas further on your own and 
write independently.
Remember also that letting somebody copy your work is just as bad as copying theirs.
Tips /
/
103

Writing
I 
\ Exercise 3
Reread essay A from Chapter 8 below and indicate where sources need to be 
mentioned.
Essay A
Cars, have been debated fo r m a n y  years, s o m e  sa y  that they are con v en ien t, 
whereas otherpeople sa y that they are expensive, a n d  ca u se  -problems fo r
problems, g o v e rn m e n ts should b a n  cars.
M a n y  people have c a rs because they are available whew a n d  where they wawt 
thei'w. (f they wawt to go a n d  v is it  f a m ily  iw  a d iffe re n t c ity , th ey caw jw st 
tatee their c a r a n d  drive to the rig h t ad d re ss, if  they toote a traiw, they would 
s t ill need to get to the sta tio n , a n d  the traiw  iw ight wot stop close to the 
a d d re ss th ey w an t. T ra in s a n d  b u ses do n o t trav e l a t wight, so they would 
wot be able to v isit f a m ily  a t certaiw tikwes. B-u.siwesses also rely ow road 
trawsport. c-ars give people con ven ien ce, so they dow't u s u a lly  m in d  that 
they are expewsive to bu.y awd w-aiwtaiw (repairs awd petrol) becawse it is 
worth it fo r th em .
However, cowvewiewce is the owly advawtage that c a rs offer, a n d  there are 
wtawy disadvawtages. F irstly , people die because o f c ars. More people die ow 
the road thaw in  othertypes o f a c c id e n ts a n d  m a n y  are childrew ow their 
w ay to school. People a lso  die in  road rage iwcidewts whew people get a n g r y  
with other drivers fo r driviw g badly. They could a lso  die or s u ffe r  fro m  the 
pollwtiow that c a rs cau se, e.g. asthkwa is iwcreasiwg.
.secowdly, polluliow  c a u se s d a m a g e  to the ewvirowwtewt. Most c a rs s t ill u se 
petrol, which c a u se s d a m a g e . Moreover bulldiw g c a rs a n d  wtotorways is bad 
fo r the e n v iro n m e n t too.
Lastly, these problewts are goiwg to in crease because there are too m a n y  c a rs 
already awd ow nership w ill feeep in c r e a sin g , ttaviwg wtore c a rs also wteaws 
m ore t r a ffic  j  a m s, which w ill have a wegative iwflu.ewce o n  b u sin e ss i f  they 
m aize b u sin e ss people wtiss a-ppointm ents.
In co n c lu sio n , the d is a d v a n ta g e s owtweigh the advawtages, so cars showld 
be b an n ed .
312 words
104

9 Integrity
/  
Providing a citation where one is not needed is fine, but not providing one where you 
should is wrong. If you are not sure whether or not a citation is needed, it is better 
to add one anyway rather than risk presenting someone else’s work as your own by 
mistake.
Quote or paraphrase?
Paraphrases allow you to demonstrate more academic skills and are 
valued more highly. Half of your essay could consist of paraphrases.
Quotes are not as common in academic writing so you should not quote 
often. However, there are occasions when it is better to quote, e.g. when 
you want to include in your essay definitions, strong statements or ideas 
that were expressed by others in an original or authoritative way.
For more information on paraphrasing, see Chapter 10.
/  
When you want to present the ideas of others, paraphrase, unless there is a good 
reason to quote.
\ Exercise 4
If you were using the following information in your essay, would you quote or
paraphrase it?
1 
History is written by the winners.
2 
Pop culture and fashion have been influenced for many years by Eastern 
culture. In part, this is due to the flourishing textile industry in countries 
such as China, Pakistan and India. Additionally, fashion has been inspired 
by colours and patterns that are prevalent in the East, with many Western 
designers including them in their ranges.
3 
Fashion is a form of ugliness so intolerable that we have to alter it every six 
months.
105

Writing
Avoiding plagiarism
Glossary
invalidation
N-UNCO UNT The 
invalidation 
of someone’s 
academic 
qualifications 
is a declaration 
that they are no 
longer valid.
e x p u ls io n
(expulsions)
N-VAR
Expulsion is 
when someone 
is forced to 
leave a school, 
university, or 
organization, 
a c c o u n t a b le  a d j 
If you are 
accountable to 
someone for 
something that 
you do, you 
are responsible 
for it and must 
be prepared 
to justify your 
actions to that 
person.
Plagiarism can be described as academic theft, where scholars use the 
ideas of others without saying so. This can happen accidentally, e.g. where 
a student put the source in his list of references but forgot to indicate in 
the text where he used it, or it can happen deliberately, where ideas have 
been copied because a student did not want to do the work.
Accidental plagiarism can happen because of a lack of proofreading, so 
it is important that you leave yourself enough time to check your work.
It can also occur because of lack of experience of the academic context, 
e.g. if in your school essays nobody minded if you included a few ideas in 
your work without saying where they came from.
Deliberate plagiarism can be caused by a lack of confidence, e.g. 
where the writer feels they can never be as good as the authors whose 
ideas and words he or she used. An extreme example of plagiarism is 
when somebody pays for an essay by somebody else, but even a few 
unacknowledged words in a text of your own can be plagiarism.
Some students may be unfamiliar at first with the stricter rules about the 
use of sources in English-medium universities, and the ways in which they 
have to be acknowledged.
However, there is no excuse for plagiarism. There is a reason why we’ve 
used the word ‘theft’ to describe it: it can be regarded as an academic 
‘crime’. The punishment ranges from reducing an assignment grade, to the 
invalidation of credits and degrees and expulsion from university.
Tutors tend to be very good at finding plagiarized sections, through a 
combination of having knowledge of the ideas and sources that are being 
used and of noticing a change of style between the plagiarized part of the 
text and the personal.
See if you can spot it yourself. Look at the following two sections from 
a piece of writing. One of them has a change of style in it; can you tell 
which one?
Lastly, companies are accountable and need to ensure that all 
investors have access to clear and accurate information, because it 
informs them o f the performance o f the company within the market 
and will enable them to make the right investment decisions. All the 
principles mentioned above are critical for a company to develop 
corporate governance, but no enterprise can develop without the
106

9 Integrity
support o f society and the natural resources o f the environment. 
Therefore, in the next section, we will pay attention to the 
relationship between the company and society and discuss 
corporate social responsibility.
2 
Successful companies with increasing sales need to make a decision 
about expansion, e.g. whether they want to produce more and hire 
staff. This means that the profit from the extra production and sales 
needs to be sufficient to cover the extra salaries and companies 
may not be prepared to take this risk. But if the competitors have 
paid attention to their lessons in economics, they will know that 
growth and increased production could bring their costs down, 
and therefore increase profit per unit. What do they know that you 
don’t know? It’s called economies o f scale.
Glossary
t o n e  n - s i n g  
The tone of a 
speech or piece 
of writing is its 
style and the 
opinions or ideas 
expressed in it.
You may have noticed that in section 2, the style is quite academic to start 
with, but towards the end it becomes more informal. Additionally, the 
beginning of the section talks about ‘companies’, whereas the end talks 
about ‘you’ and the competitors. The reason for this is that some of the 
information at the end comes from a website giving business advice. As 
we saw in earlier chapters, the style of any piece of writing is determined 
by its writer in response to the intended readers’ expectations. Anything 
lifted from other sources will have a tone that is determined by the other 
writers and their intended readers, which makes plagiarism easy to 
identify. Another clear sign of plagiarism is when the student’s writing is 
not as good as the published author’s writing, except in the plagiarized 
sections.
/  
Never worry about not sounding as good as the original source. You are not meant to. 
Tutors prefer original work with some mistakes in it to plagiarized copies.
\
\
 Exercise 5
The following example shows accidental plagiarism. Can you find it?
Tip
For instance, some explicit regulations and rules like after-sales taxes repayment are 
commanded by supervisors and managers. Finally, contractual agreements are said to 
range from the ‘explicit’ (formalized by printed contracts establishing legal bonds) to the 
‘implicit’ (the rules based on social behaviours).
107

Writing
Plagiarism is not just about academic integrity (and authority), it is also 
connected to the principle of academic accuracy. If you do not follow the 
referencing rules exactly (e.g. mentioning every author, providing page 
numbers for quotes, following conventions in your reference list), then 
this can be considered (accidental) plagiarism.
Tips 
When you have finished the essay, proofread in two directions:
/  
Check that all the authors that are mentioned in the essay are mentioned in the 
reference list.
/  
Check that all the names in the reference list have been mentioned in the essay itself.
Just a few reasons to avoid plagiarism
■ 
It is a form of theft.
■ 
It is cheating, so it is wrong.
■ 
You are wasting your time as you are not learning how to write like a 
scholar or developing your knowledge.
■ 
You are wasting your tutor’s time as they are not reading / giving 
feedback on your work.
■ 
It makes your grade worthless, so you won’t be able to feel proud of 
your work.
■ 
It is easily detectable and leads to serious consequences.
■ 
You will spend a lot of time worrying about being detected.
■ 
If it does remain undetected, it hurts others because of unfairness, and 
yourself, because you will always know your grade is meaningless.
108

9 Integrity
Other types of plagiarism
Glossary
d e lib e r a te  a d j
If you do 
something that 
is deliberate, 
you planned or 
decided to do it 
beforehand, and 
so it happens on 
purpose rather 
than by chance.
c o n v e y  (conveys, 
conveying, 
conveyed) v e r b  
To convey 
information or 
feelings means 
to cause them 
to be known or 
understood by 
someone.
You need to be aware that plagiarism is more than accidental or 
deliberate theft. It can also occur where a quote or paraphrase has been 
made up, or the ideas from the original text have been changed, perhaps 
to provide more evidence for the point that a student wants to make.
As deliberately misrepresenting a writer’s words is also considered 
plagiarism, you need to take care not to do this accidentally: always 
make sure you understand the original text. If you cannot completely 
understand it, then do not try to paraphrase it.
Another type of plagiarism occurs when students submit the same piece 
of writing twice, i.e. to get credit again for the same work. If you think 
that some of the writing you have done previously, e.g. for another tutor 
in another year, may be relevant for a new assignment, then quote or 
paraphrase yourself as you would any other author.
Another issue to look out for in order to avoid plagiarizing is that your 
paraphrases do not contain too much text that is identical to the original 
text. You are supposed to use your own words to convey the ideas from 
the original text.
Following citation guidelines
Glossary
fo o t n o t e
(footnotes)
N-CO UNT
A footnote is 
a note at the 
bottom of a 
page in a book 
which provides 
more detailed 
information 
about something 
that is mentioned 
on that page.
There are different citation systems; your university will make it clear 
which one you are supposed to use. Examples are Harvard, Vancouver, 
Chicago, APA and MLA. Different departments within a university 
may have different guidelines, e.g. law students may be asked to use the 
OSCOLA system (Oxford Standard for the Citation of Legal Authorities), 
theology students may be asked to use footnotes for religious text 
quotations, though most other departments discourage footnotes. Usually, 
you will be trained on how to use citation systems and/or given detailed 
guidelines.
There is citation software available, but this is normally only used by 
those who have to write very long academic texts, such as theses. Note 
that even if you use software, you will need to be aware of citation 
principles.
Citation conventions are important and you will need to pay attention to 
every detail, such as knowing where full stops go.
109

Writing
In the exercises below, Harvard referencing is being used. There are 
different versions of Harvard, so instead of following the one below in 
your essays, you should always check which system you are required to 
use. Use the exercises to practise following guidelines and proofreading 
for detail. Developing these skills will help you with any other citation 
systems.
Citation formats
When quoting or paraphrasing, the name of the author and the year 
of publication of the source can be given after the source information, 
between brackets. The author’s name can also be used as the subject of 
the sentence. Here is an overview of the two possibilities for quotes and 
paraphrases:
Quote
Paraphrase
1
Author as 
subject of 
the clause
Wood (2011, p. 82) describes 
their textile industry as 
‘flourishing’, yet some analysts 
are indicating that it is in 
decline, e.g. (...)
Whereas Wood (2011) has a 
positive view of the current state 
of their textile industry, some 
analysts are indicating that it is 
in decline, e.g. (...)
2
Author 
mentioned 
after the 
citation
Their textile industry has been 
described as ‘flourishing’ (Wood, 
2011, p. 82), yet some analysts 
are indicating that it is in 
decline, e.g. (...)
There have been positive 
evaluations of their textile 
industry (e.g. Wood, 2011), but 
some analysts are indicating that 
it is in decline, e.g. (...)
Note that page numbers are given for quotes, but not for paraphrases.
So far we have seen examples from books and articles written by 
one author, but it gets more complicated than that. In the exercises 
on pages 111 and 113 you will find some guidelines that cover more 
examples of in-text references.
110

9 Integrity
C " 
\ Exercise 6
Read each guideline and correct example in the boxes. Is the example 
underneath correct according to the rules?
1
Source
Article or book by one author
Example
There has been a tendency to emphasize the individual differences in the 
student learning experience (e.g. Kinginger, 2008).
Correct example?
The value o f formal instruction has also been investigated in this context (e.g. Huebner, 1995).
2
Source
Two authors have written a book or article together
Example
However, these test scores only provide limited information (Collentine and 
Freed, 2004).
Correct example?
However, numerous communicative opportunities are assumed to be obtained from 
‘a variety o f out-of-class environments in which students find themselves while living 
in-country’ (Brecht arid Robinson, 1995, p. 317).
3
Source
Three or more authors have written a book or article together
Example
This also applies to previous research in this field (e.g. Brecht et al., 1995).
Correct example?
Other research (e.g. Lapkin et al, 1995) investigated general proficiency.
4
Source
An official publication with no named author
Example
The Criminal Defence System helps ensure that the Criminal Justice System 
is both fair and efficient (Legal Services Commission, 2004).
Correct example?
The size and profits o f P & G  cannot be matched by any other packaged goods company 
(P& G Annual Report, 2012).
5
Source
The author has published more than one article or book in one year
Example
N ot only do the needs o f patients need to be taken into account in these 
circumstances (Freeman, 2011a), health services need to be able to show 
evidence o f this (Freeman, 2011b).
Correct example?
These insights are not new (Ngole, 2013A).
Note that the abbreviation of the Latin ‘et alii’, which means ‘and others’ is used in 
the text. In the reference list all the authors need to be named.
I l l

Writing
The list below is a reference list based on some of the sources mentioned 
above. Here the information on the left is added to show how different 
sources need different referencing styles.
The following are always included: author surname, author initial, date, 
title, place of publication, publisher.
Notice where page numbers have been included, e.g. for chapters in 
books and articles in journals. Page numbers are always included where 
available or appropriate.
The reference list has to be alphabetical, based on the first mentioned 
author, as in the first two examples below. It is normally on a separate 
page, not indented, and with a line space between each source.
Chapter in a book
Brecht, R., Davidson, D. and Ginsberg, R., 1995. Predictors 
of foreign language gains during study abroad. In Second 
language acquisition in a study abroad context, ed. B. Freed, 
pp. 37-66. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Chapter in a book
Brecht, R. and Robinson, J., 1995. On the value of formal 
instruction in study abroad: student reactions in context. In 
Second language acquisition in a study abroad context, ed. 
B. Freed, pp. 317-333. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Journal article
Collentine, J. and Freed, B., 2004. Learning context and its 
effects on second language acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Learning, 26,153-171.
Chapter in a book
Huebner, T., 1995. The effect of overseas language 
programs: report on a case study of an intensive Japanese 
course. In Second language acquisition in a study abroad 
context, ed. B. Freed, pp. 171-191. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Journal article
Kinginger, C., 2008. Language learning in study abroad: 
case histories of Americans in France. Modern Language 
Journal, 92,1 -1 2 4 .
Online newspaper
Liang, L., 2012. Study abroad and broaden your mind. The 
Guardian [online], 16 August. Available from: http://www 
.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/aug/16/clearing-studying- 
abroad [accessed 12.08.12],
112

9 Integrity
0
Exercise 7
A student included the following sources. Have they been referenced correctly?
Journal article 
Rivers, W., 1998. Is being there enough? The effects of homestay
placements on language gain during study abroad. Foreign Language 
Annals, 31,492-500.
Chapter in a book 
Lapkin, S., Hart, D. and Swain, M ., 1995. A Canadian interprovincial 
exchange: evaluating the linguistic impact of a three-month stay in 
Quebec. In Second language acquisition in a study abroad context, ed.
B. Freed, pp. 67-94. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Following citation and referencing guidelines will allow you to indicate 
clearly which comments are yours, which ideas have been borrowed from 
elsewhere, and where these ideas can be found. This will make your essay 
more authentic and help you to avoid accidental plagiarism.
Remember
If you are not sure whether an idea is common knowledge or not, cite 
it, just in case.
You should paraphrase rather than quote where possible.
There are many reasons why plagiarism is wrong and the penalties 
can be severe.
There is no excuse for plagiarism, not even accidental plagiarism. 
Make sure you present the source text accurately, and acknowledge 
clearly and carefully where it came from.
You can also avoid plagiarism by following citation guidelines 
carefully.
113

Paraphrasing
Asms /  
use a technique to paraphrase accurately 
/  integrate paraphrases grammatically
y  
use paraphrases to show own opinion 
■/ use paraphrases to summarize
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I know how to paraphrase correctly.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I know how to integrate paraphrases in my writing to show 
my opinion about the ideas in the paraphrase.
agree | disagree | not sure
3 
I know whether to use present or past tenses when 
paraphrasing.
agree | disagree | not sure
4 
I know a variety of verbs that I can use to introduce the ideas 
of others.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I know the difference in meaning between the verbs I use to 
introduce the ideas of others.
agree | disagree 1 not sure
6 
I know how to bring together the work of different authors 
in my paraphrases.
agree | disagree | not sure
Paraphrasing technique
In the previous chapter we looked at how important it is to acknowledge 
the ideas of others and how to do this. In this chapter we will concentrate 
more on how to integrate these ideas into your own text. We will examine 
how your choice of tenses and verbs affects meaning, but first we look 
at a paraphrasing technique that will ensure that your paraphrases are 
relevant, accurate, original and integrated.
114

10 Paraphrasing
Glossary
integrate
(integrates, 
integrating, 
integrated) v e r b  
If you integrate 
one thing with 
another, or one 
thing integrates 
with another, 
the two things 
become closely 
linked or form 
part of a whole 
idea or system. 
You can also say 
that two things 
integrate.
acronym
(acronyms)
N-COUNT 
An acronym is a 
word composed 
of the first letters 
of the words in a 
phrase, especially 
when this is 
used as a name. 
An example of 
an acronym is 
NATO which 
is made up of 
the first letters 
of the ‘North 
Atlantic Treaty 
Organization’.
A useful paraphrasing technique is the following one, which consists of 
six steps.
1 
Decide how the ideas from the original text fit into your essay (you 
do not need to use all the details from the section of the text that 
you are looking at, only the relevant ones).
2 
Read the original piece of text repeatedly, until you really 
understand its meaning.
3 
Put the original text away.
4 Write down in note form, and in your own words, what the text 
says.
5 
Compare your notes with the original:
a 
have you expressed the same meaning? 
b have you used your own words?
6 
Integrate the information into your text so that your essay clarifies 
it and builds on it; use grammatical sentences that link the 
information to the text around it.
Note that this technique works in exactly the same way if you are using a 
source in another language: you should not translate literally.
An easy way to remember the six steps, until you have paraphrased so 
often that you remember them anyway, is to use the acronym ‘FRANCIS’:
1
Fit?
2
Read (Repeatedly)
3
Away
4
Note (own words)
5
Compare
6
Integrate Sentences
FRANCIS will help you!
115

Writing
Glossary
synonym
(synonyms) 
N-CO UNT 
A synonym 
is a word or 
expression which 
means the same 
as another word 
or expression.
Paraphrasing is not about substituting words for other words and 
changing the word order of the original sentence. Doing this can lead 
to too much of the original text being reproduced, which can constitute 
plagiarism. Apart from these problems, you may also end up with a 
paraphrase that simply doesn’t work. Consider the following example.
Original source:
Dealing with housing problems was considered the greatest priority. 
Paraphrase:
)( The main concern was believed to be taking action on 
accommodation trouble.
This paraphrase does not sound natural and does not make sense. 
Instead, you could use the FRANCIS technique explained above. 
Assuming that this idea Fits in (F) with the points you are writing about, 
you would Read (R) and reread the sentence until you really understand 
it. Visualization could help here. Then, when you put the text away (A), 
you could end up with the following notes (N):
housing problems / first
When Comparing (C) with the original text, you would notice that 
‘housing problems’ is exactly the same phrase as in the original, but that 
you did manage to note the main ideas.
Putting the ideas in your own words, in a way that Integrates the 
Sentences (I S) in your text, you may get:
The housing situation needed to be improved first.
At this point you would compare with the original again to check that 
you have represented it well. Fiere it was important that you used a past 
tense.
You may end up using synonyms and different word forms, changing 
actives into passives (and the other way around) and changing the word 
order of the original, but as a result of your understanding of the whole 
idea, not as a technique to ‘hide’ the original text.
116

10 Paraphrasing
In Exercise 1, you will practise step 5, comparing (C).
\
\
 Exercise 1
Step 5: comparing. Look at the following three paraphrases and compare them 
with the original text. Do they express the same meanings and have the writers 
used their own words? Which is the best one?
Original text
Pop culture and fashion have been influenced for many years by Eastern culture. In part, 
this is due to the flourishing textile industry in countries such as China, Pakistan and India. 
Additionally, fashion has been inspired by colours and patterns that are prevalent in the East, 
with many Western designers including them in their ranges, [taken from a book by Wood, 
published in 2011]
Paraphrase 1
China, Pakistan and India have had a great influence on the West. One example is their 
textile industry, which is growing and therefore influencing fashion and popular culture. 
Western designers are also using colours and patterns that influence the East (Wood, 2011).
Paraphrase 2
Western fashion is familiar with Eastern culture, for example, typical Eastern colours and 
patterns have often been used in fashion designs. One reason for this is the success of the 
Eastern textile industry (Wood, 2011).
Paraphrase 3
Clothing trends and popular culture have been affected for a long time by the culture from 
the East. The Chinese, Pakistani and Indian clothing industries are thriving, ivhich can 
partly explain this influence. Moreover, stylists from the West have added Eastern colours 
and designs to their collections, which shows how the fashion industry has been influenced 
(Wood, 2011).
The importance of integration
Quotations or paraphrases can never stand on their own -  they always 
need to be linked to the sentences around them.
The following examples show two extremes. Paraphrase 1 shows no 
evidence of how it relates to the surrounding text. Paraphrase 2 supports 
what the writer is saying in the surrounding text. (The paraphrases are in 
bold.)
117

Writing
Glossary
anatomically
ADV
If the body of 
a person or 
an animal is 
anatomically 
large, it is 
physically or 
structurally 
large.
The original text
Researchers have taken brain scans that show that anatomically, 
dolphins have relatively large brains, similar in some aspects to those 
of highly intelligent beings such as humans, [taken from a text by 
Burns, 2010]
Paraphrases
1
Dolphins are much researched animals, 
Burns (2010) says that dolphins have 
been scanned and it demonstrates that 
physically their brains have similarities 
to human brains and are big for their 
body size. This makes them very 
interesting animals.
2
Dolphins have always been considered 
reasonably intelligent, based on the fact 
that humans could teach them tricks. 
There is now scientific evidence that 
dolphin brains show similarities to 
human brains and are large for their 
body size (Burns, 2010). If dolphins are 
even more intelligent than previously 
thought, this raises questions about the 
way they are treated.
The writer of paraphrase 2 demonstrates that she has understood the 
text by Burns, by fitting it in well into the point she is making about 
the intelligence and treatment of dolphins. In the first paraphrase, the 
writer only demonstrates that she has read the text by Burns, and that 
she can change the words and the order of the information. She has not 
demonstrated her understanding, as the other sentences just make general 
comments (‘much researched’, ‘very interesting’).
Step 6 (Integrate Sentences) is very important. As we said, paraphrases are 
not language exercises in which you change some words. Instead they are 
representations of the ideas of others, and should be integrated in a way 
that shows that the original source is understood and how it relates to the 
new idea that is being developed. To do this, introduce the paraphrases 
clearly (think about how they fit in with your essay) and comment on 
their meaning afterwards (think about what they mean), whenever 
possible.
In the following example from a student essay, you can see how the 
student has integrated the paraphrases (in bold) well. The student first of 
all pointed out the contrast between low compliance and the efforts that 
were made (‘Despite ...’) and showed in this way that she understood 
the source text. The second paraphrase, introduced by ‘They have also
118

10 Paraphrasing
claimed that’ is linked to the previous one and seems to introduce a slight 
change in topic, which will probably be developed further in the essay.
respite all the efforts that a n  m.ade by the NHS awd ail the studies that 
address the importai'vce of s u c h  m-ethods I ia, coiA,trolli.wg L.iA .feott.oi/vs, 
Magiornteos et al. (aoio) pointed out that eompLiaiA.ee of healthcare 
providers is still very low, an-d that even, if  it reaches a reason-ably high 
rate it w ill be difficult to sustain, this, they have also claimed that there are 
other factors associated with poor han,d hygien-e complian-ce.
In Exercise 2, you will practise step 6, integrating sentences (IS).
\ 
\ Exercise 2
Step 6: integrate sentences. The text below is the paragraph that comes before 
the paraphrase. Which of the two paraphrases underneath would integrate well 
after the paragraph?
The fashion industry has recently been influenced by the increased global 
interest in what Africa as a continent can offer us. The catwalks have been 
showing block prints, feathers, beads and bright colours. One possible reason 
for this interest is the state of the global economy: people feel a need to 
surround themselves with cheerful colours and accessories in difficult economic 
times. Designers have also become more socially responsible, which has resulted 
in stronger links with ethical African brands and projects that ensure fair labour 
and sustainable employment in poverty-stricken areas.
Paraphrase 1
Also, Western fashion is familiar with Eastern culture as its typical Eastern 
colours and patterns have often been used in fashion designs. One reason for 
this is the success o f the Eastern textile industry (Wood, 2011).
Paraphrase 2
The East has been a more long-term trend in fashion, with typical Eastern 
colours and patterns often being used in fashion designs. One reason for this is 
the success of the Eastern textile industry in countries such as China, India and 
Pakistan (Wood, 2011).
119

Exercise 3
Look at part of an essay below and note where the writer wants to add a 
paraphrase. Then follow the six steps (FRANCIS) to decide which part of the 
original text is useful and to paraphrase it correctly.
The essay
Some scientists have suggested that dolphins are so intelligent that they should 
be treated as a person, albeit a non-human one. [paraphrase to come here] This 
raises questions about how dolphins are being treated now.
The original text
It has long been known that chimpanzees are bright animals, and with their 
human-like appearance and their ability to learn, they have been considered 
similar to people. Now scientists are saying that dolphins communicate in 
ways that are similar to human communication and that they are brighter than 
chimpanzees, which are considered by some to be as intelligent as three-year- 
old children. Researchers have taken brain scans that show that anatomically, 
dolphins have relatively large brains, similar in some aspects to those of highly 
intelligent beings such as humans. Perhaps surprisingly, the researchers have been 
able to establish that dolphins are able to think about the future. They can learn, 
and pass their newly-learnt skills on to others.
[written by Burns, 2010]
When you are integrating your paraphrase into your essay, it is also 
important to remember to make it clear where a paraphrase ends and 
where you continue with your own ideas. For example, in the text below, 
the student needed to put ‘They have also claimed’ in the last sentence. 
Without this indication that she was still paraphrasing, the idea in the last 
sentence would be considered her own.
respite a ll the efforts, th a t are ntade by the Nl-hs and a 11 the stu d ie s 
that a d d re ss the im p o rtan ce o f sue.h methods in  controlling 
in fe c tio n s, Magiorateos et at. (s.o±o) -polluted out that com pliaiA.ee 
o f healthcare providers is s t ill very low, and that even i f  it reaches a 
reasonably high rate it w ill be d iffic u lt to su sta in  this. They have also 
olaitwed that there are other fa c to rs asso ciate d  with poor hand hygiene 
compliance.

10 Paraphrasing
Showing where your point of view fits in
Glossary
neutral
AD J-G R A D ED
If someone uses 
neutral language, 
they choose 
words which do 
not indicate that 
they approve or 
disapprove of 
something.
PR N-UNCO UNT 
PR is an 
abbreviation for 
public relations. 
Public relations 
is the part of an 
organization’s 
work that is 
concerned with 
obtaining the 
public’s approval 
for what it does.
When referring to the ideas of others, writers can show that they agree, 
disagree or are neutral about them. Let’s have a look at how a student 
writer develops some of his points in an essay about public relations in 
times of crisis for a company.
On the other hand, if companies can deal with social networking, 
they may be able to handle the crisis well (Veil, Buehner and 
Falenchar, 2011).
The writer has chosen to paraphrase what he read and has integrated the 
research in his argument (‘on the other hand’). By choosing to paraphrase 
this research in an integrated way, the student is saying that it is relevant 
for his topic and he agrees with it. He is using the source to persuade the 
reader that he is making a valid point.
The following example is from an essay about feminist research. Notice 
how the student develops her ideas: she gives two reasons why more 
women entered the workforce, one of which is based on a source. The 
text has been shortened; this is indicated with (...).
There have been a considerable number of women in the workforce for 
decades. During and after World War II there was a sharp decrease in 
the number of men; hence, women had to do men’s work in the factories. 
(...) Additionally, due to the process of globalization, the international 
labour force has experienced a dramatic change in its composition, 
particularly in terms of demographic, age and gender (Cassell, 2006).
In the following extract, the student’s point is given in the last sentence: that 
it is important that companies communicate quickly in times of crisis. He 
bases this on two areas of research, mentioned in the previous sentences.
Researchers have shown that people found negative information 
more attention-grabbing than positive and that it is weighted more 
in forming the overall evaluation o f the company (Fiske, 1980; 
Skowronski and Carlston, 1989). It also has been suggested that 
the way a company handles negative publicity is one o f the most 
influential factors for consumers when they make purchase decisions 
(Advertising Age, 1995, cited in Ahluwalia et al., 2000). Therefore, it 
is important that during crisis communication PR people are able to 
minimize the potential damage and restore the company image and 
the brand as quickly as possible.
121

Writing
The choice of verb can also show the student’s stance. Reporting verbs 
(also called ‘verbs of reference’) such as ‘point out’ and ‘claim’ are 
important because the verb you choose tells the reader about your attitude 
to what you are reporting. In the following example, the student uses the 
verb ‘point out’, which indicates that she agrees with the research.
Coombs (1998) points out that when a company is perceived as 
being responsible for the crisis, accommodative strategies should be 
used, in order to emphasize image repair.
The verb ‘point out’ is used to present facts, so if you say that an author 
pointed something out, you are saying that they stated a fact. If you use 
the verb ‘claim’, you are saying that what the author says may not be true, 
or is certainly not generally accepted. Similarly, if you think the author 
has argued something well, you may say that they have ‘demonstrated’ 
something, whereas if you are not persuaded by the argument, you might 
choose the verb ‘argue’.
It is therefore very important that you understand the exact meaning 
of the verbs that are frequently used to report the research of others.
Some students try to avoid repeating themselves by using these verbs 
as synonyms. However, they have different meanings. Although it is 
important to vary your language, it is more important to express yourself 
correctly.
For more information on showing your stance in your writing, see Chapter 8.
\ 
j  Exercise 4
Match the verbs with their meanings.
For example: 1 e; argue = state something and give the reasons why it is true
1
argue.
a
tell others about something, draw their attention to it
2
assert 
\
b
state that a theory or explanation is possibly or probably true, 
because it fits in with evidence
3
claim 
\
c
state something that you believe to be true but without proof, 
so it may be false
4
indicate 
\
d
state something firmly
5
point out
state something and give the reasons why it is true
6
propose
f
show that something is true or exists
122

10 Paraphrasing
r
 
\ Exercise 5
Match the verbs with their meanings.
For example: 1 f; acknowledge = accept or admit that something is true or that 
it exists
1
acknowledge
a
show by means of argument or evidence that something is true
2
allege 
\
b
say that something (negative) is true but without proving it
3
demonstrate 
\
c
say something which you believe to be true
4
imply 
\
d
say something that is likely to be true, e.g. because it is a 
necessary consequence
5
prove
make something clear to others
6
suggest
accept or admit that something is true or that it exists
\ Exercise 6
Five of the 12 reporting verbs in Exercises 4 and 5 introduce facts, whereas the 
others present opinion, and mean that there is a possibility that people might 
disagree. Can you separate them? Write them under two headings: Presenting 
facts and Presenting opinion.
Presenting facts
Presenting opinion
123

Writing
Glossary
fe m in ist
e m p ir ic ism
N-UNCO UNT 
Feminist 
empiricism is 
the belief that 
people should 
rely on practical 
experience and 
experiments, 
rather than 
theories, as 
a basis for 
knowledge, and 
that these should 
not favour or be 
concerned with 
one gender more 
than the other, 
d u a list a d j 
If a person or 
their way of 
thinking is dualist, 
they believe that 
something has 
two main parts or 
aspects.
In the following extract, the writer stays neutral. She discusses different 
research positions and some of the criticism and support that these have 
received (see underlined sections), but does not indicate which position 
she finds most valuable.
Saratankos (2005) suggests that there are three main feminist 
research positions. Firstly, feminist empiricism is less radical. (...)
The second position is the feminist standpoint, which suggests 
knowledge is based on experience (Harding, 1987). It is argued that 
women are in the best position to do research on women because 
women understand better about women than men; hence, women 
have unique opportunities to do research (Saratankos, 2005). (...)
It is therefore most accepted by feminists as it is closest to the 
mainstream o f feminist origin. Finally, feminist postmodernism is 
the more recent perspective which (...) refuses the usage o f dualist 
groups o f thoughts. It argues that there are different types o f women 
in terms o f age, occupation, sexual orientation and ethnicity; hence, 
different standpoints iteed to be adopted. Moreover, the world is 
viewed as endless stories or texts, for instance gender is constructed 
through language. This position, therefore, criticizes traditional 
research and practices.
As she has not indicated what she agrees or disagrees with, the student’s 
identity is not very strong in the extract above. However, in the next part 
of the essay she goes on to assess different research studies. Notice how 
the student manages to give her opinion very clearly and how it has been 
informed by the general criticism of the different research positions that 
were mentioned in the extract above.
Undoubtedly, the different findings from the studies above allow 
a better understanding o f policies and practices regarding women 
in the workplace as well as the role o f unions and management in 
addressing gender issues. However, the research studies have some 
drawbacks. They are all conducted by women; hence, it is difficult 
to be sure that the perspectives are unbiased. Moreover, the small 
samples from some workplaces cannot represent every organization 
as a whole. Additionally, these studies emphasize gender as the key 
debate but overlook the importance o f other factors, such as age, 
race and ethnicity that shape the differences between women.
124

10 Paraphrasing
Glossary
drawback
(drawbacks)
N-CO UNT 
A drawback 
is an aspect of 
something or 
someone that 
makes them 
less acceptable 
than they would 
otherwise be.
In the next example, different sources are being contrasted. By doing this, 
the student has demonstrated that he understood their content.
Whereas Dean and L iff (2010) focus on the importance o f three 
industrial relations actors, Foster and Harris (2005) emphasize 
the organizational context in which both managers and external 
environments influence diversity practices.
We would expect the next sentence to continue explaining the point by 
Foster and Harris.
r  ' 
\ Exercise 7
Answer the following questions for the extract below.
■ 
What is the writer’s opinion?
■ 
Does the writer agree with the sources he quotes?
■ 
Do the different sources express the same idea, or are they separate components of the 
argument?
If the company is small, it could ignore equality actions by using ‘word o f mouth’, which 
is indirect discrimination but much faster and cheaper (Dickens, 2005). Furthermore, 
the priority o f any organization is profit (Noon, 2010). The implementation o f anti- 
discrimination actions which have long-term effects is therefore forgotten when managers 
have to deal with other urgent issues.
Integrating quotes and paraphrases grammatically
Grammatically speaking, when we want to mention what somebody else 
has said, we can choose direct speech or indirect speech.
Direct speech -  the exact words someone has said -  is put in quotes:
Serrant-Green stated that there ‘appear to be as many arguments for 
outsider research as against’ (2008, p. 38).
Note that the exact words that the author has used have to be put 
between quotation marks that indicate where they start and finish. The 
author’s surname, the year of the source’s publication and the page 
number on which the quote appears need to be mentioned.
125

Writing
If a quote is quite long, first of all ask yourself if it is wise to include the 
whole quote. If you decide to include a quote which covers four lines or 
more, then you need to set it apart visually. Your style guidelines will tell 
you how. For example, this could involve using an indented block quote, 
using a line spacing of 1 rather than 1.5, and not using quotation marks.
Exercise 8
Quotes need to be integrated grammatically into the new sentences. In the
following sentences this is not the case. Make corrections.
1 
Redmond (2003: 12) defined the low income groups as: ‘Low income is defined as 
$725 or less.’
2 
According to Grelling (2006: 98), to protect the construction materials of the bridge they 
used ‘Chemical additives used in the concrete and waterproofing systems.’
3 
Atkins (2010: 42) said that: ‘Bur] A1 Arab, the world’s most luxurious and tallest all­
suite hotel in Dubai.’
Indirect speech, also referred to as reported speech (it reports what 
someone has said), is used where we make changes to the words that were 
originally written, which is why we find it in paraphrases.
Serrant-Green (2008) states that outsider research seems to have the 
same number o f benefits as drawbacks.
While choosing the appropriate verb of reference to show our opinion 
about what we are reporting, we also need to bear in mind that the choice 
of verb affects the grammatical pattern in the sentence. The 12 verbs from 
Exercises 4 and 5 above can all be followed by a clause, the pattern that + 
complete sentence.
Some verbs are followed by a noun phrase:
They
discussed
the potential problems with this tvpe of
examined
test.
Other verbs are followed by a different type of clause, the pattern 
question word + complete sentence.
126

10 Paraphrasing
The authors
show
how a variety of technologies is already
report
being used to engage students more.
Some verbs can follow more than one pattern:
They
suggest
show
that
these data could be interpreted in different ways.
how
these data could be interpreted in different ways.
a different interpretation of the data.
There are some other patterns, e.g. infinitive and -ing forms can follow 
the verbs:
The interviewees claimed to have had some o f the answers beforehand. 
They suggested limiting the number o f participants to 10.
/  
Make sure that you know the patterns for the verbs you use regularly and pay
attention to the patterns that are used in the articles or other types of research that 
you read.
0
 Exercise 9
Match the sentence parts to make complete sentences. You can use each ending 
more than once and you don’t need to use them all. 
The authors ...
1
concluded
2
argued
that all languages have them.
3
identified
them in all the languages in the sample.
4
claimed
how all languages have them.
5
implied
127

Writing
Choosmg the right tense
The general rules about tense choices apply to Academic English.
In the table below you can see what determines the choice of present, 
past, simple and perfect tenses.
PRESENT
PAST
SIMPLE
■ 
Habit
■ 
General truth
■ 
Some specific contexts (e.g. 
newspaper reports, recipes)
■ 
Past action (specific 
time)
■ 
Past action (no longer 
true)
■ 
active
study/studies
studied
■ 
passive
am /is/are studied
was/were studied
PERFECT
■ 
An action began in the past 
and continues in the present
■ 
An action occurred in the past 
(time is not specified)
*  
An action has occurred more 
than once in the past
■ 
An action was 
completed by a 
definite past time/ 
before another past 
action
■ 
active
have/has studied
bad studied
■ 
passive
have/has been studied
bad been studied
Let’s look at some examples in an academic context.
If you write about what specific researchers did, rather than about the 
opinions or conclusions they reached, then you use the simple past:
Horwell and Baxter (2006) investigated toxicity levels in small particles.
If the focus is on the opinions that researchers hold, rather than the 
activities they undertook to reach them, you use the simple present:
Andrews (2010) sees argumentation as a vital skill in Higher Education.
If you are writing about research activity that spanned a period of time, 
e.g. because different authors worked on the same area, then the present 
perfect is more likely:
Many studies have asserted that the increase in the incidence 
o f inflammatory bowel diseases, asthma and allergic diseases in 
industrialized countries is mainly due to immature immune systems, 
insufficient exposure to microbes, intestinal microbial ecosystem 
imbalances and genetic inheritance disorders (Penders et al., 2010 and 
Pochard et al., 2002).
128

10 Paraphrasing
When you are reporting on a study that was done in the past, you can 
present the results with a past or a present tense, depending on what you 
want to emphasize.
You can use the past tense if you are neutral about the outcome of the 
experiment. You simply present the information as something that was 
true in the past:
They showed that the toxicity levels were higher.
If you want to keep some distance from the findings, e.g. because they were 
true only in those specific circumstances, you can also use the simple past:
Horwell and Baxter (2006) showed that fine particles (<I pm), and 
ultra-fines (<0.01 pm), were likely to be the most toxic.
If the information that is being presented is generally accepted as a fact 
then you use the present tense. You would also use it if you wanted to 
emphasize that the information is current or relevant, or if you wanted to 
show that you agree with it:
Horwell and Baxter (2006) showed that fine particles (<1 pm), and 
ultra-fines (<0.01 pm), are likely to be the most toxic.
Notice that in the last two examples, the first verb ‘showed’ was in the simple 
past: the authors showed this in 2006. In the exercise below, pay attention 
to whether you need to decide on the tense of the reporting verb (such as 
‘show’) or the verb that refers to the information that is being reported on.
^
 J Exercise 10
Choose the correct tense for the underlined verbs.
1 
Bassaganya-Riera et al. (2012) (a) report that the commercial probiotic VSL#3, 
which contains Lactobacillus acidophilus, stimulates mucosal cellular immunity 
against colorectal cancer in mice, while the experiments done by M aroof et al. (2012)
(b) indicate that the previous bacterium enhances systematic immune response against 
breast cancer in mice.
2 
Studies done in Scottish hospitals reveal that one in five patients suffering from HCAI 
had been diagnosed with methacillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection 
(HPS, 2011).
3 
Furthermore, the examined data (a) show that 236 patients (b) are between the age of 
1 to 23 months and 467 patients were over 65 (NHS choices, 2012).
Glossary
assert (asserts, 
asserting, 
asserted) v e r b  
If someone 
asserts a fact or 
belief, they state 
it firmly.
129

Writing
Summarizing
Glossary
fu r th e r
(fu r th e r s, 
fu r th e r in g , 
fu r th e r e d ) v e r b  
If y o u  fu r th e r  
so m e th in g , 
y o u  h e lp  it to  
p r o g r e s s , to  b e  
su c c e s s fu l, o r  to  
b e  a c h ie v e d .
Summarizing is similar to paraphrasing, but rather than working with 
a small section of text which you use to further an idea in your essay, 
you put together ideas from different parts of a text, or from different 
texts (synthesizing). You also focus on the main ideas rather than on a 
particular one. This is what this would look like:
1 
summary from different parts of the same source:
Cook (2006) emphasizes the individual differences in the student 
experience and supports the use o f ethnographic data.
2 
synthesis from different texts:
There has been a tendency to emphasize the individual differences 
in the student learning experience (e.g. Churchill, 2006; Cook, 
2006; Kinginger, 2008).
Within the text, you can choose to put the authors’ names alphabetically 
or chronologically.
Note that in the reference list, each author will need a separate entry, in 
alphabetical order.
As we have seen in this chapter, the choices you make about grammar and 
vocabulary are important when you are integrating the ideas of others. 
They affect the meaning you are trying to convey. Use FRANCIS to make 
sure that paraphrasing is an academic skill, not a language exercise.
130

10 Paraphrasing
Remember
Paraphrases should be used to further the arguments that are being 
developed in the essay. This means they won’t look like the original 
text any more, and will be integrated in the new text, but will still 
express the original idea.
Make your paraphrases relevant, accurate and integrated by using 
FRANCIS.
You should always explain the relevance of quotes or paraphrases in 
your text -  don’t include them without comment.
Your choice of verb to introduce a quote or paraphrase can show 
whether you agree or disagree with the paraphrase.
131

Essay process and presentation
A i m S  /  
the stages in the essay writing process 
/  
presentation
/  
time management 
/  other types of academic writing
§
Quiz
Self-evaluation
For each statement below, circle the word which is true for you.
1 
I am aware of the steps involved in writing an essay.
agree | disagree | not sure
2 
I often get distracted with emails, social networks and other 
messages when writing an essay.
agree | disagree 1 not sure
3 
I often spend hours on end in front of the computer without 
breaks.
agree | disagree | not sure
4  
I always check for common errors at final draft stage.
agree | disagree | not sure
5 
I am aware of aspects of presentation such as font size, line 
spacing, paragraphing, etc.
agree | disagree | not sure
6 
I am familiar with the content and format of reports, case 
studies and reflective writing.
agree | disagree | not sure
From essay question to meeting the deadline
In the previous chapters, we looked mainly at the principles and 
requirements of the academic essay genre, and at the kind of language 
you are supposed to use. We have considered what the final product of 
the essay writing process should be like (e.g. authoritative, conventional, 
modest). In this chapter we will consider in greater depth what it should 
look like, i.e. how it should be presented. We will also discuss the 
similarities and differences between essays and some other academic 
genres. First we will look at the essay completion process itself.
132

11 Essay process and presentation
The writing process
When you wrote shorter essays, it may have been possible to sit down, 
think, plan, write and check in one go. Longer essays are very different in 
nature, because of:
Glossary
so p h is t ic a t io n
N-UNCO UNT
Sophistication 
is the quality 
of being more 
advanced or 
complex than 
other things, 
lin e a r  a d j 
A linear process 
or development 
is one in which 
something 
changes or 
progresses 
straight from 
one stage to 
another; and has 
a starting point 
and an ending 
point.
■ 
their length: more organization and signposting is required
■ 
their research component / referencing conventions
■ 
their increased levels of formality and sophistication of language.
As a longer essay is also more complex, the process leading to it is not 
straightforward. The following graphic, which is linear, is a simplification. 
In reality, you are likely to move back and forth between the stages, e.g. 
by updating your outline after doing some research or by reorganizing 
notes about a particular subject into a paragraph before continuing to 
take notes about other topics.
f 1 Planning
I
2 Analysing the question / producing an outline
f
f 3 Researching / making notes
I
f  4 Drafting (drafts 1, 2, ...)
f 5 Proofreading and presentation (final draft)
U
6 Analysing essay feedback
Figure 1 The six steps in the essay writing process
Planning
The amount of time you spend on a particular assignment will depend 
on a number of factors. If the assignment is worth a lot of marks, you are 
likely to put in a greater effort. The larger the word count, the more time 
it will take. Your previous knowledge of the topic, the availability of the 
sources, and the deadline all play a part. You can also decide how high 
you want your mark to be; if you are aiming higher than a pass, you will
133

Writing
Glossary
allocate
(allocates, 
allocating, 
allocated) verb 
If one item 
or share of 
something is 
allocated to 
a particular 
person or for 
a particular 
purpose, it is 
given to that 
person or used 
for that purpose.
want to spend more time and effort on the work. Your assignment could 
be your priority, or alternatively one of many equally important study 
tasks or something that competes with more important issues in your life.
For these reasons, it is impossible to say how much time you need to 
spend on essay preparation and writing. What you need to do is consider 
the above issues and plan so that you allow yourself enough time to do 
the work to the standard you want it to be.
If you have a lot of time, you may be tempted to work slowly, but then 
you might run out of time. Alternatively, if you feel the deadline is too 
soon, you might rush through certain stages or risk not allowing time for 
proofreading, which can have a very negative effect (see below).
Here is a practical way to manage your time. Look at your diary and do 
the following:
■ 
work out the time you have available each day between now and 
the deadline: look at your free time but be realistic about how many 
hours in total you can focus on your work each day and whether you 
need all this time
■ 
consider practicalities: transport time, library opening times, 
computer and printing facilities, etc.
Once you have the total number of hours that you can dedicate to the 
assignment:
■ 
put some time aside to allow for emergencies (those times that you 
are prevented from working due to unforeseen circumstances)
■ 
allocate half of the remaining time to research and half to the writing 
(adjust this for future essays as your experience will tell you which 
stages take you a long time, and you will probably write more 
quickly in the future); think about the first five stages.
134

11 Essay process and presentation
Assuming you have some time each day, your plan could look like this:
50%  Research 
time stages 1-3
50%  Writing time 
stages 4-5
Reserve time
e.g. Tuesday- 
Friday week 1
e.g. Sunday-Wednesday 
week 2
e.g. Thursday-Friday week 2
N O W .......................................................................................................DEADLINE
Figure 2 Suggested time allocation
Be realistic and give yourself enough time spread over several days: 
overdoing it will lead to stress, which is counter-productive. You will also 
need to allow for plenty of breaks.
/  
Although planning is important, don’t spend too much time on it or use it as a way to 
avoid starting to write.
Analysing the question / producing an outline
In Chapters 1 and 2 we covered most of what you need to know to 
effectively analyse a question and produce a useful outline. To help you 
plan your essay better you could also add approximate word counts to 
the different parts of the essay outline. Not only does this give you a 
better idea of what your final essay will look like, it will also help you 
plan stage 3, the research, as you will know how much information you 
are looking for on a particular topic.
135

Writing
Let’s look at an example from an outline from Chapter 2 with added 
word counts for a 2,000-word essay:
Introduction
background about parallel trade, including 
definition
200 words
M ain body
*  a description of each of the causes of parallel 
trade
*  the aims of international marketers / an 
explanation of the different problems that 
parallel trade causes them
■ the importance of these problems, with 
reasons
*  possible solutions with examples
100 words 
600 words
300 words 
300 words
Conclusion
comments about how big the problem of 
parallel trade is for international marketers and 
if it can be successfully minimized
200 words
This also helps you avoid a common mistake which wastes a lot of your 
time: writing too many words. Some students really get into the writing 
process and then have to cut words or whole sections out of their essay, 
which is a shame because of the work that is wasted and the time that 
is lost. The skill with longer essays is to select only the most important 
information, i.e. what is necessary to develop your argument.
Researching / making notes
In the research stage, don’t forget to:
■ 
note the bibliographic information of each source, without making 
mistakes: the author’s surname and initials, the full title, the publisher, 
the year of publication, the place of publication, and the chapter or 
pages if applicable
■ 
make sure that the section is worth reading in detail before you spend 
more time on it
■ 
make notes while you are doing detailed reading, indicating clearly 
which are the words from the author and which are not
■ 
write down the exact words and page numbers for possible quotes
■ 
adapt the style of your notes to your purpose: choose the right visual 
representation, and use concise language (abbreviations, sym bols,...).
For more information on researching and making notes, see Chapter 6.
136

11 Essay process and presentation
The first draft
Glossary
p r o c r a s t in a t io n
N-UNCOUNT
Procrastination 
is when you keep 
leaving things 
you should do 
until later, often 
because you do 
not want to do 
them.
in s p ir a tio n
N-UNCOUNT 
Inspiration is 
a feeling of 
enthusiasm 
you get from 
someone or 
something, 
which gives you 
new and creative 
ideas.
Look at the first draft as a warm-up or practice activity before you 
do the real work. As is the case for competitive sports, warm-ups and 
practice help you with your performance, but nobody judges you on the 
preparatory work. It is especially important you do not judge yourself at 
this stage. If your standards are too high, you may be at risk of writer’s 
block, an inability to start or to continue writing.
The causes of writer’s block are:
setting your standards too high
expecting too much too soon
thinking about what others expect from you
comparing yourself to others or aspiring to an ideal
self-doubt, fear and stress, which may lead to procrastination
lack of motivation, possibly leading to distractions.
Other reasons are a real inability to do the work and lack of inspiration, 
but as you have got to this stage in your studies and are working from 
research notes, these should not apply in your case.
The following can help:
remind yourself that this is the first stage, where there is no need for 
judgement
replace thoughts of what others want with calming thoughts, e.g. of a 
beautiful landscape
do nothing for a few minutes except breathing slowly, preferably with 
your eyes closed, as this can calm you down and clear your mind
develop a writing ritual, e.g. always start to write after you sip some 
water or chew sugar-free gum while you write
remove any distractions (internet, gadgets, b ook s,...)
just start writing anything; sometimes you just need to start writing 
to get into it
motivate yourself by reminding yourself that this assignment is a 
necessary part of your overall goal, and therefore you have chosen to 
do it
137

Writing
■ 
set yourself a small achievable task and deadline to start, e.g. ‘In the 
next ten minutes I will put together the three definitions of my topic 
and write two comments about how they compare.’ Then set yourself 
another small task.
■ 
say out loud what you want to write as it can help you to formulate 
your thoughts.
It is fine for your first draft to be full of spelling and grammatical 
mistakes, badly formulated sentences, words in your first language, etc. 
This draft is only a first attempt to move away from an outline and notes 
towards the development of your ideas.
The next drafts
After finishing your first draft, it is a good idea to leave your work until 
the next day at the earliest. You can then fill in gaps, reorder paragraphs, 
make clearer links and generally try to make sure that everything is 
logical and expressed clearly. This is the stage in which you should think 
about academic principles and appropriate language. Use your critical 
reading skills (see Chapter 7) on your own work to identify weaknesses in 
the argumentation. Through a continuous process of making changes and 
rereading, your essay versions will keep improving.
For more information on reading comprehension skills, see Chapter 7.
/  
Pay particular attention to the organization of your ideas. Are you starting from the 
general to the more specific and indicating with headings and topic sentences what you 
are trying to say? If there is clarity in these areas, the reader will not be too concerned 
about any language mistakes you may have made.
The final draft
Although nobody expects you to write a perfect essay, your reader will 
become irritated if you have not presented your content clearly and if:
* 
you still make basic mistakes (e.g. spelling), especially in subject- 
specific vocabulary
■ 
you make mistakes that are easily avoidable (e.g. an unfinished word 
or sentence)
■ 
you make too many mistakes.
138
Tip

11 Essay process and presentation
If you give the impression that you do not care enough about your work, 
the reader may not want to spend too much time on it either, which is 
bound to have a negative impact on your grade.
If you have not already done so in previous drafts, look for common 
errors and the typical errors you are likely to make. For some students, 
this may be subject-verb agreement, for others it will be the difference 
between ‘your’ and ‘you’re’.
For more information on common errors, see Chapter 5.
\ 
) Exercise 1
Find the mistakes in the following paragraph. Look only for spelling, subject- 
verb agreement, sentence construction, word forms, stating the obvious and 
missing words.
i iiA,this essay ! will be using resources such as textbooks, the liA-tem-et ai/\.d sciemtificjouriA-als 
! 
j in order to corue to a corcclusioiA. about how -forms of firm, organization, has chan-ged by 
i -particularly focusing on, three dominant models, which areproto-inadustrialization,, factories j 
j and big busin-ess.
j The essay is divided into three maim parts. Fistly, historical comtexts an d characteristics of 
i each model are given-, .secom-dly, the essay explores advan-tages as well disadvantages of each !
; form,. Particular models are Looked at in, terms of timeframe, location-, important institutions j 
I that affect the choose of location-, as well as examples of successful industries orjausinesses 
j 
j followed the model. 
i
j Finally, a brief d iscu ssio n  is given to tatee into account factors that influence model 
! application, which is followed by a conclusion. 
j
Layout and presentation
The final draft is also the time when you need to think about 
presentation. You may already have done so previously, but there is no 
real need to do so until this point.
Look at any guidelines you were given by your tutors regarding font size, 
line spacing, paragraphing, title pages, etc.
IP  
/  
Remember: content first; presentation later.

Writing
Glossary
ju stific a tio n
N-UNCO UNT 
If you use left or 
right justification 
when you lay 
out printed text, 
you begin each 
line at the same 
distance from 
the left-hand or 
right-hand edge 
of the page or 
column.
a p p e n d ix
(appendices) 
N-COUNT 
An appendix 
to a book or 
essay is extra 
information that 
is placed after 
the end of the 
main text.
c a p tio n
(captions) 
n -c o u n t  A 
caption is the 
words printed 
underneath or 
above a picture 
or table which 
explain what it is 
about.
If you are left to make those decisions yourself, then the following
guidelines will be helpful.
■ 
Use a separate page for the title and your details (e.g. your name and/ 
or student number, the tutor’s name, the course number, the deadline 
date).
■ 
Number the pages that follow.
* 
Use subtitles for long essays (from 1,500 words upwards if it helps 
with clarity).
* 
Don’t use bullet points or numbered lists.
■ 
Leave enough space between the lines (e.g. 1.5) and generally allow
enough white space, e.g. before and after visuals.
■ 
Have wide margins (e.g. 2.5 cm on each side of the paper).
■ 
Leave a line between each paragraph.
■ 
Start each paragraph at the beginning of the line or indent five spaces;
be consistent.
■ 
Choose a classical font style and size, such as Times New Roman or 
Courier 12.
■ 
Do not use colour or fun graphics (i.e. impress the reader with 
content only).
■ 
Do not use underlining and bold except in headings.
■ 
Do a spell check -  choose ‘English (United States)’ or ‘English (United
Kingdom)’ as appropriate.
■ 
Use left justification.
■ 
Do not use headers or footers.
* 
Start your reference list on a different page.
* 
Start every appendix (if you have any) on a different page.
■ 
Put one space between each word, after every comma (,), semi-colon 
(;) and colon (:).
* 
If you use a table, put the caption above it, for figures put the 
information below. Number tables and figures separately.
140

11 Essay process and presentation
Look at the essay at the back of the book to see what these guidelines 
make an essay look like.
Analysing essay feedback
You may be allowed to talk through a draft with a tutor for some 
essays, but usually the first time you will receive feedback is when it 
has been graded. It can be tempting to focus on the grade, especially 
if it is a good one, but the feedback you receive is full of useful 
information that you can use to inform your future essays. Do not skip 
this stage as it is essential if you want to keep improving throughout 
your studies.
For more information on analysing essay feedback, see Appendix 2.
Other types of writing
Glossary
o b je c tiv e  a d j
If someone 
is objective, 
they base their 
opinions on facts 
rather than on 
their personal 
feelings.
In this book we have mainly considered essays that are given as 
assignments. The same academic principles we have discussed also 
apply to essays written under exam conditions. The differences will be a 
reduction in:
■ 
length
■ 
number of sources used
■ 
time for planning / thinking / writing.
Generally speaking, the main difference between essays and reports is 
structure. Again, the academic principles are the same, as reports will 
need to be clearly organized, written in an objective style, be accurate, be 
referenced, etc.
A report usually starts with a page which outlines the different headings 
and subheadings in the report, which are numbered (e.g. 1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 
2, 2.1,...).
Reports are likely to be more descriptive than essays. A typical report 
will describe and comment on original research, e.g. an experiment or a
141

Writing
survey. You may be told which format you have to use, or you could use 
the classic IMRAD pattern, which is common in scientific and engineering 
subjects, as follows: 
■ 
Introduction
■ 
Methods (and Materials)
■ 
Results /
■ 
(Analysis and) Discussion / Conclusion
Exercise 2
1 Put the following report contents under the right headings.
■
description of the meaning and significance of the findings, e.g. whether they were 
expected or not
■
design/procedure of survey/experiment
■
how the information was gathered / the experiment was carried out
■
limitation of methods, materials and other aspects
■
outcome of the experiment/survey/comparison ...
■
relevance of the problem
■
suggestions for further reading
■
summary of the project/research
■
the background of the problem/project
■
the purpose of the report/research
■
relevant research about the topic
Introduction
Methods
Results
Discussion and 
conclusion
relevance o f the 
problem
design/procedure o f 
survey/experiment
2 Which of these four parts is the main one?
142

11 Essay process and presentation
Case study reports are pieces of writing that focus on a particular real-life 
issue.
Case studies are used in many different departments for a variety of 
reasons. In medicine, it could be a risk assessment; in political science it 
could be an analysis of the emergence of a social movement; in business, 
it could be an examination of the operational management of a particular 
company; in education it could look at the way technology is introduced 
in a particular teaching environment.
The difference between essays and case studies is not very clearly defined. 
The subject matter is the main difference, with a case study taking a detailed 
look at a practical example. Check with your department if they have any 
specific guidelines about what you are expected to cover in a case study.
To clarify what case studies are about, we will look at two examples of 
student work based around case studies.
■ 
The first example is a case study which is part of an essay about 
Public Relations. The question was:
‘Consider the potential use o f both traditional and social media 
engagement for crisis communications. Use a case study approach, 
using a comparison between positive and negative examples, and make 
use o f crisis communications theory in your analysis’
The student wrote up the case study in essay form. She chose to discuss 
the Domino’s Pizza YouTube Crisis of 2009, which involved a prank 
video of two employees spoiling food about to be served. The student 
included a timeline of events and company reactions in table form:
Domino’s Pizza YouTube Crisis
1 Timeline
Date 
j Company reactions
In the following section, entitled ‘2 Analysis’, the student examined the 
company’s reactions. She supported her argument by using paraphrases 
from relevant literature with in-text citation.
143

Writing
Glossary
design
specification
(design
specifications)
N-CO UNT
A design 
specification is 
a clearly stated 
requirement 
about the 
necessary 
features in 
the design of 
something.
critique
(critiques)
N-CO UNT
A critique 
is a written 
examination and 
judgment of a 
situation or of a 
person’s work or 
ideas.
collaborative
writing
N-UNCO UNT 
Collaborative 
writing is writing 
done by two or 
more people or 
groups working 
together.
lab report
(lab reports) 
n - c o u n t  A 
lab report is 
a document 
which you write 
after doing an 
experiment or 
investigating a 
situation in a 
laboratory.
* 
In the second example, the student was given a text which described 
the history of a local company. He then had to analyse the 
company’s current strengths and weaknesses and make marketing 
recommendations.
The student chose to write up the case study in report format. He 
used the following headings: background, data analysis, options, 
recommendations.
First,lie provided a summary of the company’s situation and raised the 
most important issues that he wanted to discuss. In the data analysis 
section he considered the company’s strengths and weaknesses. He then 
considered possible actions that the business owner could take to address 
the company’s weaknesses. In his recommendations he narrowed the 
solutions down to the most practical short-term and long-term options.
Because of the potential for different formats in a case study, you will 
need to follow your instructions carefully.
‘Reflection’ is ‘careful thought about a particular subject’. Reflective 
pieces of writing, such as a diary entry, a reflective essay; or a personal 
development record, usually require you to react to a real-life experience 
by relating your thoughts, opinions and learning processes. Their general 
purpose is to demonstrate evidence of your learning.
In Medicine, you may be asked to write down your reflections about a 
placement, in Education you might be asked to comment on a class you 
have observed, in Social Sciences you might be asked to comment on an 
article you have read.
Although the focus will be on your personal observations and reflections, 
you may be asked to relate these to theories and research in your field. 
The following pattern may be a useful way to organize your writing, but 
always consider the specific instructions you have received:
* 
context (introduction)
■ 
what you observed, what you did and how you did it
■ 
evaluation (feelings about the events, possible explanations, 
theoretical connections)
what you have learnt, ideas for the future, summary (conclusion).
144

11 Essay process and presentation
Glossary
research report
(r e se a r c h  
r e p o r ts ) n o u n  A 
r e se a r c h  r e p o r t 
is  a  d o c u m e n t 
t h a t  y o u  w rite  
w h ic h  s h o w s  th e  
r e s u lts  o f  y o u r  
r e se a r c h ,
literature review 
(lite ra tu r e  
re v ie w s) 
n -c o u n t  If y o u  
d o  a  lite r a tu r e  
re v ie w , y o u  
r e a d  r e le v a n t 
lite r a tu r e  su c h  
a s  b o o k s  a n d  
jo u r n a l a r tic le s 
s o  t h a t  y o u  h a v e  
a  g o o d , b a s ic  
k n o w le d g e  o f  a 
to p ic .
Bear in mind that your purpose is always academic and that your work 
will be read by a tutor. On the one hand, you will be able to use T  freely 
and describe what you did and thought (i.e. it is more personal), and 
use more non-academic vocabulary and grammar (more active verbs, 
words such as ‘find out’ rather than ‘establish’). On the other hand, 
because of the academic environment of both the writer and the reader, 
there will still need to be formal elements, such as clear organization and 
presentation, careful proofreading, and language features such as using 
full forms (instead of contractions).
It can be difficult at first to understand the requirements of this mixed 
genre, so study examples from other students if possible.
Although essays are still the most common genre in many disciplines, 
the types of writing mentioned above -  and many more -  are also 
becoming more popular. What you are asked to write will depend very 
much on your discipline, e.g. an engineer could be asked to write a 
design specification, a literature student might write a critique, business 
students may do some collaborative writing. The purpose of these pieces 
of writing varies: sometimes you will have to demonstrate theoretical or 
practical knowledge, perhaps linked to your future professional field; at 
other times you will be asked to look back at your learning experiences. 
These purposes are linked to the stage you are at in your studies: at the 
beginning of your studies you might be asked to write lab reports but 
towards the end you may need to write a research report, which also 
includes a literature review. If you want to start a PhD you will be asked 
to write a proposal.
Some of these types of writing have clearly defined parts, others are more 
flexible.
It is impossible to cover all the different formats you might be asked 
to write. However, the guidelines below will help you think about the 
requirements of any genre:
* 
ask your tutor for guidelines
■ 
ask for examples from previous students
■ 
do a library or online search for examples
145

Writing
■ 
examine previous examples by asking yourself the following 
questions:
who is the intended reader?
what does the intended reader want to find out?
-  
what knowledge or skills do I need to demonstrate? (purpose)
what are the different parts (organization), what style is being 
used (level of formality), what is a normal length?
---
Exercise 3
Look at the following extracts. Notice the difference between the two pieces of 
academic writing. Ask yourself who the writers are and what the purposes of 
their pieces of writing are.
1 The origiiA.nl specificntioiA. dimeiA.sioiA.s of the -produtet were swp-posed to be 2.3 cm 
squnre with n tolerniA.ce o f A mm. The fiiA.nl produ-ot rw.ensu.res 14 cm by 14 cm. 
Although the size of the fiiA.nl -piece differs from, the origiiA.nl specificntioiA., it hns 
resulted iiA. n better outcome. The chnrvge oc-ourred due to coiA.stniA,t development 
issues with the construction method, which nfber iA.urvterows fnilures resulted in 
the fiiA.nl piece beiiA-g smnller nnd ensier to cnrry. This chnnge hns mnde the fro d u c t 
more compnct nnd spnce efficient, with the circuits being spnced out enough so thnt 
they are ensy to chnnge niA.d replnce withoutthe riste of dnmnging nnything else.
2 Todny's lecture wns nbout microfiiA.niA.ce (m f). I hnd nlrendy lenrnt nboutthis on 
m y previous course but I noticed there were some references to nrticles I did not te.iA.ow 
nbout nnd 1 mnde n note to rend these, tn th e  group discussioiA. (thought everybody 
would ngree nbout the vnlue of m f  schemes, but in our group two people stnrted to 
hnve niA. nrgum ent. 1 felt thnt the whole group should hnve been included but it wns 
hnrd to coiA.viiA.ee them to w identhe issue or to fin ish  tnlteing nbout their pnrticulnr 
issue.
146

11 Essay process and presentation
Remember
Reduce essay stress by making a time management plan and by 
following the tips to avoid writer’s block.
None of the stages in the essay writing process should be rushed. 
After planning, analysing and researching, leave enough time for 
drafting, re-drafting and proofreading.
Don’t underestimate the importance of presentation, but don’t worry 
about it until the essay is written.
Before starting to work on a new essay, look back at previous 
feedback to make sure you keep improving.
When you are asked to write a different genre, use your essay writing 
skills but adapt your style and format.
147

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: 
Example essays
In the following section you will find two essays. The first one is a pre-university essay and the second 
one was written for a postgraduate course. We will take a close look at both essays, as a reminder of the 
academic conventions and principles that have been covered in this book, and with the aim of helping you 
to take your level of writing up to university standard. If possible, try to read essays in your discipline. 
M any university departments put examples online for their students.
Example essay 1
Look at the example 250-word essay below. You may have written similar essays before: it could have been 
written by a student preparing for an IELTS exam or a student preparing for end-of-school exams.
This particular essay was written by a student who wanted to enter an English-medium university. It was 
an effective essay: the student received a writing grade high enough to admit him onto a M aster’s course in 
engineering.
Comment and analysis
Strengths
Overall, we can say that the writer has argued well by making his points clear, with evidence and 
explanations where necessary. He has organized the writing into paragraphs and has used words such ' 
as ‘firstly’ to show the reader how the arguments in the essay relate to each other. He has used a variety 
of academic and subject-specific vocabulary and has demonstrated his ability to vary tenses, and to use 
impersonal constructions such as passives correctly. Read the positive comments below that relate to 
specific points in the essay.
In your opinion, what are the most serious urban transport problems we are currently facingf Identify 
possible solutions and say whose responsibility these are.
Positive comments
Currently, transport has increased dramatically in the city 
due to the rise of population and technology. Therefore, 
a lot of people drive their cars in the city as one of the 
main methods of transport. However, this has caused some 
serious traffic problems: lack of parking spaces, pollution, 
congestion, etc.
Although our road capacity is limited, the number of private 
cars is increasing. In the big cities especially, there is a lack 
of parking areas. People have to park illegally on the road, 
therefore causing even more traffic problems. 
"<—
Another issue is the pollution caused by the vast number < 
of cars we currently have on our roads. This problem is 
becoming increasingly serious, especially in big cities, and 
governments will need to pay more attention to this. I will 
make some suggestions to solve this problem.
TEn.se choice lln.tes an. existing -problem. 
which started In. the past w ith the cu rrent
sltU.fltl.OlA-.
ih e in tro d u ctio n  clea rly describes a n-umber 
of problems an-d its causes. The reader 
expects to f in d  in fo rm a tio n  About these 
•problems later.
j The first problem, is  clea rly identified.
cpod use of presen-t participle an-d lin k in g  
word.
Concise w ay o f in tro d u c in g  the second 
problem, clearly and the writer uses a 
reduced relative clause and the passive from, 
correctly.
Again-, good organization-, an-n.oun.dn-g 
some solutlon-s.
1481

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: Example essays
Positive comments
Firstly, the public transport system must be redesigned so 
that buses and trains are more convenient and comfortable.
The government must manage this problem by providing 
more and better transportation. As a result, the need for 
people to use their cars will decrease, and so will the levels^ 
of pollution.
Secondly, more types of alternative energy should be 
invented and implemented. For example, solar energy or 
electric power can be used without any pollution. The 
government needs to increase the budget to manage these 
solutions.
Congestion is also the problem. It is mainly caused by 
too many cars on road and deficient amount of road. 
Fundamental solution on this problem is to construct more 
roads. But it can be performed with long-range plan. In the 
short term, the methods to decrease the number of cars on 
the road should be contrived. For example, it is possible to 
make people be given the incentives of taxes, parking fees, 
etc. if they voluntarily give up using their cars in designated 
date every week.
The problems brought about by transport have paid for a 
lot of social expenses. These transport problems are public 
issues. It is time that Government should take actions!!!
This seiA,te/u&e (aloi/vg with m-ai^y others) 
dem onstrates the writer's ability to write 
S n g lls h wlthouct m istakes.
c^ood use of lli/Ueers -  this s,ou.nds, very 
na tu ra l.
The writer does rvotjucst Identify solutions, 
but explains how these ca n  be achieved.
im portance o f ■problems Is highlight ed 
and a ju stifica tio n  Is offered about who Is 
responsible fo r solving them.
Areas for development
Many of the characteristics of this piece of writing are not acceptable at university. The style is not 
academic enough: there are cliches, repetitions, imprecise expressions, informal words and punctuation 
marks. Look at the numbered paragraphs in the essay and the corresponding comments below.
With regard to organization, the introduction and conclusion could be much stronger and the transition 
between the ideas in the main body is often confusing. There are some incorrect word choices, and there 
are also grammatical mistakes, e.g. regarding prepositions and articles.
Issues like these can often be found in the writing of students who can already write quite well but are 
not used to the new system at university. M ost of the problems with writing in the first year at university 
can be attributed to a lack of awareness of academic conventions and the extra demands for longer, more 
academic essays, with a different reader, purpose and type of content.
Paragraph 1
Currently, transport has increased dramatically in the city ... Word choice mistake. ‘Recently’ would be better 
as it matches the tense choice which links a problem that started in the recent past with a current situation.
due to the rise o f population and development o f technology ... Preposition mistake. It should be ... the 
rise in population
Therefore, a lot o f people drive their cars in the city as one o f the main methods o f transport. Linking word 
error. The fact that people use the car as a main method of transport is not a direct consequence of the 
development of technology. N o linking word needed here.
149

Writing
lack o f parking spaces, pollution, congestion etc. Use of ‘etc’ is inappropriate in an academic essay. It shows 
a lack of precision in your writing.
Paragraph 2
In the big cities especially, there is a lack o f parking areas. Word choice mistake - ^ ig U s  a little informal 
and unacademic.
Paragraph 3
This problem is becoming increasingly serious, especially in big cities. Repetitive use of vocabulary.
I will make some suggestions to solve this problem. Avoid the use of I in academic essays, except in those 
circumstances described in Chapter 8, page 96.
Paragraph 4
N o need to separate paragraph 5 from paragraph 4.
Paragraph 5
The government must manage this problem by providing more and better transportation. Incorrect 
referencing device. It’s unclear what this refers to here.
Paragraph 6
Secondly, more types o f alternative energy should be invented ... Word choice mistake. As energy is a 
naturally occurring resource, it is rarely invented -  ‘sourced’ would be better here.
Paragraph 7
Congestion is also the problem. Incorrect article use. The problem suggests there is only one problem, whereas 
the essay describes many, and deficient amount o f road ... Word choice mistake. ... and a poor road 
netivork is better. Deficient doesn’t collocate with road. Also, an article is needed before poor.
Fundamental solution on this problem ... article needed. A fundamental solution... Preposition mistake. ... 
to this problem ...
But it can be performed with long-range plan ... Wrong word choices. Suggest But this can only be 
achieved as part o f a long-term plan ...
the methods to decrease the number o f cars on the road should be contrived ... N o article needed. Instead 
of contrived, which has negative connotations, created or invented would work.
For example, it is possible to make people be given the incentives o f taxes, parking fees ... Passive form not 
needed. Suggest: For exa?nple, it is possible to incentivize people by reducing their taxes ...
Paragraph 8
It is time that Government should take actions!!! Exclamation marks are not normally used in academic 
writing.
150

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: Example essays
Example essay 2
The following essay was the first one written by an international student studying for an M Sc in H RM  
(Human Resource Management). She received a merit for it.
Study it, paying particular attention to organization, citations, register and style, academic principles, and 
other topics that have been covered in this book. There are some comments, both positive and negative, to 
guide you.
When you have read Example essay 2, go back and compare it with Example essay 1. You will see that the 
difference between them is not just about word length and subject matter: the second essay demonstrates a 
much higher awareness of the academic genre.
Why are equality and diversity in the ivorkforce so difficult to achieve? Why have attempts to enhance 
equality and diversity achieved limited success?
Negative comments
The studevd: couold have 
expressed herself more 
logically: it Is iA,ot clear 
whether the dramatic 
c h a f e s  In  the composition 
of the Labour force are due 
to globalization or not. 
Compare what she wrote with 
the following:
The International labour force 
has experienced a dramatic 
cha'nge In Its composition, 
particularly In terms of 
demographic, age, and 
gender (cassell, zooe>).
This tran sition  has led to 
diversity among employees 
In  the workforce. The driving 
force behind this process Is 
globalization, which has 
also brought a wide range of 
opportunities to econovuica lly  
active In d ivid ua ls regardless 
of their nationality, race or 
culture.
For more in fo rm a tio n  on 
clarity, see chapter-*.
The stu dent chose the passive 
voice In  this section. This Is 
fine, but there was no need 
to avoid personalpronouns. 
in  fact, the section would be 
more Interesting I f  there was 
some v a riety and she had 
written:
'Firstly, I w ill give 
b rie f d e fin itio n s  and 
explanations. .Secondly,
I w ill explain two major 
reasons ...'
For more Information on the 
use of personalpronouns, see 
Chapter 2.
The international labour force has experienced a 
dramatic change in its composition, particularly 
in terms of demographic, age and gender (Cassell,J 
2006). This transition has led to diversity among 
.employees in the workforce. Globalization has 
also brought a wide range of opportunities to 
economically active people regardless of their 
<- 
nationality, race or culture. However, more 
diversity has also meant more instances of 
discrimination. Diversity and equality, therefore, 
have become a matter of debate, attracting 
the attention of not only governments and 
corporations, but of the whole of society. It is 
commonly thought that real diversity and equality 
are difficult to achieve, and that despite a number 
of initiatives, success in this area has been limited. \
The aim of this essay is to investigate diversity and 
equality in the workforce by drawing on theoretical 
concepts, empirical findings, policies and key actor 
interventions. The essay is divided into five main 
sections. Firstly, brief definitions and explanations 
of important terms are given. Secondly, two major 
reasons why equality and diversity need to be 
taken seriously are explained. Next, the causes of 
the difficulties in attaining equality and diversity 
will be examined, after which possible solutions 
are explored. Finally, the essay tries to give possible
Positive comments
This first sentence strikes a 
nice balance between general 
and specific.. For more 
inform a tio n  oh, the beginning 
on, essay, see chapters._______
The Introduction, consists of 
three parts, as recomm ended 
In, Chapter 2. "This Is the first 
one: an, explanation, of the 
sutuatlon.
Notice how the student does 
not ju s t  say that there has 
been, debate about these Issues 
but uses 'therefore' to refer 
back to the evidence that has 
been, given, fo r this.
"This Is part 2 o f the 
in tro d u ctio n  in  which the 
writer explains why the 
s itu a tio n  Is problematic and 
im portant.
The title of the essay asks 
'why', so we would expect 
the writer to follow a cause/ 
effect pattern In  this essay. 
A s we said In  chapter 2, 
longer essays are lik e ly  to 
use more than one pattern, 
and here the writer has also 
in clu d ed  problem/solution. 
Notice how the student has 
chosen a logical structure 
fo r her essay: she makes sure 
that the concepts are clearly 
defined, then discusses the 
Importance of the topic, the 
causes of the problems, some 
possible solutio n s, a nd  then 
she evaluates some of these 
so lutions.
151

Writing
Negative comments
The block guote w ould Iook 
better with a Hue spacing of 
±, rather than the ± . s which 
Is used throughout the essay. 
For more in fo rm a tio n  on 
Integrating quotes and 
paraphrases, see chapter ±o.
C au tio us la ngua ge w ould 
be better here: 'everyone 
w i l l s o u n d s  too strong. 
A n  Improvement would be 
'employees are lik e ly  to 
For more Inform ation on 
cautious language, see 
clnayters 3, 4- and 2.
Positive comments
reasons for the disappointing outcomes of equality. 
initiatives.
To begin with, definitions of crucial terms 
are given. Equality refers to the idea of ‘equal 
opportunity’ which is defined as ‘the concept 
^  
of ensuring fair treatment for all employees 
(or prospective employees) throughout the 
organization’ (Heery and Noon, 2001). In other 
words, everyone needs to be treated fairly in the 
workforce no matter what his/her characteristics 
are.
Kandola and Fullerton (1994: 8), cited in Cassell, 
2006: 346, defined managing diversity as follows:
\
The basic concept of managing diversity 
accepts that the workforce consists of a 
diverse population of people. The diversity 
consists of visible and non-visible differences 
which will include factors such as sex, age, 
background, race, disability, personality and 
work style.
Put differently, diversity relates to differences 
among employees within an organization, whether 
they are noticeable or not. Usually these are the 
f  
types of differences that are not of the employees’ 
own choosing. Thompson (1997), cited in Shen et 
al. (2009), stated that managing diversity should 
be recognized as a positive organizational trait that 
_needs to be attained, rather than a problematic 
issue. If diversity is well managed, everyone will 
feel valued, and in that way, productivity and 
morale alike will be enhanced; otherwise, it could 
lead to discrimination.
Disadvantage refers to the lack of equal 
opportunities among a group of people compared 
with others. According to Kirton and Greene -<----
(2005: 5), there are five main social groups that 
are likely to be disadvantaged, namely ‘women, 
minority ethnic people, older people, disabled 
people and lesbians and gay men’. Black people, for 
instance, have more limited access to good jobs and 
their average income is lower than that of white 
people.
This Is the third part o f the 
in t ro d u c t io n in  which the 
stu d en t states the alm s and 
the o rg a n iza tio n  o f the essay.
The stu d en t has decided not 
to put d e fin itio n s in  the 
introdu ction, but in  part 
± o f the m a in  body. This Is 
a good Idea here, because 
there are m any key concepts 
that need to be defined. For 
more in fo rm a tio n  on the 
definition o f key terms and 
concepts, see chapter 3.
Notice how the guote does not 
Interrupt the sentence and Is 
n a tu ra lly  Integrated.
The student was asked to use 
her university's versio n  of 
A PA referencing. For more 
in fo rm a tio n  o n  referencing 
systems, see chapter^.
Notice that this Is a long 
quotation, so a block guote 
needed to be Inserted. For 
more in fo rm a tio n  on 
Integrating guotes and 
paraphrases, see chapter±o.
Notice how the student 
does not ju s t  guote, she 
com m ents on the guote 
and dem onstrates that she 
has understood it. For more 
in fo rm a tio n  on Integrating 
the Ideas of others, see 
chapter ±0.
Notice that when q u o tin g , a 
page n u m ber is  necessary. 
For more in fo rm a tio n  on 
c itin g  and referencing, see 
Chapter^.
152

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: Example essays
Negative comments
The w riter should have 
indicated where this 
lufbrm atlou coutes frovu. 
For more luforucatlou ou 
d ecid in g  wheu to cite, see 
chapter^.
Discrimination is described as ‘the process of 
judging people according to particular criteria’ 
(Noon, 2010: 197). It refers to prejudice based 
on unfair assumptions about sex, race, age, 
religion and sexual orientation, and other factors, 
such as size or appearance. For example, in 
2011, Starbucks dismissed Elsa Sallard, who has 
dwarfism, arguing that she posed a danger to 
customers and co-workers, even though she could 
have done her job with a stepladder. They were 
sued and lost their case.
In the following section, the essay investigates two 
major reasons why employers need to address 
unjust treatment, namely ‘the social justice case’ 
'< ~ 
and ‘the business case’ (Noon, 2010: 200).
The social justice case rests on the fact that 
the decision-making processes need to exclude 
‘prejudice and stereotyping’, ensuring that h a rd ly ^ \ 
anyone feels disadvantaged or discriminated 
against (Noon, 2010: 201). Unfortunately, many 
companies use employment quota, choosing a 
certain percentage of various groups, such as 
women and black people, just to protect their good 
image and not because of fairness. However, basing 
decisions on social justice can also have a positive 
effect on business efficiency. The business case, 
therefore, needs to be taken into account.
The business case is that equality and diversity 
could create a win-win situation for both 
employees and employers and their businesses 
(Dickens, 2005). This is due to four main reasons 
(Noon, 2010): managers have more recruitment 
choices; they can attract more talented people; 
sales may increase because more diversity in 
the workplace can lead to more diversity in 
the customer base; the company is presenting a 
positive image to its stakeholders. Moreover, costly 
and damaging discrimination litigation is avoided 
(Noon, 2010).
Despite these advantages, equality and diversity are 
difficult to achieve. The following section examines 
why.
Positive comments
Notice how this paragraph 
starts lu  a more geueral way 
aud theu becomes specific.. 
For more In fo rm a tio n  on 
essay structure, see 
chapter z .
Notice how the student 
m akes a sm ooth tra n s itio n  
fro m  part ± o f the m a in  body, 
which In clu d e s d efin itio n s, 
to part z : she auiA.ouiA.ces, 
lu  more specific tervus thau 
above, what that sectlou w ill 
contain.
Note the academ ic style, 
e.g. the seuteiA.ce Is efflcleut 
-  It has uo unnecessary 
luforutatlou and uses 
uo uu structures. For more 
In fo rm a tio n  ou efflcleucy, 
see chapter -f.
153

Writing
Negative comments
There is  a cita tio n  m istake 
here, which the reader c-am 
easily spot: L in d a  Is a first 
nam e. The author's nam e 
Is L in d a  t>ic\zens, so this 
should justsaw : (pickets,
1339).
For more in fo rm a tio n  
o n  authors' names,, see 
C-hapter e>.
For more in fo rm a tio n  on 
citin g , see chapter^.
This Idiom, could be 
considered too in fo rm a l for 
a n  essay. The studemt could 
have w ritten:
A s the priority o f a my 
o rg a n iza tio n  is  profit (Noom, 
2.010), m ore im portance Is 
u s u a lly  g iv e n  to urgemt 
Issues such as competition., 
ra th erth a n to  im p lem enting  
long-term  strategies.
For m ore in fo rm a tio n  on 
fo rm a lity , see chapter^.
Positive comments
Firstly, organizational structures and workplace 
culture tend to be long established and deeply 
embedded. Highly-paid jobs are still likely to be 
dominated by men (Kirton and Greene, 2000).
To illustrate, the CEOs of a large number of big 
international corporations such as Microsoft, 
Google and Apple are male, and more women 
than men have part-time and low-paid jobs. This is 
related to the traditional pattern in which women 
raise families and do housework (Smithson and 
Stokoe, 2005). Other deeply-rooted attitudes are 
about age: older people are often considered to 
be less efficient and young workers are generally 
seen as lacking the necessary experience and 
qualifications. It is particularly difficult for people 
to find jobs or get promotions between the ages of 
16 and 21 (Kirton and Greene, ibid.)
Secondly, managers are not particularly interested 
in equality and diversity. Although these qualities 
could be beneficial for productivity and morale, 
they require long-term commitment, cannot be 
.quantified financially (Dickens and Linda, 1999) 
and can initially be expensive, e.g. to reach a wide 
range of potential employees, different media need 
to be used. If a company is small, it could prefer 
to use ‘word of mouth’, which may constitute 
indirect discrimination but is much faster and 
cheaper (Dickens, 2005). As the priority of any 
organization is profit (Noon, 2010), implementing 
-long-term strategies is often put on the back burner 
when managers have to deal with more urgent 
issues, such as competition.
Thirdly, equality and diversity are inherently 
problematic to some extent. Foster and Harris 
(2005) argue that not only is a diverse team 
difficult to manage but this also takes a toll on 
team coordination. Every member differs in 
terms of gender, age, ethnicity, schooling or skills; \  
hence, it is hard to reach a common consensus 
and conflict may result. In addition, positive 
discrimination, which is often seen as a way to 
manage diversity, can lead to resentment from co­
workers. For instance, parents have a right to take 
time off for childcare whilst those without children 
do not have that right, even if they have to care for 
elderly relatives.
Notice the good use o f 
cautious la n g ua g e in  th is 
sentence.
The student Mas -presented 
the essay well: the lliA.es all 
start at the saiAte poliA,t, aiA.d 
the paragraphs are v is u a lly  
d istin g u ish e d  with a space. 
For more in fo rm a tio n  on 
■presentation, see chapter ±±.
Notice how the writer maYzes 
a poliA.t and -provides evidence 
and a n  explanation. For more 
in fo rm a tio n  o n  the poliA-t- 
evldeiA.ce-e*pla i/uatloiA. pattern., 
see chapter £>.
154

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: Example essays
Negative comments
There should rea lly  be a 
paragraph breate here, to 
m ake It also v isu a lly  
clear that a new section Is 
starting.
For more in fo rm a tio n  
about the v isu a l aspects of 
paragraphing, see Chapters 
2  and ±±.
Positive comments
Because of these three reasons, discrimination 
continues to be evident in the workforce. In 
the following section, two key initiatives are 
^considered: policies and positive action (Noon, 
2010). Policies are undoubtedly essential in guiding 
managers in decision-making and taking action. 
Recently, many policies have been introduced in 
the UK, for instance the Disability Discrimination 
Act (1995), The Employment Equality (Religion 
and Belief) Regulations (2003), and The Equality 
Act (2006). Also, many organizations have their 
own formal policies. In order to ensure policy 
implementation, however, positive action is 
necessary, for example a recruitment advertisement 
in magazines aimed at gay people or a training 
programme for older employees.
Despite the presence of policies and positive 
action, there has been limited success in achieving 
equality and diversity. In the last section, this essay 
considers why this is so.
The first reason is the lack of intervention from 
pivotal actors. Dickens (1999) argues that although 
managers play the most crucial part, the roles 
of government and trade unions should not be 
neglected. Firstly, state intervention by legal 
regulation (law and policies) can contribute greatly 
to setting equality standards to underpin practices, 
regulate employer decision-making and protect 
employees who are discriminated against by forcing 
their companies to compensate them. Another 
actor is the trade unions, who represent employees 
and are responsible for protecting employee rights 
through collective bargaining. By negotiating with 
managers about certain interests or concerns of 
employees, collective bargaining could provide a 
better match between the needs of the company 
and employees, particularly disadvantaged groups 
such as ethnic minorities and women.
Whereas Dean and Liff (2010) focus on the 
importance of these industrial relations actors, 
Foster and Harris (2005) emphasize the 
organizational context in which both managers and 
external environments influence diversity practices. 
They give an example of a store in Leicester which 
tried to recruit Asian people but no one applied 
because they said that it was dominated by white 
people.
Notice how this -paragraph 
Is lin k e d  n ice ly  to the 
■previous, paragraph. For more 
in fo rm a tio n  on connecting 
paragraphs, see C-hapter 2..
155

Writing
Negative comments
Positive comments
The author's nam e ts
misspelled.
This should say  ‘com panles'. 
For more In fo rm a tio n  o n the 
Im portance o f accuracy, see 
Chapter s .
Another issue is that the policies of many 
organizations are ‘empty shells’ (Hoque and Noon, 
2004). There is a large gap between policies, which 
.^are just declarations, and action (Dickens, 2005). 
According to Dicken (2005), 27%  of company 
rwith policies had not implemented them. In 
addition, many managers treat everyone the same 
without realizing that they differ in many ways, 
and those differences need to be valued to improve 
individual potential (Foster and Harris, 2005).
To sum up, striving for equality and diversity 
should be an important consideration for 
organizations. If this is done well, it will be 
beneficial to both organizations and employees 
in terms of productivity and efficiency. However, 
this is difficult to achieve for a number of 
reasons, including deep-rooted prejudice, 
managerial priorities and the side-effects of 
positive discrimination. There are two possible 
paths towards equality and diversity: policies and 
positive action. However, without the efforts of 
key protagonists such as the government, trade 
unions and employees, any initiatives are likely to 
have limited success. Other obstacles are a lack of 
managerial goodwill and company culture. In order 
to eradicate disadvantage, a number of factors need-* 
to be combined: the social justice approach, the 
business approach, national legislation and local 
policies and action.
Notice how the student 
dem onstrates her awareness 
o f what her tu tor waists: she 
has clearly g iv e n  a n  answ er 
to the essay q u e stio n  here. 
For more In fo rm a tio n  about 
a n a ly s in g  essay titles, see 
chapter ±.
The last sentence focuses on 
possible so lutions, a nd  ca n  
be regarded as the overall 
conclusion . The othertwo 
parts o f co n clu sion s are 
also In  this paragraph: 
su m m a ries o f the m a in  Ideas 
and evidence.
For more In fo rm a tio n  on 
essay structure, see 
chapter 2.
For Inform ation abou± 
the la n g ua g e used In  
conclu sion s, see chapters.
156

Appendix 1 -  Taking your writing up to the next level: Example essays
Negative comments 
R EFER EN C E LIST
Positive comments
E>lcteens And Lindfl. This 
should Sfly: I>lckenS,
htw.rn.flkv resource. 
kwflnflgekuentjournfll ... 
The whole title needs to be 
capitalized:
htw.ku.flkv Resource 
ManagementJo u rw A
Jflkvet .Skulthson And 
Elizabeth ht. stoteoe. The first 
nflkwes of the Authors should 
kvot be Included:
.SkwlthS O n,J. flkvd S.to'Rjot, B.
Cassell, C., ‘Managing Diversity’, in T. Redman 
and A. Wilkinson, Contemporary Human Resource 
Management (3rd edn., London: Prentice Hall, 
2006), 343-360.
Dean, D. and Liff, S., ‘Equality and diversity: The 
ultimate industrial relations concern’, in T. Colling 
and M . Terry, Industrial Relations (Oxford: Wiley- 
Blackwell, 2010), 422-446.
rDickens and Linda, ‘Beyond the business case:
A three-pronged approach to equality action’, in 
Human Resource Management Journal (1999), 
9 (1 ), 9-19.
Dickens, L., ‘Walking the talk? Equality and 
diversity in employment’, in S. Bach, Managing 
Human Resources (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), 
178-203.
Foster, C. and Harris, L., ‘Easy to say, difficult to 
do: diversity management in retail’, in Human 
k resource management Journal (2005), 15 (3), 4-17.
Heery, E. and Noon, M ., A Dictionary o f Human 
Resource Management (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2001).
Hoque, K. and Noon, M ., ‘Equal Opportunities 
Policy and Practice in Britain: Evaluating the 
‘empty shell’ hypothesis’, in Work, Employment 
and Society (2004), 18 (3), 481-506.
Jan e t Smithson and Elizabeth H. Stokoe, ‘Gender, 
Work and Organization’, in Discourses o f Work- 
Life Balance: Negotiating ‘Genderblind’ Terms in 
Organizations (2005), 12 (2), 147-168.
Kirton, G. and Greene, A.,The Dynamics o f 
Managing Diversity: A Critical Approach (Oxford: 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000).
Noon, M ., ‘Managing equality and diversity’, in 
J. Beardwell and T. Claydon, Human Resource 
Management: A Contemporary Approach (London: 
Pearson, 2010), 196-229.
Shen, J., Chanda, A., D ’Netto, B. and Monga,
M ., ‘Managing diversity through human resource 
management: an international perspective and 
conceptual framework’, in The International 
Journal o f Human Resource Management, (2009), 
20 (2), 235-251.
the reference list Is started on 
a kvew page, as It show.ld be. 
A ll the kvflku.es kuekvtlokved lu. 
the te*t Are represented In  the 
reference list And vice versa. 
The stu.dent seekws to hflve 
followed her university's 
style guide flnd hns used 
Identlcfll pfltterns for the 
sflkue types o f sources.
A ll the sources she hfls used 
are flcfldem-lc sources.
For kuore Inforkufltlon 
on academic sources, see 
chapter Q>.
For kuore Inforkufltlon on 
reference lists, see Chapter^.
157

Writing
Appendix 2 -  Responding to marking criteria and feedback
When you receive your essay title, you are often given information about how you should deal with it, for 
example ‘Use a variety of sources’, ‘Refer to your lecture notes’, ‘Include at least three theories’. You need 
to follow these instructions carefully, as your mark will depend on your ability to do so.
It is also important to read or print off any other information provided by your department. This could 
cover presentation requirements, referencing systems, etc. and may be found online (via the university 
website or their virtual learning environment) or in a handbook or other document.
You may also be given marking criteria, which state what the marker will be looking for in your work. 
This may include wording such as ‘evidence of reading’, ‘the ability to incorporate the ideas of others’, ‘a 
demonstration of knowledge’, ‘an ability to apply knowledge’, ‘the ability to consider and discuss different 
points of view’, etc. Again, keep this in mind while you are putting your essay together. When you have 
finished your first draft you need to double check that there is evidence of these skills in the essay.
Unfortunately, many students find it difficult to understand what is meant by some of these criteria. You 
will become better at this through practice, but you can speed up this process by examining the feedback 
you get on your essays, both the positive and the negative comments. As we saw in Chapter 11, analysing 
essay feedback can be considered a stage of the essay writing process. It needs to be seen as guidance for 
your next essay.
Have a look at the following paragraph, taken from an essay on relationship and transactional marketing. 
Look at the lecturer’s notes in the margin. Before you read on, consider what the student can do to 
understand what is wrong in this essay and what he should do before writing his next one.
Relationship marketing can be defined as ‘attracting 
new customers, obtaining and maintaining the 
relationships between original customers and 
companies’ (J.A.F. Nicholls, 2000). This strategy focuses 
on keeping in touch with customers, especially the loyal 
customers, rather than concentrating on individual 
sales. Gronroon’s (1996) definition of relationship 
marketing strategy is ‘to build, maintain and proceed 
the relationships between customers and relative
(l) reference format
(z) is this the author’s name? 
(3) page number? exact quote?
shareholders, while to terminate collaboration when it
(4)  is this the only defnition?
is necessary’. It can be seen that relationship marketing
is based on the exchange and promise between
(5) good insight, but could be developedfurther
customers and firms. This strategy incorporates the 4Cs
marketing mix and has long-term benefits.
(6) explain
The student did not follow referencing conventions: he misspelled an author’s name, gave initials in 
citation, may have misquoted an author and did not include a page reference for his quote. Although 
comments (1) and (3) do not say exactly what is wrong, the student should have more information that he 
can consult, possibly online, in the form of his department’s guidelines for academic writing. If this does 
not exist then he would have to make an appointment to see his tutor.
Comment (4) suggests that there are more definitions, which means that the student should have read 
more and not stopped his research as soon as he found one definition. A library search on the topic of 
‘relationship marketing’ would have shown more than one source.
158

Appendix 2 -  Responding to marking criteria and feedback
Comment (5) includes positive feedback. Next time, the student should therefore try to give more 
comments about the quotes that he uses. The lecturer seems to appreciate it when the student shows his 
personal understanding of the definition, and wants him to keep adding insights like this and developing 
them further.
Comment (6) suggests that there is more to say about the 4Cs, and that ‘long-term benefits’ needs an 
explanation too.
Now  look at some comments taken from the feedback that the lecturer provided at the end of the essay. 
Notice how many of the comments can actually be linked to what the lecturer had put in the margin 
above. They have been numbered below to make it easier for you to find them.
■ You demonstrated that you understood (5) the concepts related to relationship marketing and 
transactional marketing, but this could have been explored in more depth (5), by analysing and 
synthesizing a number of different authors’ opinions (4) and drawing your own conclusions (5). 
M ake sure you always back up your statements and opinions with clarifications or evidence (6), as 
these will strengthen your arguments.
■ Unfortunately, you did not follow referencing conventions (1, 2, 3), which is not acceptable at this 
stage.
■ Perhaps in part 2 you could have given more examples of how transactional marketing has been 
beneficial to the companies you mention.
In short, don’t glance over the comments that have been put on your essay and then put them away. 
Instead, spend time on really trying to understand them. It can be painful to read the comments if your 
results are not what you had hoped for, but it is time well spent if it can help you learn from your mistakes.
Have a look at a paragraph written by a Social Policy student. Read the comments that the tutor made 
and decide whether these are positive, neutral or negative comments. Before you read on, think about how 
important it is to avoid similar issues in the next essay.
One of Ponzini and Rossi’s (2010) approaches 
is to critically discuss Florida’s theory and 
the problems caused by the application of his 
theory to urban policy. They explain how an 
unclear theory or its incorrect interpretation 
by misunderstood politicians could cause 
social-spatial injustice. This is because city 
development is related to the exchange 
of policy models aiming to ensure the 
comprehensiveness and role of each city in the 
world (Sassen, 1994). Ponzini and Rossi look 
at specific cities and specifically their urban 
and spatial restructure and policies. However, 
it could be argued that looking at individual 
cases may not be appropriate, due to the 
cities’ diversity. This would mean applying a 
multi-case study for finding a paradigm via 
exemplary samples (Gibson and Kong, 2005).
(l) do they have another approach?
(l) are the politicians misunderstood7
(3)  it mijht have been a jood idea to have explained the link 
between politicians andpolicy models
(4)  comprehensiveness?
(5) you could havejiven some examples of cities here 
((,) This = ?
(7) perhaps you could have referred here to some later studies 
by the same authors
159

Writing
In general, when a lecturer uses language such as ‘perhaps you could have’, ‘it might have been a good idea to’, 
or asks questions, they are using polite language to tell you what you should have done. Don’t ignore comments 
like these: they are not about possibilities or queries, but tell you what you should have done to get a better 
mark. Do not treat any comments as ‘neutral’ comments or small points. Instead, think about the underlying 
issues and take them into consideration for your next essay. Let’s have a look at the specific examples.
Comment (1) suggests that there is no other approach, and that the student should have written ‘Ponzini 
and Rossi’s (2010) approach is ...’, in which case the underlying problem is a lack of clarity in the language. 
The other possibility is that the problem is with setting up thb^wrong reader expectation: the reader expects 
to hear what the other approaches are, but the student never picks up that point in the assignment.
Comment (2) is not a real question: the tutor knows that the politicians are not misunderstood: the 
politicians misunderstand the policy and it is the policy that is misunderstood. The question points out to 
the student that there is a language problem.
In (3), (5) and (7) polite language is being used to say that the student should have done something 
(explain, give examples, include more studies). In other words, the student has not researched deeply or 
widely enough, understood enough of the research or selected the right information.
Comments (4) and (6) can be read as requests for clarification. It can be frustrating for students to see question 
marks in their work without further explanation, but usually it just means that the meaning of a phrase or 
sentence has not been made clear enough. It is important for the writer to put themselves in the shoes of the 
reader, to see if what has been written makes sense. Here ‘comprehensiveness’ is a concept that needs further 
explanation in the context of cities, and ‘this’ does not seem to relate to anything in the previous sentence.
To sum up, you probably receive more information than you realize about how you can achieve higher 
grades. The trick is to pay careful attention. If, despite your efforts, you still really don’t understand specific 
criteria or feedback, don’t be afraid to say so and ask your lecturer to explain verbally.
Some final words from the author
This book has given you a lot of advice about the different requirements of essay writing, and you may feel
that there is so much that it is not possible for you to follow it all. Luckily, that is not necessary. Instead of
worrying about all the guidelines, focus on the bigger picture using the following checklist:
■ Does the essay answer the question?
*  Will my reader understand what I am trying to do and say?
■ Is it clear what my opinion is?
■ Is it clear where I have given the opinion of others?
■ Have I expressed myself clearly, formally, efficiently, modestly and accurately?
■ Have I followed the other academic conventions?
It is also worth remembering that lecturers tend to start you off with the easier essays, that there is
support available from individuals and departments at your institution, and that nobody expects you to 
get everything right from the start. Take the results from your first essay as a starting point and, most 
importantly, study the feedback to help you improve. Be proud of your hard work, and of every pass, merit 
and distinction you receive.
Els Van Geyte
160

Appendix 3 -  Useful phrases
Useful phrases introduced throughout the book are reproduced here for easy reference.
Linkers
Sequencing
■ Firstly, ... /
First of all, ...
Adding ideas
■ In addition, ...
*  Furthermore, ... 
Contrasting ideas
■ On the one hand, ... 
On the other hand, ...
■ In contrast, ...
■ Whilst
Talking about results
■ Therefore,...
Talking about causes
■ Due to ...
■ Secondly,...
■ Finally,...
■ A lso ,...
■ M oreover,...
■ H ow ever,...
■ Although ...
■ As a consequence, ... / Consequently,
■ As a consequence of ...
Referring back to a previous point
*  This analysis (suggests th a t...)
■ This approach (indicates th a t...)
■ This concept (illustrates that ...)
■ This context (shows th a t...)
■ These data (prove that ...)
■ This definition (has been used to ...)
■ These factors (need to be taken into account when ...)
■ This interpretation (is influenced by ...)
*  This period (was characterized by ...)
■ This process (can be seen in ...)
■ This response (was summarized by ...)

Writing
*  This sector (was restructured in ...)
■ This theory (was widely debated by ...)
■ These guiding principles (throw light on ...)
■ Another argument (in favour of the privatization ...)
Giving definitions
■ (Synthesis) is (the process of combining objects or ideas into a complex whole).
■ (Synthesis) is comrponly defined as (the process of combining objects or ideas into a complex whole).
■ (Synthesis) is generally understood to refer to (the process of combining objects or ideas into a complex 
whole).
■ (Synthesis) can be described as (the process of combining objects or ideas into a complex whole).
■ (The process of combining 
objects or 
ideas into 
a complex 
whole) is called (synthesis).
■ (The process of combining 
objects or 
ideas into 
a complex 
whole) is known as (synthesis).
■ (The process of combining 
objects or 
ideas into 
a complex 
whole) is referred to as (synthe
Using definitions
■ For the purposes of this essay, I will be using (Kotler’s definition of societal marketing), because of (its 
focus on the organization’s task to meet the need ...)
■ Although many different definitions (of marketing) have been suggested (over the years), I will be using 
(the one by Kotler (1994), because of ...)
■ Throughout this essay, I will be using the word (‘cognitive’) to refer to (the different types of intellectual 
behaviour).
■ (In this essay), the term (‘reliability’) is used to mean ...
Indicating the importance of the topic
« (One of) the most significant (stages in a child’s development) is ...
■ (One of) the most important (factors to take into consideration when ...) is ...
■ 
(One of) the most essential (conditions for the germination of orchidea) is ...
■ (Some of) the most memorable aspects (of the documentary) were ...
Intensifying adjectives
■ 
an important part 
■ a common problem
■ 
a key role/factor 
■ an increasing need/concern
*  
a great/major problem 
■ heightened awareness
a 
a central area of 
■ rapid development
162

Appendix 3 -  Useful phrases
■ a dramatic increase 
*  a serious effect/impact on
*  renewed/unprecedented interest 
■ increasing concern
Introducing the aim and the organization of the essay
■ This essay will ...
■ This report attempts to (examine whether ...)
■ This case study hopes to (determine whether ...)
■ The aims of this essay are to (determine whether ...)
■ This essay examines whether (the effects of exposure to ...)
■ This essay argues that (the effects of exposure to ...)
■ In this essay I argue that (the historical influences of ...)
■ In this essay I will discuss (the origins of ...)
*  In this essay it will be argued that (the Middle Ages were ...)
The language of conclusions
■ This essay discussed (the economic factors that contributed to ...)
■ In this essay, I have argued (that globalization is not a recent phenomenon).
This essay has explored (the causes of the conflict...)
■ . These findings suggest that (bees are nearing extinction).
*  The evidence seems to indicate that (prolonged bouts of laughter lead to ...)
■ A consequence of this is that (Western lifestyles have become more fashionable).
Counter-argumentation
■ One study has emphasized the need for (a change in the way custody cases are ...)
■ So far there has been limited agreement only on (three of the proposed laws).
■ Some studies have challenged (this concept).
■ There is continuing debate about the value of (trialling this vaccine in ...)
*  The literature shows some contradictory findings (in this area).
Claim s the author makes
■ There are several drawbacks (involved in investing in ...)
*  There is not enough reliable evidence that (ingesting valium results in ...)
163

Writing
■ These are the most dangerous substances (on the face of the earth, yet ...)
■ One of the most significant patterns is (also one of the easiest to disrupt).
The use of ‘I’ and ‘we’ to indicate the writer’s stance
■ M y concern is ...
■ M y definition ... is based on M unson’s but combines this with ...
■ Experiments have been carried out by Nelson and Smith (1993) and Ojha and Mazumder (2008). In our 
experiment ...
■ We know that ... has consequences ... that are still apparent ... today ...
■ As we have seen ,...
Quoting
Wood (2011: 23) describes their textile industry as “ flourishing” , yet some analysts are indicating that it is 
in decline.
Paraphrasing
Whereas Wood (2011) has a positive view of the current state of their textile industry, some analysts are 
indicating that it is in decline.
Reporting verbs
■ They discussed / examined (the potential problems with this type of test).
■ The authors show / report (how technology is being used to engage students more).
■ They suggest that / how (these data could be interpreted in different ways).
*  They suggest (a different interpretation of the data).
■ It was alleged that (the copyright for the image wasn’t cleared).
■ They claimed to have (informed their neighbours of their intention).
■ The head of education proposed (a set of new measures to guard against bullying).
■ The report acknowledges that (the proposed building plot was not suitable).
*  The research demonstrates that (it is dependent on a low percentage of imports).
■ The curator of the exhibition asserts that (Manet was the founder of modernism).
164

Glossary
C l POWERED BY COBUILD
Some of the more difficult words from the chapters are defined here in this Glossary. The definitions 
focus on the meanings of the words in the context in which they appear in the text. Definitions are from 
COB UILD Advanced Dictionary.
Key
ADJ
ADV
AUX
COLOUR
COM B
CO N J
CO N VEN TIO N
DET
EXCLAM
FRACTIO N
LINK
MODAL
N-CO UN T
N-PLURAL
N-PROPER
N-PROPER-PLURAL
N-SING
N-TITLE
adjective
adverb
auxiliary verb 
colour word 
combining form 
conjunction 
convention 
determiner 
exclamation 
fraction 
see V-LINK 
modal verb 
count noun 
plural noun 
proper noun 
plural proper noun 
singular noun 
title noun
accuracy n-uncount
The accuracy of information or measurements is 
their quality of being true or correct, even in 
small details.
acronym (acronyms) n-count 
An acronym is a word composed of the first letters 
of the words in a phrase, especially when this is 
used as a name. An example of an acronym is 
NATO which is made up of the first letters of the 
‘North Atlantic Treaty Organization’.
N-UNCO UNT
N-VAR
N EG
NUM
ORD
PASSIVE
PHRASAL VERB
PHRASE
PREDET
PREFIX
PREP
PRON
QUANT
QUEST
SUFFIX
VERB
V-LINK
V-PASSIVE
uncount noun 
variable noun 
negative 
number 
ordinal
see V-PASSIVE 
phrasal verb 
phrase
predeterminer
prefix
preposition
pronoun
quantifier
question word
suffix
verb
link verb 
passive verb
abbreviation (abbreviations) n-count 
An abbreviation is a short form of a word or
phrase, made by leaving out some of the letters or 
by using only the first letter of each word.
active (actives) n-count
An active, active verb, or active form, is the form 
of the verb which is used when the subject refers 
to a person or thing that does something. For 
example, in ‘I saw her yesterday’, the verb is in 
the active.
accountable adj
If you are accountable to someone for something 
that you do, you are responsible for it and must 
be prepared to justify your actions to that person.
adverbial adj
Adverbial means relating to adverbs or like an 
adverb.
allocate (allocates, allocating, allocated) verb
If one item or share of something is allocated to a 
particular person or for a particular purpose, it is 
given to that person or used for that purpose.
analogy (analogies) n-count
If you make or draw an analogy between two things, 
you show that they are similar in some way.
anatomically adv
If the body of a person or an animal is anatomically 
large, it is physically or structurally large.

Writing
anonymous adj
Something that is anonymous does not reveal who 
you are.
anti-discrimination adj
An anti-discrimination action is an action that 
shows that you are opposed to the practice of 
treating one person or group of people less fairly 
or less well than other people or groups.
appendix (appendices) n-count
An appendix to a book or essay is extra
information that is placed after the end of the 
main text.
argument (arguments) n-var
An argument is a statement or set of statements that 
you use in order to try to convince people that 
your opinion about something is correct.
assert (asserts, asserting, asserted) verb
If someone asserts a fact or belief, they state it 
firmly.
assignment (assignments) n-count
An assignment is a task or piece of work that you 
are given to do, especially as part of your job or 
studies.
attribute to (attributes to, attributing to, attributed
to) VERB
If you attribute something to an event or situation, 
you think that it was caused by that event or 
situation.
authoritative adj
Someone or something that is authoritative has a 
lot of knowledge of a particular subject.
authority n-uncount
If someone speaks or writes with authority, people 
respect and take notice of what they say because 
they have special knowledge of a subject.
b
balanced adj
A balanced report, book, or other document 
takes into account all the different opinions on 
something and presents information in a fair and 
reasonable way.
blues N-PLURAL
If you have got the blues, you feel depressed.
bright (brighter, brightest) adj
If you describe a person or an animal as bright, you 
mean that they are quick at learning things.
c
caption (captions) n-count
A caption is the words printed underneath or 
above a picture or table which explain what it is 
about.
catwalk( catwalks) n-count
At a fashion show, the catwalk is a narrow platform 
that models walk along to display clothes.
cautious adj
If you describe someone’s attitude, language, or 
reaction as cautious, you mean that it is limited 
or careful.
charity (charities) n-count
A charity is an organization which raises money in 
order to help people who are ill, disabled, or very 
poor.
chronological adj
If things are described or shown in chronological 
order, they are described or shown in the order in 
which they happened.
cite (cites, citing, cited) verb
If you cite something, you quote it or mention it, 
especially as an example or proof of what you 
are saying.
clarity n-uncount
The clarity of something such as a book or 
argument is its quality of being well explained 
and easy to understand.
classify (classifies, classifying, classified) verb
To classify things means to divide them into groups 
or types so that things with similar characteristics 
are in the same group.
cohesion n-uncount
If you write with cohesion, you use language that 
shows that the different aspects of your writing 
relate to each other, fit together well, and form a 
united whole.
collaborative writing n-uncount
Collaborative writing is writing done by two or 
more people or groups working together.
166

Glossary
compile (compiles, compiling, compiled) verb 
When you compile something such as a report, 
book, or table, you produce it by collecting and 
putting together many pieces of information.
complement (complements) n-count 
The complement of a link verb is an adjective group 
or noun group which comes after the verb and 
describes or identifies the subject. For example, 
in the sentence ‘They felt very tired’, ‘very tired’ 
is the complement. In ‘They were students’, 
‘students’ is the complement.
constitute (constitutes, constituting, constituted)
V-LINK
If something constitutes a particular thing, it can be 
regarded as being that thing.
context (contexts) n-var
The context of a word, sentence, or text consists of 
the words, sentences, or text before and after it 
which help to make its meaning clear.
convention (conventions) n-count 
Academic conventions are traditional methods or 
styles of academic writing.
convey (conveys, conveying, conveyed) verb 
.To convey information or feelings means to cause 
them to be known or understood by someone.
corporate governance n-uncount 
Corporate governance is the way in which a 
business corporation is managed.
creditor (creditors) n-count 
Your creditors are the people who you owe 
money to.
criteria (criterion) n -p lu ra l 
Criteria are factors on which you decide or judge 
something.
critique (critiques) n-count
A critique is a written examination and judgment of 
a situation or of a person’s work or ideas.
d
defining relative clause (defining relative clauses) 
n-count
A defining relative clause is a subordinate clause 
which gives information about a person or thing, 
explaining or specifying which person or thing 
you are talking about.
deliberate adj
If you do something that is deliberate, you planned 
or decided to do it beforehand, and so it happens 
on purpose rather than by chance.
demonstrative adjective (demonstrative adjectives) 
n-count
Demonstrative adjectives are the words ‘this’, ‘that’, 
‘these’, and ‘those’.
dense (denser, densest) adj 
If a text or sentence is dense, it contains a lot of 
information in a small or short space.
design specification (design specifications) 
n-count
A design specification is a clearly stated requirement 
about the necessary features in the design of 
something.
determiner (determiners) n-count 
A determiner is a word which is used at the 
beginning of a noun group to indicate, for 
example, which thing you are referring to or 
whether you are referring to one thing or several. 
Common English determiners are ‘a ’, ‘the’, ‘some’, 
‘this’, and ‘each’.
discipline (disciplines) n-count 
A discipline is a particular area of study, especially a 
subject of study in a college or university.
dissertation (dissertations) n-count 
A dissertation is a long formal piece of writing on 
a particular subject, especially for a university 
degree.
distinguish (distinguishes, distinguishing, 
distinguished) verb
If you distinguish one thing from another or
distinguish between two things, you show, see, or 
understand how they are different.
drawback (drawbacks) n-count 
A drawback is an aspect of something or someone 
that makes them less acceptable than they would 
otherwise be.
dualist adj
If a person or their way of thinking is dualist, they 
believe that something has two main parts or 
aspects.

Writing
e
efficiency n-uncount
Efficiency is the quality of being able to do a task 
successfully, without repetition or wasting time or 
energy.
ethical adj
Ethical means relating to beliefs about right and 
wrong.
exemplify (exemplifies, exemplifying, exemplified)
VERB
If you exemplify something you are saying or 
writing, you give an example to make it clearer.
expulsion (expulsions) n-var 
Expulsion is when someone is forced to leave a 
school, university, or organization.
f
fatigue n-uncount
Fatigue in metal or wood is a weakness in it that is 
caused by repeated stress. Fatigue can cause the 
metal or wood to break.
feminist empiricism n-uncount 
Feminist empiricism is the belief that people should 
rely on practical experience and experiments, 
rather than theories, as a basis for knowledge, 
and that these should not favour or be concerned 
with one gender more than the other.
figure (figures) n-count
In books, journal articles, and essays, the diagrams 
which help to show or explain information are 
referred to as figures.
flow chart (flow charts) n-count 
A flow chart or a flow diagram is a diagram which 
represents the sequence of actions in a particular 
process or activity.
footnote (footnotes) n-count 
A footnote is a note at the bottom of a page in a 
book which provides more detailed information 
about something that is mentioned on that page.
f o r m a l i t y  n -u n c o u n t
If you talk about the formality of a person’s
language or writing style, you mean that they are 
using extremely formal academic language.
further (furthers, furthering, furthered) verb 
If you further something, you help it to progress, to 
be successful, or to be achieved.
168
g
genre (genres) n-count
A genre is a particular type of literature, painting, 
music, film, or other art form which people 
consider as a class because it has special 
characteristics.
geological adj
Geological means relating to geology.
get into (gets into, getting into, got into) phrasal
VERB
If you get into a particular kind of work or activity, 
you manage to become involved in it.
guild (guilds) n-count
A guild is an organization of people who do the 
same job or activity.
i
immune response (immune responses) 
n-count
Your immune response is the reaction of your body 
to the presence of substances causing disease or 
infection.
immunity n-uncount
If you talk about someone’s immunity to a
particular disease, you mean that they cannot be 
affected by it.
indent (indents) n-count
An indent is the space at the beginning of a line of 
writing when it starts further away from the edge 
of the paper than all the other lines.
initiative (initiatives) n-count 
An initiative is an important act or statement that is 
intended to solve a problem.
innovation n-uncount 
Innovation is the introduction of new ideas, 
methods, or things.
inspiration n-uncount
Inspiration is a feeling of enthusiasm you get from 
someone or something, which gives you new and 
creative ideas.
integrate (integrates, integrating, integrated) verb 
If you integrate one thing with another, or one thing 
integrates with another, the two things become 
closely linked or form part of a whole idea or 
system. You can also say that two things 
integrate.

Glossary
integrity n-uncount
If you have integrity in academic writing, you are 
honest about what is your point of view and 
what is the point of view of other people.
intent (intents) n-var
If you state your intent in a piece of writing, you 
say what you intend to do in the writing.
invalidation n-uncount
The invalidation of someone’s academic qualifications 
is a declaration that they are no longer valid.
irrelevant adj
If you describe something such as a fact or remark 
as irrelevant, you mean that it is not connected 
with what you are discussing or dealing with.
j
justification n-uncount
If you use left or right justification when you lay 
out printed text, you begin each line at the same 
distance from the left-hand or right-hand edge of 
the page or column.
k
key word (key words) n-count
Key words in a text are the most important words 
used in discussing a topic.
I
lab report (lab reports ) n-count
A lab report is a document which you write after 
doing an experiment or investigating a situation 
in a laboratory.
linear adj
A linear process or development is one in which 
something changes or progresses straight from 
one stage to another, and has a starting point and 
an ending point.
literature review (literature reviews) n-count
If you do a literature review, you read relevant 
literature such as books and journal articles so 
that you have a good, basic knowledge of a topic.
m
measure (measures) n-count
When someone, usually a government or other 
authority, takes measures to do something, they
carry out particular actions in order to achieve a 
particular result.
metaphor (metaphors) n-var
A metaphor is an imaginative way of describing 
something by referring to something else which 
is the same in a particular way. For example, if 
you want to say that someone is very shy and 
frightened of things, you might say that they are 
a mouse.
microfinance n-uncount
Microfinance is the lending of money to
unemployed people or people or groups that have 
a low income, and who may not usually be able 
to borrow money.
modesty n-uncount
If you write with modesty, you use impersonal and 
cautious language in your writing.
module (modules) n-count
A module is one of the separate parts of a course 
taught at a college or university.
morality n-uncount
The morality of something is how right or 
acceptable it is.
n
neutral adj-graded
If someone uses neutral language, they choose 
words which do not indicate that they approve or 
disapprove of something.
o
objective adj
If someone is objective, they base their opinions on 
facts rather than on their personal feelings.
obstacle (obstacles) n-count
You can refer to anything that makes it difficult for 
you to do something as an obstacle.
outline (outlines) n-var
An outline is a general explanation or description 
of something.
P
paraphrasing n-uncount
Paraphrasing is when you express what
someone else has said or written in a different 
way.
169

Writing
passive (passives) n-count
A passive, passive form, or passive verb is formed 
using ‘be’ and the past participle of a verb. The 
subject of a passive clause does not perform the 
action expressed by the verb but is affected by it. 
For example, in ‘H e’s been murdered’, the verb is 
in the passive.
pedagogy n-uncount
Pedagogy is the study and theory of the methods 
and principles of teaching.
phrasal verb (phrasal verbs) n-count
A phrasal verb is a combination of a verb and an 
adverb or preposition, for example ‘shut up’ or 
‘look after’, which together have a particular 
meaning.
policy (policies) n-var
A policy is a set of ideas or plans that is used as a 
basis for making decisions, especially in politics, 
economics, or business.
possession n-uncount
Possession is the state of having something 
because you have obtained it or because it 
belongs to you.
possessive (possessives) n-count
A possessive is a word such as ‘my’ or ‘his’ which 
shows who or what something belongs to or is 
connected with, or the possessive form of a name 
or noun which has ‘s added to it, as in ‘Jenny’s’ or 
‘cat’s’.
post-modern adj
Post-modern is used to describe something or 
someone that is influenced by post-modernism.
post-modernism n-uncount
Post-modernism is a late twentieth century approach 
in art, architecture, and literature which typically 
mixes styles, ideas, and references to modern 
society, often in an ironic way.
PR N-UNCOUNT
PR is an abbreviation for public relations. Public 
relations is the part of an organization’s work 
that is concerned with obtaining the public’s 
approval for what it does.
preliminary adj
Preliminary activities or discussions take place at 
the beginning of an event, often as a form of 
preparation.
principle (principles) n-count 
The principles of a particular theory or philosophy 
are its basic rules or laws.
procrastination n-uncount
Procrastination is when you keep leaving things you 
should do until later, often because you do not 
want to do them.
proofreading n-uncount
Proofreading is the act of reading through a book, 
an article, or an essay before it is submitted or 
published in order to find and mark mistakes that 
need to be corrected.
proposal (proposals) n-count 
A proposal is a plan or an idea, often a formal or 
written one, which is suggested for people to 
think about and decide upon.
provoke (provokes, provoking, provoked) verb 
If something provokes a question, reaction, or 
effect, it causes the question to be asked, causes a 
particular reaction, or has a particular effect.
r
reference work (reference works) n-count 
A reference work is a book, journal, or article that 
you look at when you need specific information 
or facts about a subject.
reliable adj
Information that is reliable or that is from a reliable 
source is very likely to be correct.
research report (research reports) noun 
A research report is a document that you write 
which shows the results of your research.
respectively adv
Respectively means in the same order as the items 
that you have just mentioned.
s
saying (sayings) n-count
A saying is a sentence that people often say and that 
gives advice or information about human life and 
experience.
scandal (scandals) n-count 
A scandal is a situation or event that is thought 
to be shocking and immoral and that everyone 
knows about.
170

Glossary
search term (search terms) n -co u n t 
A search term is a word or phrase that you put 
into a database or search engine in order to 
find information, books, or journal articles that 
contain or deal with a particular subject.
sector (sectors) n -cou n t 
A particular sector of a country’s economy is 
the part connected with that specified type of 
industry.
seminar (seminars) n -cou n t 
A seminar is a class at a college or university in 
which the teacher and a small group of students 
discuss a topic.
shareholder (shareholders) n -cou n t 
A shareholder is a person who owns shares in a 
company.
sophistication n -uncount 
Sophistication is the quality of being more 
advanced or complex than other things.
specification (specifications) n -cou n t 
A specification is a requirement which is clearly 
stated, for example about the necessary features 
in the design of something.
spidergram (spidergrams) n -co u n t 
A spidergram is a drawing to show facts or ideas, 
which has the main topic in a circle in the centre 
with other important facts on lines drawn out 
from this central circle.
stakeholder (stakeholders) n -cou n t 
Stakeholders are people who have an interest in a 
company’s or organization’s affairs.
stance (stances) n-count
Your stance on a particular matter is your attitude 
to it.
sub-clause (sub-clauses) n-count
A sub-clause or subordinate clause is a clause 
in a sentence which adds to or completes the 
information given in the main clause. It cannot 
usually stand alone as a sentence.
synonym (synonyms) n-count
A synonym is a word or expression which means 
the same as another word or expression.
synthesis (syntheses) n-count
A synthesis of different ideas or styles is a mixture 
or combination of these ideas or styles.
t
tentative adj
Tentative answers, plans, or arrangements are not 
definite or certain, but have been given or made 
as a first step.
tone n-sing
The tone of a speech or piece of writing is its style 
and the opinions or ideas expressed in it.
trial and error phrase
If you do something by trial and error, you try 
several different methods of doing it until you 
find the method that works properly.
v
verify (verifies, verifying, verified) verb
If you verify something, you check that it is true by 
careful examination or investigation.
171

Answer key
Chapter 1
Exercise 1
1 ,4  = give different points of view (and your 
opinion)
2, 3 = write about, describe 
When answering questions 2 and 3 you will 
have to describe what (might have) happened. 
Questions 1 and 4 are more about opinions about 
how far something is true (‘less’, ‘sufficiently’) and 
the terminology used is open to interpretation 
(‘effective’, ‘advanced’).
Notice how the meaning of a word depends on 
the context. Different disciplines may have different 
ways of using words, and you need to think 
about what happens in yours. Looking at example 
essays or exam questions from previous years 
can help.
Exercise 2
1 c 
2 a 
3 
7 e 8 j 
9
4  h
10 i
5 b 6 d
Exercise 3
a The topic is ‘urban planning theories’.
b There are three sentences, without major 
subdivisions.
Part
Instruction
What I should do
1
What are the key 
urban planning 
theories that have 
emerged in the 
post-war period?
■ say what the most 
important (= ‘key’)urban 
planning theories are, 
but ONLY mention the 
ones that were developed 
after the war
2
Outline in 
summary 
their key 
characteristics.
■ for each theory, give 
the main characteristics 
ONLY, WITHOUT 
going into detail
With reference 
to one of these 
theories, explain 
how they help 
us understand 
the nature of 
planning practice.
choose one theory 
explain how this theory 
relates to practice by 
answering the question: 
‘How does the theory 
enable an understanding 
of the nature of 
planning practice?’
Exercise 4
1 C
2 B
Exercise 5
1 , 2 , 3 /
‘appreciation of politics’ ?
The question says ... X
There is a danger here that the student is going in 
the wrong direction.
The question could be reformulated as follows: ‘Is 
it absolutely necessary to understand politics in 
order to understand opportunities and constraints 
for development? Select a country and analyse their 
understanding (of politics and the opportunities/ 
constraints for development). Use development 
theory in your analysis and other academic sources 
about development.’
The student does not seem to understand the 
meaning o f ‘appreciation’. The reason for this may 
be the fact that the word has different meanings. 
Have a look at the four dictionary definitions and 
decide which one is most likely here:
A Appreciation of something is the recognition and 
enjoyment of its good qualities.
B Your appreciation for something that someone 
does for you is your gratitude for it.
An appreciation of a situation is an 
understanding of what it involves.
172

Answer key Chapters 1-2
D Appreciation in the value of something is an 
increase in its value over a period of time.
The closest meaning here is C, an understanding. 
The best dictionary to use for most academic 
purposes is an Advanced Learner’s Dictionary.
We have used the Collins COB UILD Advanced 
Dictionary here.
The reason that the lecturer uses ‘thinkers’ 
separately from ‘development theory’ is probably 
because not all thinkers have come up with whole 
theories. The student needs to look at what thinkers 
have said about development and that includes 
looking at development theory. It is unlikely that 
‘thinker’ and ‘theory’ are seen as two completely 
separate concepts.
Chapter 2
Exercise 1
Suggested answers:
In tr o d u c tio n
b a c k g r o u n d : u r b a n  p la n n in g  in  th e  
p o s t- w a r  p e r io d
M a in  b o d y
■ d e sc r ib e  th e  m o s t  im p o r t a n t  
p la n n in g  th e o r ie s in  th is p e r io d  
(m a in  c h a r a c te r istic s)
■ e x p la in  o n e  th e o r y  in  m o r e  
d e ta il
*  r e la te  th is th e o r y  to  p r a c tic e : 
e x p la in  h o w  it h e lp s u s 
u n d e r s t a n d  th e  n a tu r e  o f  p la n n in g  
p r a c tic e
C o n c lu s io n
su m m a r iz in g  c o m m e n ts a b o u t  
u r b a n  p la n n in g  in  th e  p o s t- w a r  
p e r io d  a n d  th e  lin k  b e tw e e n  th e o r y  
a n d  p r a c tic e
Exercise 2
This is what we would expect a student to do in an 
introduction:
1 give a description or explanation of the situation 
or problem (more general)
2 say why this problem (or a more specific aspect 
of it) is important
3 say what the organization of your essay will be.
Introduction A
The writer of Introduction A has demonstrated that 
she understands the question: we know that she 
understands the meaning of ‘discuss’ in this context 
as she immediately starts talking about benefits and 
drawbacks. She also clearly indicates the structure 
of the essay (point 3): ‘first... the role calculators 
play ... benefits ... drawbacks ... Then ... argument 
for ... by examining ... before concluding ...’.
What she has not done is explore the situation 
(point 1) and show why this question is worth 
discussing (point 2). It may be that historically, 
calculators have been used as soon as they were 
affordable, or this may have started because of 
educational theories that suggested that they were 
necessary, or perhaps this is a cultural issue and 
in some countries they are not allowed to be used. 
Once this background is provided, the student 
could then have explained why it is an issue that 
is worth discussing: are there different educational 
theories, cultural shifts, studies that suggest 
calculatorsjihould not be used? Although she 
should not go into these issues in depth, she could 
have used them to justify why this topic is worth 
discussing.
In this particular case, she nearly did this: there is a 
suggestion that the question has to be discussed in 
the context of the purpose of an educational system 
-  but she should have said more about this.
Introduction B
This student includes point (2): he is saying why 
this particular question is being raised and is 
therefore worthy of discussion. In the last sentence, 
he also says (as student 1 did) whether he agrees or 
disagrees with the comment.
It is a good idea to ‘answer’ the question. Not 
only does it show that you understand what the 
question is, but it also tells your reader what you 
are going to argue, which guides them through 
your text.
This student has not really included enough 
for point 1, and there is no comment about 
organization (point 3).
We can take the best from both introductions to 
write a better one:
173

Writing
Calculators are useful pieces of equipment 
and are commonly used in classrooms all over 
the world. Recently, however, a number of 
studies (you would insert the details here -  see 
information about references in Chapter 9) 
have questioned the role of the calculator in the 
primary school classroom, suggesting that it may 
slow students’ ability to understand mathematical 
concepts. This essay will first address the role 
calculators play by examining some established 
benefits as well as the drawbacks mentioned 
in the recent research. It will then discuss the 
underlying purpose of all educational systems 
before concluding that calculators will always 
have a use in learning environments.
Exercise 3
(1) In conclusion, new technologies have 
provided a remarkable breakthrough which 
has allowed society itself to become incredibly 
advanced. (2) They have now become so highly 
developed that they have provoked ethical 
questions about their morality. One of the main 
reasons for this is that they can be controlling, 
but as we have seen, they are liberating at the 
same time, with cyborg (mechanical body parts) 
technology even being able to save people’s lives. 
Another area of thought is related to the area 
of feminism: despite their large contribution 
to the fields of science and technology, women 
still have to struggle with inequality in everyday 
and scientific life. While new technologies have 
undoubtedly influenced postmodern thinking,
(3) the amount of research activity in the field in 
recent years suggests that the influence may also 
work the other way round.
Exercise 4
It is widely believed that the internet is making 
our lives easier than they were in the past.
(1) Furthermore, the internet is used as a 
consultation method for solving many problems.
(2) On the one hand, many people use the internet 
for consulting others who are in a different 
location, for example, teachers, physicians and 
community researchers. (3) Moreover, there
are social networking sites such as Facebook to 
communicate with old friends, and so you can get 
together with them and other people you have
174
not seen in a long time. The internet has (4) also 
led to an increase in opportunities for face-to- 
face communication and people can talk with 
each other at any time and anywhere. (5) At last, 
people with disabilities can use the internet to 
help overcome obstacles so that they have better 
access to education and other services.
1 Furthermore: the reader has just read a sentence 
that says what is widely believed (that the 
internet makes our lives easier). This linking 
word suggests that there is something else that 
is widely believed. Instead, the sentence gives an 
example of how it makes our lives easier.
2 On the one hand: this is always followed by ‘on 
the other hand’ (which is missing here), to give 
opposing points of view. There are no views 
expressed here: there are examples given here 
about how the internet can solve problems. This 
connects the sentence to the previous sentence, 
and a linking word was not absolutely necessary.
3 Moreover: this is acceptable as it introduces a 
second point. The first point was that it helps 
solve problems, the second that it helps with 
communication, and both points are evidence 
that the Internet is making our lives easier.
4 also: this suggests that there is another idea, but 
actually face-to-face communication was already 
mentioned in the previous sentence (‘get together 
with them’).
5 At last: this is incorrect. ‘At last’ is not used in 
academic writing. It suggests that it has taken too 
long. Instead, you can use ‘last’, ‘lastly’ or ‘finally.’
The student seems to have used incorrect and 
unnecessary linking words to give the impression 
that the paragraph is developed well. Unfortunately, 
not only will the reader notice immediately that 
this is not the case, he or she will also be confused 
about what the student is trying to say.
Exercise 5
Internet users can get information any time they 
need it via their internet connection. When the 
internet was first introduced, its feature was to 
share information. As time has gone by, more 
functions and tools have been added. These 
include blogs, which allow users to share their 
comments and opinions, and social networks, 
which enable people to pass on messages quickly.

Answer key Chapters 2 -4
■ ‘they’ and ‘their’ refer to internet users.
■ ‘its’ refers to the internet.
■ ‘These’ refers to functions and tools.
■ ‘which’ refers to blogs.
*  ‘their’ refers to users.
■ ‘which’ refers to social networks.
The connections between the sentences indicated by 
pronouns all suggest that the writer is giving a list, 
which is related to the topic of the internet.
Chapter 3
Exercise 1
Suggested answers:
Comprehension is commonly defined as the act of 
understanding.
The act of understanding is known as 
comprehension.
Exercise 2
1 which / that
2 which / that, which 
that
Exercise 3
1 exemplifying
2 listing/classifying
Exercise 4
1 a This essay has discussed the economic factors
that contributed to ...
b In this essay, I have argued that globalization is 
not a recent phenomenon.
c This essay has explored the causes of the 
conflict...
2 You could have used a simple past (e.g. this essay 
discussed). However, the present perfect, as in the 
answers above, is better because the essay is not 
finished yet.
3 a These findings suggest th a t...
b The evidence seems to indicate th a t... 
c A consequence of this is th a t...
3 which / that
4 who
5 which / that
3 giving cause/effect
4 comparing/contrasting
If you are repeating exactly what you have already 
said, you could use the simple past (These findings 
suggested th a t...). It is very common in conclusions 
to use the present simple when discussing the 
significance of findings and evidence.
Chapter 4
Exercise 1
The style in this book is informal. The informal style 
has been chosen because this book is giving advice 
directly to the readers. The pronouns ‘we’ and ‘you’ 
make the text more personal. A friendly style is 
appropriate because the text aims to be reassuring.
Here are some examples from this section of 
Chapter 4:
■ Try to work out what the mistakes are and 
how you could correct them before you 
read on.
‘Try to work out’ is a command -  the writer is 
addressing the reader. The use of ‘you’ makes the 
text more personal and direct.
■ Idioms are very rare in academic writing, and it 
is better if you don’t use them.
Contractions are not used in a formal style.
■ There is a grammatical mistake here: you 
wouldn’t say ‘every X  cannof.
A more formal way of writing this would be ‘it 
is wrong to say ...’, but the use of ‘you’ makes 
the style less formal; the use of the contraction in 
‘wouldn’t’ is informal.
Exercise 2
Suggested answers:
1 Better staff training will increase the company’s 
efficiency. / With better staff training the 
company’s efficiency will increase.
2 In this case, cultural differences necessitate varied 
communication strategies.
3 The adoption of this strategy may lead to cost 
reductions.
4 The creation of such a unit may improve the 
accessibility of marketing information.
175

Writing
Exercise 3
Suggested answers:
1 Non-verbal behaviour has significant effects on 
every living being.
2 This environment is non-living components like 
rocks, water and air.
3 It is necessary from a social point of view to talk 
about unimportant topics sometimes.
4  Giving pupils more responsibilities during an 
already stressful time may not be the wisest 
action to take.
5 Stress may not be as negative a factor for our 
health as previously thought. / Stress may not be 
as negative for our health as previously thought, 
(i.e. simply take ‘thing’ out)
Chapter 5
Exercise 1
1 Complex and currently unresolved issues 
arising in research on innovation in complex 
organizations are also to be examined.
2 Lastly, a possible solution of the horizon, 
flatness, homogeneity and isotropy problems in 
cosmology is suggested.
3 Hundreds of reliable focal-mechanism solutions 
for deep and intermediate depth earthquakes 
were analysed.
Exercise 2
To begin with, it is essential to understand what the 
feminist approach is, why it has emerged and what its 
positions are. According to Saratankos (2005:71 Lthe 
feminist approach is defined as ‘an established type of 
research, which has the specific purpose of studying 
women and their status in the community’. Put 
differently, women are the dominant research subject 
of the feminist approach, which aims at attaining 
economic, social and political equality between the 
sexes, emancipating women and increasing people’s 
understanding about blatant sexism.
Exercise 4
Suggested answer:
Schoolchildren may be able to improve their 
mathematical knowledge and skills with regular 
practice outside the classroom. This will help 
them avoid an over-reliance on calculators, 
although those can still be helpful when 
checking answers or doing long calculations.
Chapter 6
Exercise 1
Student’s notes
Spelling mistake
The quotation marks are missing.
Article title: Trauma, Transferrence- 
and ‘Working through’ in Writing the- 
History of the Shoah - - "  "
_—  —  "
This is how the name will appear in the references, so this is fine. 
However, it may be safer to keep a note of the full name.
Author: Friedlander, S.
The page numbers have been omitted and are necessary.
Journal: History arid -Memory, Volume 
4, No. 1,1992, Indiana P r e s s - " " ”
The name of the publisher is not complete.
This needs to have the same punctuation as in the original.
Book title: The Democratic Ideal and
This needs to have the same capitalization as in the original. |
the Shoah; the unthought in political 
modernity
The author's first name is misspelled. This probably won't be a 
problem later as the first name is not necessary in the reference list, 
but it is bad practice to make mistakes.
Authors: Samuel Trigano, Eileen
Publisher: State University of New York 
Press, Albany-----------------------------------
She does not need to be mentioned as she is not an author.
The year is missing.
176

Answer key Chapters 4 -6
Some of these mistakes could have been avoided if the student had a system, e.g. working with columns for 
all the information, first names, surnames, dates, etc.
Exercise 2
Here are two ways of presenting the notes.
Solving climate change (Roval Society )
1 Ideas 
WHY
1.1 giant mirrors — ---------- >  reflect tight away
1.2 particles into atmosphere ------->  block sm energy
1.3 iron filings into ocean ----- => end.plankton ----- >  absorb COz
2 Criticism
people will not take respy. to reduce C 0 2
Climate change research (Royal Society)
Both representations show the three different ideas and their purpose, and try to integrate a comment 
about criticism. The second suggestion works very well visually.
177

Writing
Exercise 3
Notes
Retailing is changing:
-  becoming leisure, about convenience ->• e.g. 
more delivery
-  recently: independents closing - >  empty 
shops in towns, bee. of ec.s of scale / 
supermarkets’ control of supply chain/prices
Useful subject-specific vocabulary:
retailing (the sale of goods from a fixed location)
independent retailer: opposite = chain store
economies of scale (it is cheaper to buy stock in 
bulk, so big shops can charge lower prices)
buy in bulk
supply chain
Exercise 4
1 point 
2 evidence 
3 explanation
(1) Although this approach has been criticized 
by many researchers who argue that it is not 
effective enough to teach and learn a second 
language, it is still useful for teaching spoken 
English grammar. (2) Firstly, if the teachers 
want to use this approach to teach features of 
spoken grammar, they should clearly know what 
the features of spoken grammar are and have 
coursebooks based on spoken English grammar.
(3) Otherwise, it is very difficult to use this 
approach in their teaching activity.
Exercise 5
1 The writer makes the following points:
a the projects were not effective because of 
limited budgets and conflicts (between property 
owners and later economists/councillors)
b the projects raised public awareness
2 For point a, four sources are given, including 
three historical ones (strong evidence).
Point b seems to be based on the evidence in the 
previous sentence. However, an explanation is 
missing which explains how the point and the 
evidence are linked, e.g. were the conflicts well 
known in Halifax? This evidence could be stronger.
Chapter 7
Exercise 1
2 a gene / controls / the activity: pattern 2
3 the treatment / is discussed / in O’Connor: pattern 4
4  the evidence / is / not conclusive: pattern 3
5 trade / brings / benefits / to all: pattern 5
Exercise 2
2 -  a (swim) bladder / is / a bladder [main clause]
-  a swim bladder is found (in bony fish) [sub­
clause] [extra information]
-  the bladder is situated (in the roof of the 
abdominal cavity) [sub-clause] [extra 
information]
Note: this sentence has been interpreted as ‘A 
swim bladder is a bladder which is situated in the 
roof of the abdominal cavity and which is found 
in bony fish.’
3 -  notation / is / a method (of recording music)
[main clause]
-  the method is based on naming (the notes 
by letters) / the method includes ways (of 
distinguishing the value of notes in terms of 
duration) [sub-clause] [extra information]
Note: ‘and’ is used here to separate two parts 
that are equally important in the sub-clause.
4 -  (traditional) models (of urban zones) (such
as the models by Burgess (1920s) or Hoyt 
(1930s)) / place / the CBD (in the middle of 
town) [main clause]
this = placing (it in the middle of town) is 
unsurprising [extra information]
Note: the example (starting with ‘such as’) has 
not been put separately as this is not a sub­
clause: it has no conjugated verb.
Exercise 3
2 supplies: noun (verb: shows)
3 increases: noun (verb: are)
4  contrast: noun (verb: has been developed)
Exercise 4
1 c  
2 g 
3 h 
4 f 
5 a  6 b 
7 e  
S d
178

Answer key Chapters 6 -9
Exercise 5
1 university / concert hall
2 post-traumatic stress / symptoms
3 knowledge management / systems
4 solid waste / management
5 data stream / systems
6 social science / issues
7 human resource / management
8 economic growth / theory
Chapter 8
Exercise 1
This essay is biased (1) because it does not consider 
the evidence against the writer’s opinion. There 
are also examples of items 2 ,4 ,5 , 6 and 9 in the essay.
Chapter 9
Exercise 1
1 and 2 are common knowledge and do not need a 
citation.
3 This could be common knowledge but is actually 
a dictionary definition (taken from the Cobuild 
online dictionary) so it needs a citation.
4 This is an interesting and concise way of 
expressing an opinion about history: that 
there may be different versions of history 
and that the official history is only one 
version of what really happened, but the 
most popular one. This particular statement 
has been attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte, 
so it needs a citation.
5 This is a more controversial statement than the 
previous one. It has been attributed to Ambrose 
Bierce and needs a citation.
Exercise 2
1, 2, 3, and 7 are well-known facts, although 1 and 
7 perhaps only in certain disciplines.
4 This is the opposite of (3), which is considered a 
fact under normal circumstances, so it will either 
need explaining (under what circumstances is 
this true?) or you will need to cite the source 
before explaining further.
5 This definition is very specific (‘any paid form 
of non-personal presentation’) and sounds 
academic. It is different from the general 
definition of advertising which you would find in 
a dictionary. If you find a definition like this on a 
website and cannot determine the author, check 
that the site has not just taken it from elsewhere 
without saying so. It is up to you to determine 
its real origin, which actually is a book by Kotler 
and Armstrong (2001).
6 This is a controversial statement that would need 
explanation and/or a reference.
8 This is not well-known, and does not sound 
academic. If you really wanted to make this 
point, you would have to evidence it.
(2) Because of the spread of the world’s 
economic crisis, more and more people are 
asking for a single world currency system.
(6) Therefore, it is a good idea to implement this.
First, the risks involved in foreign exchange would 
no longer exist if we had a single world currency. 
In international trade, enterprises (4) always 
face exchange rate risks. The loss caused by the 
floating exchange heavily counteracts their profit. 
Sometimes trading loss occurs in a very short time.
Second, it would be very convenient if we had 
a single world currency: people would not need 
to exchange money or pay service charges in 
the future. (4) Everybody (2) wants convenience 
above everything else when they travel, (6) so 
one currency is better.
Last but not least, the competitive power of 
enterprises would improve if the prices for the 
goods and service were in same currency. It 
would be beneficial to social development.
Some say that it would be difficult to manage 
the currency, (5) but these are the usual
(2) pessimistic economists. (9) Given the evidence 
in favour above, it is clear that a single world 
currency should be put into practice in the future.
Note: in the first example of 2 above, evidence is 
necessary because the statement which has been 
made is so strong.
179

Writing
Exercise 3
Essay A
(1) Cars have been debated for many years.
Some say that they are convenient, whereas 
other people say that they are expensive, and 
cause problems for traffic, human beings and the 
environment. As they cause so many problems, 
governments should ban cars.
Many people have cars because they are available 
when and where they want them. If they want 
to go and visit family in a different city, they can 
just take their car and drive to the right address. 
If they took a train, they woidd still need to 
get to the station, and the train might not stop 
close to the address they want. Trains and buses 
do not travel at night, so they would not be 
able to visit family at certain times. Businesses 
also rely on road transport. Cars give people 
convenience, so they don’t usually mind that they 
are expensive to buy and maintain (repairs and 
petrol) because it is worth it for them.
However, (2) convenience is the only 
advantage that cars offer, and there are many 
disadvantages. Firstly, people die because o f cars.
(3) More people die on the road than in other 
types o f accidents and many are children on 
their way to school. (4) People also die in road
rage incidents when people get angry with other 
drivers for driving badly. (5) They could also die 
or suffer from the pollution that cars cause, e.g. 
asthma is increasing.
Secondly, pollution causes damage to the 
environment. M ost cars still use petrol, 
which causes damage. Moreover, building 
cars and motorways is bad for the environment 
too.
Lastly, these problems are going to increase 
because there are too many cars already and 
ownership will keep increasing. Having more 
cars also means more traffic jams, which will 
have a negative influence on business if they 
make business people miss appointments.
In conclusion, the disadvantages outweigh the 
advantages, so cars should be banned.
1 In a more academic essay, you would provide 
examples of ‘debates’ about cars, or details of a 
source that mentions these.
2 This is a strong statement to make. It really needs 
evidence, in the form of a source that has said 
this. If this is the writer’s own opinion and not 
based on a source, and there is no other evidence 
available to back this up, then it needs to be 
rephrased more cautiously: ‘most important’ 
instead of ‘only’ or ‘is probably’ instead of ‘is’.
3 These statistics cannot be given without evidence.
4 There needs to be some sort of evidence, e.g. a 
mention of newspaper reports about this.
5 There has to be a source for the fact that more 
and more people suffer from asthma.
Exercise 4
1 This is a saying of unknown origin, but often 
attributed to British Prime Minister Winston 
Churchill. It can easily be paraphrased, but a 
quote would be acceptable because the saying is 
so short and to the point.
2 There is no good reason to quote, so this should 
be paraphrased.
3 This is an often quoted sentence by Oscar 
Wilde, a British playwright. He made a 
very personal comment here which is quite 
controversial, and he put it in a very interesting 
way. This is something that would best be quoted.
Exercise 5
The student is trying to indicate that the 
terminology is not her own, by putting words such 
as ‘explicit’ between quotation marks. However, 
as she has not mentioned whose words and 
definitions (between brackets) these are, it is still 
plagiarism.
Exercise 6
1 Correct.
2 Correct. As this was a quote, the page number 
needed to be added.
3 N ot correct: full stop needed after et al.
4 Correct.
5 Not correct: lower case a needed.
180

Answer key Chapters 9 -1 0
Exercise 7
The two additional sources are correct, but as the 
list should be alphabetical, Lapkin would come 
before Rivers.
Chapter 10
Exercise 1
Paraphrase 1
This paraphrase is making a claim that the original 
did not have: the first sentence is too general, 
making it sound as if it is about more than 
fashion. Also, the three countries were only given 
as examples of places with textile industries, rather 
than what is being said now, i.e. that the textile 
industry is an example of something bigger. The 
other factual mistake is that the West is influencing 
the East, as the original text claimed the opposite.
This paraphrase misrepresents the author, which is 
completely unacceptable.
Paraphrase 2
Although this paraphrase does not include every 
detail of the original text, remember that it does 
not need to: this was part of a larger text anyway, 
which will not be paraphrased completely. This 
paraphrase is the best one of the three: it reflects 
what the original author was saying but it has been 
used in a new (but related) argument with a slightly 
different emphasis: it is about familiarity rather 
than influence, and perhaps the writer will continue 
the topic of the textile industry.
Paraphrase 3
This paraphrase is too close to the original.
Although the writer has not used many of the 
words from the original, he has used synonyms 
throughout (fashion -  clothing trends, influenced -  
affected, for many years -  for a long time, Eastern 
culture -  culture from the East, etc.) and has not 
demonstrated any real understanding of the original, 
which means he has only demonstrated language 
skills, not academic skills. The pattern is also similar 
to the original (see e.g. the first sentence).
This can be considered plagiarism as using 
synonyms and changing word order is a technical 
exercise. This technique is more about hiding 
the original quote, rather than paraphrasing and 
integrating it well to show it has been understood 
and developed into a new argument.
Exercise 2
The second paraphrase is better because it 
develops the ideas of the writer better. The 
writer’s first topic sentence talks about how the 
fashion industry has recently been influenced by 
Africa. The paraphrase functions as a second 
topic sentence, talking about the more long-term 
trend of Eastern influence. The phrase ‘long-term 
trend’ at the beginning of the paraphrase is linked, 
through contrast, to the word ‘recently’ in the first 
sentence of the text.
The first paraphrase also relates to what was said 
in the original text, but it is not integrated in the 
essay: ‘also’ does not really tell us much, so we 
do not know how the paraphrase supports the 
writer’s ideas or develops them. The writer has not 
demonstrated an understanding of the original well 
enough.
Exercise 3
The essay
Some scientists have suggested that dolphins 
are so intelligent that they should be treated as 
a person, albeit a non-human one. They found 
some similarities between dolphins and humans 
in terms of the anatomy of their brains and what 
they can do with them, e.g. learning, teaching, 
communicating, and thinking about the future 
(Burns, 2010). This raises questions about how 
dolphins are being treated now.
Notes about the six steps (FRANCIS):
Step 1 (F) Note that the information about 
chimpanzees was not selected because it did not fit. 
You should only select from your source what is 
useful for the development of your own ideas.
Step 4 (N) dolphins similar to humans: 
communication, smarter than three-year-old 
humans, anatomy of brain, think about future, 
learn and teach
Exercise 4
l e  
2 d  
3 c  
4 f 
5 a  6 b
Exercise 5
I f  
2 b  
3 e 
4 d 
5 a  6 c
181

Writing
Exercise 6
Presenting facts
Presenting opinion
acknowledge 
indicate 
demonstrate 
prove 
point out
allege 
claim 
argue 
imply 
assert 
propose 
suggest
Exercise 7
What is the writer’s opinion? The implementation 
of anti-discrimination actions which have long-term 
effects is therefore forgotten when managers have 
to deal with other urgent issues.
Does the writer agree with the sources she quotes?
Yes.
Do the sources express the same idea, or are they 
separate components of the argument? There are 
two different ideas here: ignoring equality actions 
(in small companies), and prioritizing profit (in all 
companies). Together they lead to the conclusion: 
the paragraph’s last sentence.
Exercise 8
1 Redmond (2003: 12) defined the low income 
groups as ‘Low income is defined as $725 or less’.
You would not repeat ‘defined’ and ‘low income’, 
but there is not much left in the quote without 
this -  it may be better not to quote here.
2 According to Grelling (2006: 98), to protect the 
construction materials of the bridge they used 
‘Chemical additives used (...) in the concrete and 
waterproofing systems’.
After ‘they used’ you need the object, a noun 
phrase without a verb. If you remove a word 
from the original quote, you need to show that 
there is something missing by using (...).
3 Atkins (2010: 42) said that Burj A1 Arab was ‘the 
world’s most luxurious and tallest all-suite hotel 
in Dubai’.
‘that’ introduces a sub-clause, which needs to 
have a verb. We could not add a verb to the 
original text, so needed to do this outside of the 
quotation marks.
Exercise 9
The authors ...
1 concluded that all languages have them.
2 argued that all languages have them.
3 identified that all languages have them. / 
identified them in all the languages in the sample.
4 claimed that all languages have them.
5 implied that all languages have them.
Note: it is not possible to use ‘how all languages 
have them’ in these sentences.
Exercise 10
1 a reported (what the researchers did is
emphasized)
b indicated (what the researchers did is 
emphasized)
2 have revealed (a number of studies, no named 
authors or dates in the subject)
3 a showed (this was true at that time)
show is also possible as you could say that the 
data always show this
b were: the information refers to patients that 
were a certain age at that time, so this verb 
needs to be in the past.
182

Answer key Chapters 10-11
Chapter 11
Exercise 1
In this essay I will be using resources such as textbooks,. . 
the internet and scientific journals in order to come to 
a conclusion about how forms of firm organization h asN 
changed by particularly focusing on three dominant 
models, which are proto-industrialization, factories and 
big business.
The essay is divided into three main parts. Fistly,- -..............
historical contexts and characteristics of each model are
given. Secondly, the essay explores advantages as well-----
disadvantages of each form. Particular models are looked 
at in terms of timeframe, location, important institutions., 
that affect the choose o f location, as well as examples of 
successful industries or businesses followed the .model____
Finally, a brief discussion is given to take into account 
factors that influence model application, which is followed' 
by a conclusion.
This is stating the obvious and does not need to 
be said - it gives the impression that the writer 
wants to make sure the word count is reached. 
This is a very weak start.
subject-verb agreement: have
spelling: Firstly
word missing: as well as
word form: choice
sentence construction: that follow
This needs to be deleted: it is stating the obvious.
Exercise 2
1
Introduction
Methods
Results
Discussion and conclusion
■ r e le v a n c e  o f  th e  p r o b le m
■ th e  b a c k g r o u n d  o f  th e 
p r o b le m /p r o je c t
■ th e  p u r p o s e  o f  th e  r e p o r t/ 
r e s e a r c h
■ r e le v a n t r e se a r c h  a b o u t  
th e t o p ic
■ d e sig n /p r o c e d u r e  o f  
su r v e y /e x p e r im e n t
■ h o w  th e  in fo r m a tio n  
w a s  g a th e r e d  / th e  
e x p e r im e n t w a s  
c a r r ie d  o u t
o u tc o m e  
o f  th e
e x p e r im e n t/ 
su r v e y / 
c o m p a r is o n  ...
■ s u m m a r y  o f  th e  p r o je c t/r e se a r c h
*  s u g g e s t io n s  fo r  fu rth e r  r e a d in g
■ d e s c r ip tio n  o f  th e  m e a n in g  a n d  
s ig n ific a n c e  o f  th e  fin d in g s, e .g . w h e th e r 
th e y  w e r e  e x p e c te d  o r  n o t
*  lim ita tio n  o f  m e th o d s , m a te r ia ls  a n d  
o th e r  a s p e c t s
2 The main part is the Results section.
Exercise 3
1 The writer studies Electrical Engineering / Electronic Engineering. The text is part of a report about 
a design project. Her brief was to develop an electronic product, e.g. a game or mobile phone. This 
particular paragraph comes from the evaluation section. Notice the formality of the style.
2 The writer studies International Development/Business/Economics. This is a diary entry from the first 
term of his studies, in which students were encouraged to reflect on the differences and similarities with 
their previous studies (in other countries). The students were asked to particularly comment on different 
learning situations and formats, on working with others, on expectations and on learning experiences.
Notice the mixture of styles: in this piece of reflective writing the student writes in a personal way 
(‘I thought...) but still uses an academic style. In a personal diary he might have expressed his feelings 
about the two people in the group in a very different way (e.g. ‘Samuel and Angela started to argue 
about something really stupid, we tried to stop them but they would not listen!!!’).
183

Collins
Communicate like a native 
English speaker
CEF Level: B1-C 2
Collins Work on your 
Accent
978- 0 - 00 - 746291-9
Clearer pronunciation for better 
com m unication
Work on your
Accent
dearer pronunciation for bets? communication
@  Includes DVD with visual and audio material
i
. -rT1
Work on
Phras
Master the 400 m
your
al Verbs
st common phrasal verbs
Hefea Ashton 
SSarsh Shepherd 1
V
Collins Work on your 
Phrasal Verbs
978- 0 - 00 - 746466-1
M aster the 400 m ost com m on 
phrasal verbs in English
Jamie Flockharl Wt 
\ 
j
SChervlWiercl
Work on your
Idioms
Master the 300 most common idioms
Collins Work on your 
Idioms
978- 0- 00- 746467-8
Speak idiom atic English -j u s t  like 
a native speaker
If you need help finding our books, please e-mail us at 
collins.elt@ harpercollins.co.uk.
www.collinselt.com
____________________________________
POWERED BY COBUILD
J

This book gives you the skills you need to write well-structured 
essays, reports and case studies to succeed at university.
Learn how to interpret the question, structure your work, reference 
your sources, avoid plagiarism and understand your reader.
Clear information and practical exercises
A  step-by-step guide to the writing process including a complete 
a 500-word model essay
Information on academic expectations to help you understand 
what is required
Helpful tips and summaries
Answer key and glossary
Academic Skills Series
Writing is part of a new six-book series to help international students achieve 
academic success at college or university. It is designed to support students who are 
studying, or preparing to study, at an English-speaking institution. Also available:
Group Work
Work together for 
academic success
978* 0 -00 -750714-6
Lectures
Learn listening and 
note-taking skills
Numbers
Data and statistics 
for the non-specialist
Presenting
Deliver presentations 
with confidence
Research
Improve your reading 
and referencing skills
978-0 -00 -750712-2
978-0 -0 0 -750715-3
English ; AcademicPurposes

