	  
1	  
Using The Treatment To Accelerate Progress On Your Script 
BEFORE You Start Writing.  
By Marilyn Horowitz 
 
Excerpted from original article in MOVIEMAKER MAGAZINE  
“The Complete Guide to Making Movies”  2011 
 
How To Write A Treatment  
Writing a treatment is a skill that can help any screenwriter succeed. 
Learning to write a treatment can jumpstart a writer's career because 
it allows a screenwriter to communicate her or his screenplay idea in a 
brief and compelling way.  
  
I am often asked if a writer has to actually write a screenplay, or can 
they just sell ideas?  You can sell a verbal or written “pitch,” but you 
can’t protect the idea, only the execution of an idea.  
 
So, if you have a great idea, the only way to protect it is to write the 
screenplay, which can be time consuming and ultimately not efficient. 
Writing down your idea as a treatment before you commit to a full-
length script does three things. First, you can test out an idea before 
committing to writing a script and second, it gives you a document 
that you can copyright for protection of your idea. 
  
Part of succeeding as a screenwriter is to write at least one well-
crafted original screenplay. Screenplays are hard work and take time 
to perfect. If you have completed a screenplay, writing a treatment 
can help you determine whether or not the screenplay is viable, 
because writing the treatment helps to create distance. This allows the 
screenwriter to get an overview of their work and look at it objectively. 
  
There is no substitute for talent. If the basic story is not something an 
audience will want to see, no amount of rewriting can fix it. This is a 
problem I encounter over and over in my work as a writing coach. 
Screenwriters often forget that they are writing for an audience. 
Writing a treatment before you write your next screenplay can help 
you work out problems and determine whether your story idea is a 
diamond in the rough, or just a lump of coal. The goal is to combine 
stories told from the heart with a deep understanding of what other 
people want to see. 
  
Craft and good ideas don't necessarily go together. I have worked on 

	  
2	  
several scripts with great ideas and poor execution and the reverse. 
The successful screenwriter must be able to master both aspects. One 
tip: Always remember that a screenplay, unlike a novel, is not a 
complete form in itself but a step along the path of making a film, so 
the goal of any screenwriter is to see the film made of his or her 
screenplay. It's easy to forget the goal when you are wrestling with 
your script. 
   
 
What Is a Treatment? 
 
There is controversy about the length a treatment can be, but the 
point is to communicate your story as quickly as possible, so brevity 
without sacrificing juice is key. 
  
There seem to be three opinions about what a treatment is. 
  
One opinion is that it is a one-page written pitch. The second, which I 
agree with, is that it is a two to five page document that tells the 
whole story focusing on the highlights. A third opinion is that a 
treatment is a lengthy document that is a scene-by-scene breakdown 
of a script. I consider this an outline, and a waste of time as a 
marketing document, though it can be an important step in the 
creation process. In my experience, the two to five page version works 
best, and an example is included in this article. 
 

	  
3	  
How To Write a Treatment 
 
This two to five page document should read like a short story and be 
written in the present tense. It should present the entire story 
including the ending, and use some key scenes and dialogue from the 
screenplay it is based on. 
 
 
 
What Should Be in the Treatment? 
 
1. A Working title 
2. The writer's name and contact information 
3. Copyright Registration number 
4. A short logline 
5. Introduction to key characters 
6. The answers to the following questions: Who? What? When? Why? 
Where? 
7. Act 1 described in one to three paragraphs. Set the scene and 
dramatize the main conflicts. 
8. Act 2 described in two to six paragraphs. Should dramatize how the 
conflicts introduced in Act 1 lead to a crisis. 
9. Act 3 described in one to three paragraphs. Dramatize the final 
conflict and resolution. 

	  
4	  
The Three-Act Structure 
Any discussion of treatment writing should at least touch on basic 
screenplay structure. Although everyone reading this article is 
probably familiar with this information, revisiting the basics can be 
helpful. 
  
In his seminal book of fragments, The Poetics, Aristotle proposed that 
all stories should have a beginning, middle, and an end. The Horowitz 
System®, the visual writing method that I have created uses the 
expressions, “Set up, “Conflict” and” Resolution” as more evocative 
terms for describing the basic movements of a screenplay. 
  
Many screenplays are organized into a 3-act structure. The tradition of 
writing in this form comes from the theater and was followed by 
filmmakers. Think of it as a foundation for building a house that others 
can easily identify, even if the details are new and original. 
  
Act 1, called the Set-up, The situation and characters and conflict are 
introduced. This classically is 30 minutes long. 
  
Act 2, called The Conflict, often an hour long, is where the conflict 
begins and expands until it reaches a crisis. 
  
Act 3, called The Resolution, the conflict rises to one more crisis and 
then is resolved. 
 

	  
5	  
How To Write The Treatment 
 
Find A Title 
Whether the screenwriter is creating a new story or writing a 
treatment based on an existing script, the first step is to make sure 
that the screenplay has a good title. The first contact a prospective 
producer has with a script is the title. Pick a title that gives a clear idea 
of what genre the screenplay is written in. (See my 2-part article that 
appeared in this magazine for more detail on genre. A good title can 
predispose a producer or reader to like a screenplay because it 
suggests the kind of experience that is in store and arouses curiosity. 
Great classic film titles include It Happened One Night, Psycho and Die 
Hard. 
  
One film I recently consulted on is named, And Then Came Love. This 
is a good title because it describes the story and the style or genre it's 
written in - a light romantic comedy. A title does not determine 
whether or the screenplay is good or not, but it can be a great 
marketing tool. There's a famous quote from Shakespeare that is 
helpful to keep in mind when naming screenplays: "What's in a name? 
That which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet". 
Romeo and Juliet (Quote Act II, Sc. II). 
  
If you want a producer to read your script, pick a name that promotes 
your story. 
 
 
Write a logline 
 
The second step is to write a logline. Preparing a log line for your 
screenplay is a basic marketing tool that I have repurposed for 
developing treatments. It is similar to the summary given in TV Guide. 
It is a technique for boiling down a plotline to its essence that has 
been described as trying to vomit into a thimble. 
  
Follow the example below when writing a logline: 
  
And Then Came Love is a character-driven romantic comedy about a 
high-powered Manhattan single mom who opens Pandora's box when 
she seeks out the anonymous sperm donor father of her young son. 
 

	  
6	  
Write a synopsis 
 
The third step is to a synopsis. Begin by expanding the logline into a 
three-act story Start with the end. For example, Let's work with The 
Silence Of The Lambs: 
  
Act 3: Clarice Starling catches the killer and saves the intended victim. 
  
Then break down into three acts. For example, 
  
Act 1: While still a student at The FBI, Clarice is asked to help on a 
case. She's eager to help and interviews Hannibal Lector who gives her 
a clue. 
  
Act 2: With his help, she is able to overcome many obstacles, and 
finds the identity of the killer. 
  
Act 3: She confronts the killer, saves his intended victim and atones 
for the death of the lamb. The scriptwriter should follow this break 
down for his or her story, and then expand this into a synopsis. 
  
Follow the example below of And Then Came Love: 
  
Julie (mid 40s), a successful Manhattan reporter-turned-columnist 
believes she has it all - a great job, a rent controlled apartment, a 
boyfriend and best of all, an adorable six-year-old son named Jake, 
whom she conceived via an anonymous sperm donor. 
  
Her perfect world, however, is rocked when she's called in for an 
emergency parent-teacher conference and learns that her son has 
been acting up, needs to be 'tested' and is on the brink of expulsion. 
Over-whelmed, Julie instinctively blames herself... it's easy to do since 
her mother has made her feel inadequate for not being a stay-at-home 
mom. 
  
Julie, however, will not concede that her mother could be right, so she 
places genetic blame on Jake's anonymous father. Through a private 
investigator, Julie learns the identity of the donor and meets him. His 
name is Paul, and he’s a struggling actor and law school dropout. Julie 
has neither intention nor desire to reveal her identity to him, she 
simply needs to check her sources, get the facts, and move on. 
  
A child psychiatrist tells Julie that Jake does not appear to have ADHD, 
but could benefit from a "father figure" in his life. Julie's boyfriend, a 

	  
7	  
charismatic photojournalist, is up for the challenge and proposes. Julie 
believes her life is back on course until Paul, the donor, shows up, 
hoping she'll promote the off-off Broadway show in which he's 
performing. 
  
Jake instantly bonds with Paul. No matter how hard Julie tries to keep 
Paul from complicating her life, the more he does as he begins to fall 
for her, and she finds she can not deny her feelings for him, and her 
boyfriend is pushing to set a date.  
 
(Written by Caytha Jentis, writer/producer). 
 
  
Summary and Conclusion 
 
Whenever possible, take your idea and write a treatment before you 
begin a new screenplay. Start by creating a logline and synopsis. Then 
use the synopsis and expand it into a treatment by correcting 
structure and adding detail.  
 
Learning to write treatments can save you years of working on the 
wrong projects. If you already have a script, writing a treatment using 
my method will help you correct any mistakes that could prevent a 
sale. 
 
 
Copyright ©2011marilynhorowitz 
 

	  
8	  
Bio: 
 
Marilyn Horowitz is the founder of the Horowitz Center for 
Screenwriting and creator of The Horowitz System®, a revolutionary 
visual writing system. She is an award-winning New York University 
professor, producer, screenwriter, and New York City-based writing 
coach who works with bestselling novelists, produced screenwriters, 
and award-winning filmmakers; and a judge for the prestigious 
Fulbright Scholarship Program for film and media students. Marilyn is 
the author of five books, including How to Write a Screenplay in 10 
Weeks and The Four Magic Questions of Screenwriting. 
 
Marilyn presents more than 100 classes, seminars and workshops 
every year for groups across the country. She has presented The 
Creative Business of Screenwriting, Story Development, Writing The 
Treatment and Overcoming The Writer’s Fears for the Writer’s Guild of 
America, East (WGAE), New York Women in Film and Television 
(NYWIFT), New York Script Club (NYSC), Women in Film and Video 
(WIFV) in Washington DC and Women in Film (WIF) in Los Angeles. In 
2008, Marilyn was a speaker at the Santa Fe Screenwriting Conference 
in Santa Fe, New Mexico. In June and October 2011, she presented at 
The Great American PitchFest and the Screenwriting Expo in Los 
Angeles, CA. Marilyn is also a senior writer for Script Magazine and 
contributor to Hollywood Scriptwriter. 
 
 

