


Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication
Introduction
Chapter 1 - Priming
Chapter 2 - Confabulation
Chapter 3 - Confirmation Bias
Chapter 4 - Hindsight Bias
Chapter 5 - The Texas Sharpshooter Fallacy
Chapter 6 - Procrastination
Chapter 7 - Normalcy Bias
Chapter 8 - Introspection
Chapter 9 - The Availability Heuristic
Chapter 10 - The Bystander Effect
Chapter 11 - The Dunning-Kruger Effect
Chapter 12 - Apophenia

Chapter 13 - Brand Loyalty
Chapter 14 - The Argument from Authority
Chapter 15 - The Argument from Ignorance
Chapter 16 - The Straw Man Fallacy
Chapter 17 - The Ad Hominem Fallacy
Chapter 18 - The Just-World Fallacy
Chapter 19 - The Public Goods Game
Chapter 20 - The Ultimatum Game
Chapter 21 - Subjective Validation
Chapter 22 - Cult Indoctrination
Chapter 23 - Groupthink
Chapter 24 - Supernormal Releasers
Chapter 25 - The Affect Heuristic
Chapter 26 - Dunbar’s Number
Chapter 27 - Selling Out
Chapter 28 - Self-Serving Bias
Chapter 29 - The Spotlight Effect
Chapter 30 - The Third Person Effect
Chapter 31 - Catharsis
Chapter 32 - The Misinformation Effect
Chapter 33 - Conformity
Chapter 34 - Extinction Burst
5/599

Chapter 35 - Social Loafing
Chapter 36 - The Illusion of Transparency
Chapter 37 - Learned Helplessness
Chapter 38 - Embodied Cognition
Chapter 39 - The Anchoring Effect
Chapter 40 - Attention
Chapter 41 - Self-Handicapping
Chapter 42 - Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
Chapter 43 - The Moment
Chapter 44 - Consistency Bias
Chapter
45
-
The
Representativeness
Heuristic
Chapter 46 - Expectation
Chapter 47 - The Illusion of Control
Chapter 48 - The Fundamental Attribution
Error
Acknowledgements
BIBLIOGRAPHY
6/599

DUTTON
Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite
700, Toronto, Ontario M4P
2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) •
Penguin Books Ltd, 80
Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England • Penguin Ireland, 25
St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin
2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) • Penguin
Group (Australia), 250 Camber-
well Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division
of Pearson Australia Group
Pty Ltd)• Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community
Centre, Panchsheel Park, New
Delhi–110 017, India • Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo
Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632,
New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) •
Penguin Books (South Africa)
(Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg
2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London
WC2R 0RL, England
Published by Dutton, a member of Penguin Group (USA)
Inc.

First printing, November 2011
Copyright © 2011 by David McRaney
All rights reserved
REGISTERED TRADEMARK—MARCA REGISTRADA
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-
PUBLICATION DATA
has been applied for.
ISBN : 978-1-101-54535-5
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopy-
ing, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written per-
mission of both the copyright owner and the above publish-
er of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via
the Internet or via any other means without the permission
of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please
8/599

purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not
participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted
materials. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate
telephone numbers and Internet addresses at the time of
publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes
any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur after
publication. Further, the publisher does not have any con-
trol over and does not assume any responsibility for author
or third-party websites or their content.
http://us.penguingroup.com
9/599

For Jerry, Evelyn, and Amanda

INTRODUCTION
You
THE MISCONCEPTION: You are a
rational, logical being who sees the
world as it really is.
THE TRUTH: You are as deluded as
the rest of us, but that’s OK, it keeps
you sane.
You hold in your hands a compendium of in-
formation about self-delusion and the won-
derful ways we all succumb to it.
You think you know how the world works,
but you really don’t. You move through life

forming opinions and cobbling together a
story about who you are and why you did the
things you did leading up to reading this sen-
tence, and taken as a whole it seems real.
The truth is, there is a growing body of
work coming out of psychology and cognitive
science that says you have no clue why you
act the way you do, choose the things you
choose, or think the thoughts you think. In-
stead, you create narratives, little stories to
explain away why you gave up on that diet,
why you prefer Apple over Microsoft, why
you clearly remember it was Beth who told
you the story about the clown with the peg
leg made of soup cans when it was really
Adam, and it wasn’t a clown.
Take a moment to look around the room in
which you are reading this. Just for a second,
see the effort that went into not only what
you see, but the centuries of progress leading
to the inventions surrounding you.
12/599

Start with your shoes, and then move to
the book in your hands, then look to the ma-
chines and devices grinding and beeping in
every corner of your life—the toaster, the
computer, the ambulance wailing down a
street far away. Contemplate, before we get
down to business, how amazing it is humans
have solved so many problems, constructed
so much in all the places where people
linger.
Buildings and cars, electricity and lan-
guage—what a piece of work is man, right?
What triumphs of rationality, you know? If
you really take it all in, you can become en-
amored with a smug belief about how smart
you and the rest of the human race have
become.
Yet you lock your keys in the car. You for-
get what it was you were about to say. You
get fat. You go broke. Others do it too. From
bank crises to sexual escapades, we can all be
really stupid sometimes.
13/599

From the greatest scientist to the most
humble artisan, every brain within every
body is infested with preconceived notions
and patterns of thought that lead it astray
without the brain knowing it. So you are in
good company. No matter who your idols
and mentors are, they too are prone to spuri-
ous speculation.
Take the Wason Selection Task as our first
example. Imagine a scientist deals four cards
out in front of you. Unlike normal playing
cards, these have single numbers on one side
and single colors on the other. You see from
left to right a three, an eight, a red card, and
a brown card. The shifty psychologist allows
you to take in the peculiar cards for a mo-
ment and poses a question. Suppose the psy-
chologist says, “I have a deck full of these
strange cards, and there is one rule at play. If
a card has an even number on one side, then
it must be red on the opposite side. Now,
14/599

which card or cards must you flip to prove
I’m telling the truth?”
Remember—three,
eight,
red,
brown—which do you flip?
As psychological experiments go, this is
one of the absolute simplest. As a game of lo-
gic, this too should be a cinch to figure out.
When psychologist Peter Wason conducted
this experiment in 1977, less than 10 percent
of the people he asked got the correct an-
swer. His cards had vowels instead of colors,
but in repetitions of the test where colors
were used, about the same number of people
got totally confused when asked to solve the
riddle.
So what was your answer? If you said the
three or the red card, or said only the eight
or only the brown, you are among the 90
percent of people whose minds get boggled
by this task. If you turn over the three and
see either red or brown, it does not prove
anything. You learn nothing new. If you turn
15/599

over the red card and find an odd number, it
doesn’t violate the rule. The only answer is to
turn over both the eight card and the brown
card. If the other side of the eight is red,
you’ve only confirmed the rule, but not
proven if it is broken elsewhere. If the brown
has an odd number, you learn nothing, but if
it has an even number you have falsified the
claims of the psychologist. Those two cards
are the only ones which provide answers.
Once
you
know
the
solution,
it
seems
obvious.
What could be simpler than four cards and
one rule? If 90 percent of people can’t figure
this out, how did humans build Rome and
cure
polio?
This
is
the
subject
of
this
book—you are naturally hindered into think-
ing in certain ways and not others, and the
world around you is the product of dealing
with these biases, not overcoming them.
If you replace the numbers and colors on
the cards with a social situation, the test
16/599

becomes much easier. Pretend the psycholo-
gist returns, and this time he says, “You are
at a bar, and the law says you must be over
twenty-one years old to drink alcohol. On
each of these four cards a beverage is written
on one side and the age of the person drink-
ing it on the other. Which of these four cards
must you turn over to see if the owner is
obeying the law?” He then deals four cards
which read:
23—beer—Coke—17
Now it seems much easier. Coke tells you
nothing, and 23 tells you nothing. If the
seventeen-year-old is drinking alcohol, the
owner
is
breaking
the
law,
but
if
the
seventeen-year-old isn’t, you must check the
age of the beer drinker. Now the two cards
stick out—beer and 17. Your brain is better at
seeing the world in some ways, like social
17/599

situations, and not so good in others, like lo-
gic puzzles with numbered cards.
This is the sort of thing you will find
throughout this book, with explanations and
musings to boot. The Wason Selection Task
is an example of how lousy you are at logic,
but you are also filled with beliefs that look
good on paper but fall apart in practice.
When those beliefs fall apart, you tend not to
notice. You have a deep desire to be right all
of the time and a deeper desire to see your-
self in a positive light both morally and beha-
viorally. You can stretch your mind pretty far
to achieve these goals.
The three main subjects in this book are
cognitive biases, heuristics, and logical falla-
cies. These are components of your mind,
like organs in your body, which under the
best conditions serve you well. Life, unfortu-
nately, isn’t always lived under the best con-
ditions. Their predictability and dependabil-
ity have kept confident men, magicians,
18/599

advertisers, psychics, and peddlers of all
manner of pseudoscientific remedies in busi-
ness for centuries. It wasn’t until psychology
applied rigorous scientific method to human
behavior that these self-deceptions became
categorized and quantified.
Cognitive biases are predicable patterns of
thought and behavior that lead you to draw
incorrect conclusions. You and everyone else
come into the world preloaded with these
pesky and completely wrong ways of seeing
things, and you rarely notice them. Many of
them serve to keep you confident in your
own perceptions or to inhibit you from see-
ing yourself as a buffoon. The maintenance
of a positive self-image seems to be so im-
portant to the human mind you have evolved
mental mechanisms designed to make you
feel awesome about yourself. Cognitive bi-
ases lead to poor choices, bad judgments,
and wacky insights that are often totally in-
correct. For example, you tend to look for
19/599

information that confirms your beliefs and
ignore information that challenges them.
This is called confirmation bias. The con-
tents of your bookshelf and the bookmarks in
your Web browser are a direct result of it.
Heuristics are mental shortcuts you use to
solve common problems. They speed up pro-
cessing in the brain, but sometimes make
you think so fast you miss what is important.
Instead of taking the long way around and
deeply contemplating the best course of ac-
tion or the most logical train of thought, you
use heuristics to arrive at a conclusion in re-
cord time. Some heuristics are learned, and
others come free with every copy of the hu-
man brain. When they work, they help your
mind stay frugal. When they don’t, you see
the world as a much simpler place than it
really is. For example, if you notice a rise in
reports about shark attacks on the news, you
start to believe sharks are out of control,
when the only thing you know for sure is the
20/599

news is delivering more stories about sharks
than usual.
Logical fallacies are like math problems in-
volving language, in which you skip a step or
get turned around without realizing it. They
are arguments in your mind where you reach
a conclusion without all the facts because
you don’t care to hear them or have no idea
how limited your information is. You become
a bumbling detective. Logical fallacies can
also be the result of wishful thinking. Some-
times you apply good logic to false premises;
at other times you apply bad logic to the
truth. For instance, if you hear Albert Ein-
stein refused to eat scrambled eggs, you
might assume scrambled eggs are probably
bad for you. This is called the argument from
authority. You assume if someone is super-
smart, then all of that person’s decisions
must be good ones, but maybe Einstein just
had peculiar taste.
21/599

With each new subject in these pages you
will start to see yourself in a new way. You
will soon realize you are not so smart, and
thanks to a plethora of cognitive biases,
faulty heuristics, and common fallacies of
thought, you are probably deluding yourself
minute by minute just to cope with reality.
Don’t fret. This will be fun.
22/599

1
Priming
THE MISCONCEPTION: You know
when you are being influenced and
how it is affecting your behavior.
THE TRUTH: You are unaware of the
constant nudging you receive from
ideas formed in your unconscious
mind.
You are driving home from the grocery store
and you realize you forgot to buy spinach
dip, which was the only reason you went
there in the first place. Maybe you could buy
some at a gas station. Nah, you’ll just get it
next trip. Thoughts of dip lead to rumina-
tions on the price of gas, which lead to

excogitation
over
bills,
which
leads
to
thoughts about whether you can afford a new
television, which reminds you of the time
you watched an entire season of Battlestar
Gallactica in one sitting—what the hell? You
are home already and have no recollection of
the journey.
You drove home in a state of highway hyp-
nosis, your mind and body seemingly float-
ing along in parallel. When you stopped the
car and turned the key, you snapped out of a
dreamlike state sometimes called line hyp-
nosis when describing the dissociative men-
tal world of an assembly line worker stuck in
a repetitive grind. In this place, conscious-
ness drifts as one mental task goes into auto-
pilot and the rest of the mind muses about
less insipid affairs, floating away into the
umbra.
You split your subjective experience into
consciousness and subconsciousness all the
time. You are doing it right now—breathing,
24/599

blinking, swallowing, maintaining your pos-
ture, and holding your mouth closed while
you read. You could pull those systems into
conscious control or leave them to the auto-
nomic nervous system. You could drive
cross-country
consciously
adjusting
your
foot on the gas pedal, shifting your hands on
the wheel, mulling over the millions of micro
decisions needed to avoid gnashing metallic
death at high speeds, or you could sing along
with your friends while the other parts of
your mind handle the mundane stuff. You
accept your unconscious mind as just anoth-
er weird component of the human experi-
ence, but you tend to see it as a separate
thing—a primal self underneath conscious-
ness that doesn’t have the keys to the car.
Science has learned otherwise.
A great example of how potent a force your
unconscious
can
be
was
detailed
by
researchers Chen-Bo Zhong at the University
of
Toronto
and
Katie
Liljenquist
at
25/599

Northwestern in a 2006 paper published in
the journal Science. They conducted a study
in which people were asked to remember a
terrible sin from their past, something they
had done which was unethical. The research-
ers asked them to describe how the memory
made them feel. They then offered half of the
participants the opportunity to wash their
hands. At the end of the study, they asked
subjects if they would be willing to take part
in later research for no pay as a favor to a
desperate graduate student. Those who did
not wash their hands agreed to help 74 per-
cent of the time, but those who did wash
agreed only 41 percent of the time. According
to the researchers, one group had uncon-
sciously washed away their guilt and felt less
of a need to pay penance.
The subjects didn’t truly wash away their
emotions, nor did they consciously feel as
though they had. Cleansing has meaning
beyond just avoiding germs. According to
26/599

Zhong and Liljenquist, most human cultures
use the ideas of cleanliness and purity as op-
posed to filth and grime to describe both
physical and moral states. Washing is part of
many
religious
rituals
and
metaphorical
phrases used in everyday language, and re-
ferring to dastardly deeds as being dirty or to
evil people as scum is also common. You
even make the same face when feeling dis-
gusted about a person’s actions as you do
when
seeing
something
gross.
Uncon-
sciously, the people in the study connected
their hand washing with all the interconnec-
ted ideas associated with the act, and then
those associations influenced their behavior.
When a stimulus in the past affects the
way you behave and think or the way you
perceive another stimulus later on, it is
called priming. Every perception, no matter
if you consciously notice, sets off a chain of
related ideas in your neural network. Pencils
make you think of pens. Blackboards make
27/599

you think of classrooms. It happens to you
all the time, and though you are unaware, it
changes the way you behave.
One of many studies that have revealed
how much influence your subconscious mind
has over the rest of your thinking and beha-
vior and how easily it can be influenced by
priming was conducted in 2003 by Aaron
Kay, Christian Wheeler, John Barghand, and
Lee Ross. People were separated into two
groups and asked to draw lines between pho-
tos and text descriptions. One group looked
at neutral photos. They drew lines to connect
kites, whales, turkeys, and other objects to
descriptions on the other side of the paper.
The second group connected lines to descrip-
tions for photos of briefcases, fountain pens,
and other items associated with the world of
business. Participants were then moved into
isolated rooms and told they had been paired
off with another subject. The other person
was actually in on the experiment. Each
28/599

person was then told they were now going to
play a game in which they could earn up to
$10. The researchers presented the subject
with a cup and explained two strips of paper
waited inside, one with the word “offer” writ-
ten
on
it
and
another
with
the
word
“decision.” The subject was then given a
choice—blindly pluck a slip of paper from the
cup, or allow the other person to blindly se-
lect. The catch? Whoever pulled out the “of-
fer” slip would get the $10 and choose how it
was divided between both parties. The part-
ner would then choose to accept or reject the
offer. If the partner rejected, both received
nothing. This is called the ultimatum game,
and its predictability has made it a favorite
tool of psychologists and economists. Offers
below 20 percent of the total amount are
usually turned down.
Most people chose to do the picking. They
didn’t know both slips had “offer” written on
them. If they instead let the other person do
29/599

the picking, the actor pretended to get the
“decision” slip. So everyone in the study was
put in the position of making a reasonable
offer, knowing if they did not, they would
miss out on some free cash. The results were
bizarre, but confirmed the scientists’ suspi-
cions about priming.
So how did the two groups differ? In the
group who connected neutral photos to their
descriptions before the ultimatum game, 91
percent chose to split the money evenly—$5
each. In the group who connected the busi-
ness photos, only 33 percent offered to split
the money evenly; the rest tried to keep a
little more for themselves.
The researchers ran the experiment again
with real objects instead of photos. They had
participants play the ultimatum game in a
room with a briefcase and leather portfolio
on the far end of a table along with a foun-
tain pen in front of the participant’s chair.
Another group sat in a room with neutral
30/599

items—a backpack, a cardboard box, and a
wooden pencil. This time, 100 percent of the
neutral group chose to split the money
evenly, but only 50 percent of those in the
group sitting in a room with business-related
items did the same. Half of the business-
primed group tried to stiff the other party.
All of the subjects were debriefed after-
ward as to why they behaved as they did, but
not one person mentioned the objects in the
room. Instead, they confabulated and told
the researchers about their own feelings on
what is and is not fair. Some described their
impressions of the people they were playing
the game with and said those feelings influ-
enced them.
Mere exposure to briefcases and fancy
pens had altered the behavior of normal, ra-
tional people. They became more competit-
ive, greedier, and had no idea why. Faced
with having to explain themselves, they
31/599

rationalized their behavior with erroneous
tales they believed were true.
The same researchers conducted the ex-
periment in other ways. They had subjects
complete words with some of the letters
omitted, and again those who first saw
business-related images would turn a word
like “c—p—tive” into “competitive” 70 per-
cent of the time while only 42 percent of the
neutral group did. If shown an ambiguous
conversation between two men trying to
come to an agreement, those who first saw
photos of business-related objects saw it as a
negotiation, whereas the neutral group saw
an attempt at compromise. In every case, the
subjects’ minds were altered by unconscious
priming.
Just about every physical object you en-
counter
triggers
a
blitz
of
associations
throughout your mind. You aren’t a com-
puter connected to two cameras. Reality isn’t
a vacuum where you objectively survey your
32/599

surroundings. You construct reality from
minute to minute with memories and emo-
tions orbiting your sensations and cognition;
together they form a collage of consciousness
that exists only in your skull. Some objects
have personal meaning, like the blow-pop
ring your best friend gave you in middle
school or the handcrafted mittens your sister
made you. Other items have cultural or uni-
versal meanings, like the moon or a knife or
a handful of posies. They affect you whether
or not you are aware of their power, some-
times so far in the depths of your brain you
never notice.
Another version of this experiment used
only smell. In 2005, Hank Aarts at Utrecht
University had subjects fill out a question-
naire. They were then rewarded with a cook-
ie. One group sat in a room filled with the
faint smell of cleaning products while anoth-
er group smelled nothing. The group primed
by the aroma in the clean-smelling room
33/599

cleaned up after themselves three times
more often.
In a study by Ron Friedman where people
were merely shown but not allowed to drink
sports beverages or bottled water, those who
just looked at sports drinks persisted longer
in tasks of physical endurance.
Priming works best when you are on auto-
pilot, when you aren’t trying to consciously
introspect before choosing how to behave.
When you are unsure how best to proceed,
suggestions bubble up from the deep that are
highly tainted by subconscious primes. In
addition, your brain hates ambiguity and is
willing to take shortcuts to remove it from
any situation. If there is nothing else to go
on, you will use what is available. When pat-
tern recognition fails, you create patterns of
your own. In the aforementioned experi-
ments, there was nothing else for the brain
to base its unconscious attitudes on, so it fo-
cused on the business items or the clean
34/599

smells and ran with the ideas. The only prob-
lem was the conscious minds of the subjects
didn’t notice.
You can’t self-prime, not directly. Priming
has to be unconscious; more specifically, it
has to happen within what psychologists
refer to as the adaptive unconscious—a place
largely inaccessible. When you are driving a
car, the adaptive unconscious is performing
millions of calculations, predicting every mo-
ment and accommodating, adjusting your
mood and manipulating organs. It does the
hard work, freeing up your conscious mind
to focus on executive decisions. You are al-
ways of two minds at any one moment—the
higher-level rational self and the lower-level
emotional self.
Science author Jonah Lehrer wrote extens-
ively about this division in his book How We
Decide. Lehrer sees the two minds as equals
who communicate and argue about what to
do. Simple problems involving unfamiliar
35/599

variables are best handled by the rational
brain. They must be simple because you can
juggle only four to nine bits of information in
your conscious, rational mind at one time.
For instance, look at this sequence of letters
and then recite them out loud without look-
ing:
RKFBIIRSCBSUSSR.
Unless
you’ve
caught on, this is a really difficult task. Now
chunk these letters into manageable portions
like this: RK FBI IRS CBS USSR. Look away
now and try to recite them. It should be
much easier. You just took fifteen bits and
reduced them to five. You chunk all the time
to better analyze your world. You reduce the
complex rush of inputs into shorthand ver-
sions of reality. This is why the invention of
written language was such an important step
in your history—it allowed you to take notes
and preserve data outside the limited capa-
city of the rational mind. Without tools like
pencils, computers, and slide rulers, the ra-
tional brain is severely hampered.
36/599

The emotional brain, Lehrer argues, is
older and thus more evolved than the ration-
al brain. It is better suited for complex de-
cisions and automatic processing of very
complex operations like somersaults and
break dancing, singing on key and shuffling
cards. Those operations seem simple, but
they have too many steps and variables for
your rational mind to handle. You hand
those tasks over to the adaptive unconscious.
Animals with small cerebral cortices, or none
at all, are mostly on autopilot because their
older emotional brains are usually, or totally,
in charge. The emotional brain, the uncon-
scious mind, is old, powerful, and no less a
part of who you are than the rational brain
is, but its function can’t be directly observed
or communicated to consciousness. Instead,
the output is mostly intuition and feeling. It
is always there in the background co-pro-
cessing your mental life. Lehrer’s central ar-
gument is “you know more than you know.”
37/599

You make the mistake of believing only your
rational mind is in control, but your rational
mind is usually oblivious to the influence of
your unconscious. In this book I add another
proposition: You are unaware of how un-
aware you are.
In
a
hidden
place—your
unconscious
mind—your
experience
is
always
being
crunched so suggestions can be handed up to
your conscious mind. Thanks to this, if a
situation is familiar you can fall back on in-
tuition. However, if the situation is novel,
you will have to boot up your conscious
mind. The spell of highway hypnosis on a
long trip is always broken when you take an
exit into unfamiliar territory. The same is
true in any other part of your life. You are al-
ways drifting back and forth between the in-
fluence of emotion and reason, automaticity
and executive orders.
Your true self is a much larger and more
complex construct than you are aware of at
38/599

any given moment. If your behavior is the
result of priming, the result of suggestions as
to how to behave handed up from the adapt-
ive unconscious, you often invent narratives
to explain your feelings and decisions and
musings because you aren’t aware of the ad-
vice you’ve been given by the mind behind
the curtain in your head.
When you hug someone you love and then
feel the rush of warm emotions, you have
made an executive decision which then influ-
enced the older parts of your brain to deliver
nice chemicals. Top-down influence makes
intuitive
sense
and
isn’t
disturbing
to
ponder.
Bottom-up influence is odd. When you sit
next to a briefcase and act more greedy than
you usually would, it is as if your executive
brain centers are nodding in agreement to
hidden advisers whispering in your ear. It
seems mysterious and creepy because it’s so
clandestine. Those who seek to influence you
39/599

are sensitive to this, and try to avoid creating
in you the uncomfortable realization that you
have been duped. Priming works only if you
aren’t aware of it, and those who depend on
priming to put food on the table work very
hard to keep their influence hidden.
Let’s look at casinos, which are temples to
priming. At every turn there are dings and
musical notes, the clatter of coins rattling in
metal buckets, symbols of wealth and opu-
lence. Better still, casinos are sensitive to the
power of the situation. Once you are inside,
there are no indications of the time of day,
no advertisements for anything not available
inside the box of mutually beneficial primes,
no reason to leave, whether to sleep, eat, or
anything else—no external priming allowed.
Coca-Cola stumbled onto the power Santa
Claus has to prime you during the holidays.
Thoughts of childhood happiness and whole-
some family values appear in your subcon-
scious as you choose between Coke or a
40/599

generic brand of soda. Grocery stores noticed
an increase in sales when the smell of freshly
baked bread primed people to buy more
food. Adding the words “all natural” or in-
cluding pictures of pastoral farms and crops
primes you with thoughts of nature, dissuad-
ing thoughts of factories and chemical pre-
servatives. Cable channels and large corpora-
tions prime potential audiences by adopting
an image, a brand, so as to meet you halfway
before you decide how to engage and judge
them. Production companies spend millions
of dollars to create trailers and movie posters
to form first impressions so you are primed
to enjoy their films in a certain way right up
until the opening titles. Restaurants decorate
their interiors to communicate everything
from fine dining to psychedelic hippie com-
munes in order to prime you to enjoy their
cheese sticks. From every corner of the mod-
ern world advertisers are launching attacks
on your unconscious in an attempt to prime
41/599

your behavior to be more favorable for the
bottom lines of their clients.
Businesses discovered priming before psy-
chologists did, but once psychology started
digging into the mind, more and more ex-
amples of automaticity were uncovered, and
even today it isn’t clear how much of your
behavior is under your conscious control.
The question of who is truly in the driver’s
seat was made far more complex in 1996 by a
series of studies published by John Bargh in
the
Journal
of
Personality
and
Social
Psychology.
He had New York University students un-
scramble
thirty
separate
five-word
sen-
tences. He told them he was interested in
their language abilities, but he was really
studying
priming.
He
assembled
three
groups. One unscrambled sentences with
terms associated with aggression and rude-
ness
such
as
“brazen,”
“disturb,”
and
“bluntly.” Another group unscrambled words
42/599

from a bank of polite terms like “courteous”
and “behaved.” A third group served as a
control
with
words
like
“gleefully,”
“prepares,” and “exercising.”
The experimenters told the students how
to complete the task and once they were
done to come find them to receive the second
assignment, but this was the real experi-
ment. When each student approached the re-
searcher he or she found him already en-
gaged in a conversation with an actor who
was pretending to be having trouble under-
standing the word puzzles. The researcher
completely ignored the student until he or
she interrupted the conversation or ten
minutes passed.
The results? The polite-word group waited
on average 9.3 minutes to interrupt; the
neutral group waited about 8.7 minutes; and
the rude-word group waited around 5.4
minutes. To the researchers’ surprise, more
than 80 percent of the polite-word group
43/599

waited the full 10 minutes. Only 35 percent
of the rude-word group chose not to intrude.
The subjects were interviewed after the ex-
periment and couldn’t pinpoint why they
chose to wait or to interrupt. The question
never entered their minds because as far as
they knew, their behavior had not been influ-
enced. The scrambled sentences, they be-
lieved, had not affected them.
In a second experiment, Bargh had parti-
cipants unscramble sentences that contained
words associated with old age, like “retired,”
“wrinkled,” and “bingo.” He then clocked
participants’ speed as they walked down a
hall to an elevator and compared it to the
speed they walked when they first strolled in.
They took about one to two extra seconds to
reach their destination. Just as with the
rude-word groups, the old-word groups were
primed by the ideas and associations the
words created. To be sure this was really a
result
of
priming,
Bargh
repeated
the
44/599

experiment and got the same results. He ran
it a third time with a control group who un-
scrambled words related to sadness to be
sure he hadn’t simply depressed people into
walking slower. Once again, the old-age
group tottered along the longest.
Bargh also conducted a study in which
Caucasian participants sat down at a com-
puter to fill out boring questionnaires. Just
before each section began, photos of either
African-American or Caucasian men flashed
on the screen for thirteen milliseconds,
faster
than
the
participants
could
con-
sciously process. Once they completed the
task, the computer flashed an error message
on the screen telling the participants they
had to start over from the beginning. Those
exposed to the images of African-Americans
became hostile and frustrated more easily
and more quickly than subjects who saw
Caucasian faces. Even though they didn’t be-
lieve themselves to be racist or to harbor
45/599

negative stereotypes, the ideas were still in
their neural networks and unconsciously
primed them to behave differently than
usual.
Studies of priming suggest when you en-
gage in deep introspection over the causes of
your own behavior you miss many, perhaps
most, of the influences accumulating on your
persona like barnacles along the sides of a
ship. Priming doesn’t work if you see it com-
ing, but your attention can’t be focused in all
directions at once. Much of what you think,
feel, do, and believe is, and will continue to
be, nudged one way or the other by uncon-
scious primes from words, colors, objects,
personalities, and other miscellany infused
with meaning either from your personal life
or the culture you identify with. Sometimes
these primes are unintended; sometimes
there is an agent on the other end who plot-
ted against your judgment. Of course, you
can choose to become an agent yourself. You
46/599

can prime potential employers with what you
wear to a job interview. You can prime the
emotions of your guests with how you set the
mood when hosting a party. Once you know
priming is a fact of life, you start to under-
stand the power and resilience of rituals and
rites of passage, norms and ideologies. Sys-
tems designed to prime persist because they
work. Starting tomorrow, maybe with just a
smile and a thank-you, you can affect the
way others feel—hopefully for the best.
Just remember, you are most open to sug-
gestion when your mental cruise control is
on or when you find yourself in unfamiliar
circumstances. If you bring a grocery list,
you’ll be less likely to arrive at the checkout
with a cart full of stuff you had no intention
of buying when you left the house. If you
neglect your personal space and allow chaos
and clutter to creep in, it will affect you, and
perhaps encourage further neglect. Positive
feedback loops should improve your life, not
47/599

detract from it. You can’t prime yourself dir-
ectly, but you can create environments con-
ducive to the mental states you wish to
achieve. Just like the briefcase on the table,
or the clean aroma in the room, you can fill
your personal spaces with paraphernalia in-
fused with meaning, or find meaning in the
larger idea of owning little. No matter, when
you least expect it, those meanings may
nudge you.
48/599

2
Confabulation
THE MISCONCEPTION: You know
when you are lying to yourself.
THE TRUTH: You are often ignorant
of your motivations and create fic-
tional narratives to explain your de-
cisions,
emotions,
and
history
without realizing it.
When a movie begins with the words “Based
on a True Story,” what crosses your mind?
Do you assume every line of dialogue, every
bit of clothing and song in the background is
the same as it was in the true event on which
the film was based? Of course you don’t. You
know movies like Pearl Harbor or Erin

Brockovich take artistic license with facts,
shaping them so a coherent story will unfold
with a beginning, middle, and end. Even
biopics about the lives of musicians or politi-
cians who are still alive are rarely the abso-
lute truth. Some things are left out, or some
people are fused into single characters. The
details, you think when watching, are less
important than the big picture, the general
idea.
If only you were so savvy when it came to
looking back on the biopic in your head, but
you are not so smart. You see, the movie up
there is just as dramatized, and scientists
have known this for quite a while.
It all starts with your brain’s desire to fill
in the gaps.
Take your thumbs and place them side by
side in front of you. Close your left eye and
slowly move your right thumb away in a ho-
rizontal line to your right. Notice anything?
Probably not. Somewhere along the line is
50/599

your blind spot, the point where your optic
nerve breaks into the retina. You have one
per eye, and in this area of your vision you
can’t see anything. It is larger than you think
too—roughly 2 percent of your eyesight. If
you want to see for yourself, take a blank
sheet of paper and draw on it a dot about the
size of a dime. Now, about two inches to the
right, draw another. Close your left eye and
focus on the left-hand dot. Move the paper
closer to you until the right-hand dot disap-
pears. There it is, one of your blind spots.
Now look around the room with your eye
closed. Try the same trick above with some
words on this page. Notice anything? Is there
a giant gap in your vision? Nope. Your brain
fills it in with a bit of mental Photoshopping.
Whatever surrounds the blind spot is copied
and pasted into the hole in an automatic
imaginary bit of visual hocus-pocus. Your
brain lies to you, and you go about your busi-
ness none the wiser.
51/599

Just as the brain fills in your blind spot
every moment of the day without your con-
sciously noticing, so do you fill in the blind
spots in your memory and your reasoning.
Have you ever been telling a story about
something you and someone else did long
ago, and then they stop you to say, “No, no,
no. That’s not how it happened,” just as you
get on a roll? You say it was at a Christmas
party when you acted out the final episode of
Lost with stockings on your hands; they say
it
was
Easter.
You
remember
opening
presents and drinking eggnog, but they
promise it was eggs and it wasn’t even you. It
was your cousin, and they used a chocolate
bunny to represent the smoke monster.
Consider how often this seems to happen,
especially if you are in a relationship with
someone who can call you out in this way all
the time. Is it possible if you had a recording
of everything you’ve ever done it would
rarely match up with how you remember it?
52/599

Think of all the photographs that have blown
your mind when you saw yourself in a place
you had completely deleted from memory.
Think of all the things your parents bring
back up about your childhood that you have
zero recollection of, or which you remember
differently. But you still have a sense of a
continuous memory and experience. The de-
tails are missing, but the big picture of your
own life persists. But the big picture is a lie,
nurtured by your constant and unconscious
confabulation, adding up to a story of who
you are, what you have done, and why.
You do this so much and so often that you
can’t be sure how much of what you consider
to be the honest truth about your past is ac-
curate. You can’t be sure how you came to be
reading these words at this moment instead
of languishing on a street corner or sailing
around the world. Why didn’t you go in for
the kiss? Why did you say those horrible
things to your mother? Why did you buy that
53/599

laptop? Why are you really angry with that
guy? What is the truth about who you are
and why you are here?
To understand confabulation, we have to
head into surgery. Every once in a while, in
extreme cases where nothing else will work,
doctors resort to splitting a patient’s brain
right down the middle. And what they dis-
cover is fascinating.
To get a rough idea of how large and how
halved your brain is, hold your hands out in
front of you and form two fists. Now bring
them together so that if you were wearing
rings they would be facing upward. Each fist
represents a hemisphere. Your two hemi-
spheres communicate with each other via a
dense series of nerve fibers called the corpus
callosum. Imagine when you made those
fists you grabbed two handfuls of yarn—the
yarn is your corpus callosum. In a corpus
callosotomy (which is sometimes performed
when a case of epilepsy becomes so severe
54/599

and unmanageable that no drug will bring
relief and normalcy) that yarn is cut. The two
halves of the brain are disconnected in a
careful way that allows the patients to live
out their lives with as much normalcy as
possible.
Split-brain patients seem fine from the
outside. They are able to hold down jobs and
carry their weight in conversation. But re-
searchers who have looked deeper have dis-
covered the strengths and weaknesses of the
separate hemispheres with the help of split-
brain patients. Since the 1950s, studies with
those who have undergone this procedure
have revealed a great deal about how the
brain works, but the insight most germane to
the topic at hand is how quickly and un-
flinchingly these patients are capable of cre-
ating complete lies which they then hold to
as reality. This is called split-brain confabu-
lation, but you don’t have to have a split
brain to confabulate.
55/599

You feel like a single person with a single
brain, but in many ways, you really have two.
Thoughts, memories, and emotions cascade
throughout the whole, but some tasks are
handled better by one side than the other.
Language, for example, is usually a task
handled by the left side of the brain, but then
bounced back and forth between the two.
Strange things happen when a person’s brain
hemispheres are disconnected, making this
transfer impossible.
Psychologist Michael Gazzaniga at the
University of California at Santa Monica was
one of the first researchers, along with Roger
Sperry, to enlist the help of split-brain pa-
tients in his work. In one experiment sub-
jects looked at a cross in the center of a com-
puter screen, and then a word like “truck”
was flashed on only the left side. They were
then asked what they saw. Those with con-
nected brains would, of course, say “truck.”
Those with split brains would say they didn’t
56/599

know, but then, amazingly, if they were
asked to draw with their left hand what they
had seen, they easily doodled a truck.
Oddly enough, your right hand is con-
trolled by your left brain and your left hand
by the right. What the left eye sees travels di-
agonally through the cranium into the right
hemisphere and vice versa, and these nerves
are not severed when the brains are split.1
Normally this isn’t a problem, because
what one side of the brain perceives and
thinks gets transmitted to the other, but a
split-brain can’t say what they see when a
scientist shows an image to the left visual
field. The language centers are in the other
hemisphere, across from where the image is
being processed. The part of their brain in
charge of using words and sending them to
the mouth can’t tell the other side, the one
holding the pencil, what it is looking at. The
side that saw the image can, however, draw
it. Once the image appears, the split-brain
57/599

person will then say, “Oh, a truck.” The com-
munication that normally takes place across
the corpus callosum now happens on the
paper.
This is what goes on in the world of a split-
brain patient. The same thing happens in
your head too. The same part of your brain is
responsible for turning thoughts into words
and then handing those words over to the
mouth. All day long, the world appearing in
your right hemisphere is being shared with
your left in a conversation you are unaware
of. At the biological level, this is a funda-
mental source of confabulation, and it can be
demonstrated in the lab.
If split-brain people are shown two words
like “bell” on the left and “music” on the
right and then asked to point out with their
right hand in a series of four photos what
they saw, they will point to the image with a
bell in it. They will ignore other photos of a
drummer, an organ, and a trumpet. The
58/599

amazing
confabulatory
moment
happens
when they are asked why they chose the im-
age. One split-brain patient said it was be-
cause the last music they heard was coming
from the college’s bell towers. The left eye
saw a bell, and told the right hand to point to
it, but the right side saw music and was now
concocting a justification for ignoring the
other pictures that were also related to the
idea.
The side of the brain in charge of speaking
saw the other side point out the bell, but in-
stead of saying it didn’t know why, it made
up a reason. The right side was no wiser, so it
went along with the fabrication. The patients
weren’t lying, because they believed what
they were saying. They deceived themselves
and the researcher but had no idea they were
doing so. They never felt confused or decept-
ive; they felt no different than you would.
In one experiment a split-brain person was
asked to perform an action only the right
59/599

hemisphere could see, and the left hemi-
sphere once again explained it away as if it
knew the cause. The word “walk” was dis-
played; the subject stood. When the re-
searcher asked why he got up, the subject
said, “I need to get a drink.” Another experi-
ment showed a violent scene to only the right
hemisphere.
The
subject
said
she
felt
nervous and uneasy and blamed it on the
way the room was decorated. The deeper
emotional centers could still talk to both
sides, but only the left hemisphere had the
ability to describe what was bubbling up.
This
split-brain
confabulation
has
been
demonstrated many times over the years.
When the left hemisphere is forced to ex-
plain why the right hemisphere is doing
something, it often creates a fiction that both
sides then accept.
Remember though, your brain works in
the same way—you just have the benefit of a
connection between the two halves to help
60/599

buffer against misunderstandings, but they
can still happen from time to time. Psycholo-
gist Alexander Luria compared conscious-
ness to a dance and said the left hemisphere
leads. Since it does all the talking, it some-
times has to do all the explaining. Split-brain
confabulation is an extreme and amplified
version of your own tendency to create nar-
rative fantasies about just about everything
you do, and then believe them. You are a
confabulatory creature by nature. You are al-
ways explaining to yourself the motivations
for your actions and the causes to the effects
in your life, and you make them up without
realizing it when you don’t know the an-
swers. Over time, these explanations become
your idea of who you are and your place in
the world. They are your self.
The neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran
once encountered a split-brain patient whose
left hemisphere believed in God, but whose
right hemisphere was an atheist. Essentially,
61/599

as he put it, there were two people in one
body—two selves. Ramachandran believes
your sense of self is partly the action of mir-
ror neurons. These complex clusters of brain
cells fire when you see someone hurt them-
selves or cry, when they scratch their arm or
laugh. They put you in the other person’s
shoes so you can almost feel that person’s
pain and itches. Mirror neurons provide em-
pathy and help you learn. One of the greatest
discoveries in recent years was to find that
mirror neurons fire also when you do things.
It is as if part of your brain is observing your-
self as an outsider.
You are a story you tell yourself. You en-
gage in introspection, and with great confid-
ence you see the history of your life with all
the characters and settings—and you at the
center as protagonist in the tale of who you
are. This is all a great, beautiful confabula-
tion without which you could not function.
62/599

As you move through your day, you ima-
gine a wide range of potential futures, poten-
tial situations outside your senses. When you
read news articles and nonfiction books, you
create fantasy worlds for situations that actu-
ally did happen. When you recall your past,
you create it on the spot—a daydream part
true and part fantasy that you believe down
to the last detail. If you were to lie back and
imagine yourself sailing around the world,
seeing all the wonders of the planet from one
port to the next, you could with varying
levels of detail imagine the entire globe from
Paris to India, from Cambodia to Kansas, but
you know you haven’t actually taken this
trip. And there are severe brain disorders
where sufferers cannot sort out their own
confabulations:
• Patients with Korsakoff’s syndrome
have
amnesia
surrounding
recent
events but can recall their past. They
make up stories to replace their recent
63/599

memories and believe them instead of
becoming confused. If you were to ask
someone with Korsakoff’s syndrome
where they had been over the last few
weeks, they might say they worked in
the hospital’s garage and need to get
back to work when in reality they are
patients receiving daily treatment in
that same hospital.
• Anosognosia sufferers are paralyzed
but won’t admit it. They tell their doc-
tors and loved ones they have severe
arthritis or need to watch their weight
if asked to move their incapacitated
arm to take a piece of candy. They lie,
but they don’t know they are lying.
The deception is only directed inward.
They truly believe the fiction.
• A person with Capgras delusion be-
lieves their close friends and family
have been replaced by impostors. The
part of the brain that provides an
64/599

emotional response when you see
someone you know stops functioning
properly in those with this dysfunc-
tion. They recognize their loved ones,
but don’t feel the spark. They make up
a story to explain their confusion and
accept it entirely.
• Those with Cotard’s syndrome believe
they have died. Those with this afflic-
tion will assume themselves to be
spirits in an afterlife and believe the
delusion so strongly they sometimes
die of starvation.
Psychologists have long assumed that you
aren’t aware of your higher cognitive pro-
cesses, as Richard Nisbett and Timothy
DeCamp
Wilson
at
the
University
of
Michigan suggested in their 1977 article for
Psychological Review. In their paper they
shot holes in the idea of introspection, saying
you are rarely aware of the true stimuli that
have led to your responses over the years,
65/599

even from one day to the next. In one study,
they write, subjects were asked to think of
their mother’s maiden name.
Go ahead. You try. What is your mother’s
maiden name?
The next question in the study was “How
did you come up with that?”
So how did you?
You don’t know. You just thought it. How
your mind works is something you can never
access, and although you often believe you
understand your thoughts and actions, your
emotions and motivations, much of the time
you do not. The very act of looking inward is
already several steps removed from the
thoughts
you
are
remembering.
This,
however, doesn’t prevent you from assuming
you really do know, you really can recall in
full detail, and this is how narratives begin.
This is how confabulation provides a frame-
work from which to understand yourself.
66/599

As the psychologist George Miller once
said, “It is the result of thinking, not the pro-
cess of thinking, that appears spontaneously
in consciousness.” In other words, in many
ways you are only reporting on what your
mind has already produced instead of direct-
ing its performance. The flow of conscious-
ness is one thing; the recollection of its
course is another, yet you usually see them
as the same. This is one of the oldest con-
cepts in psychology and philosophy—phe-
nomenology. It was one of the first debates
among researchers over just how deep psy-
chology could delve into the mind. Since the
early 1900s, psychologists have wrestled
with the conundrum of how, at a certain
level, subjective experience can’t be shared.
For instance, what does red look like? What
do tomatoes smell like? When you stub your
toe, what does it feel like? What would you
say if you had to explain any of these to
someone who had never experienced them?
67/599

How would you describe red to a person
blind from birth or the scent of a fresh to-
mato to someone who had never smelled
before?
These are qualia, the deepest you can tun-
nel down into your experience before you hit
rock. Most everyone has seen red but can’t
explain what it is like to do so. Your explana-
tions of experience can build up from qualia
but can’t go any lower. These are the inef-
fable building blocks of consciousness. You
can explain them only in relation to other ex-
periences, but you can never completely de-
scribe the experience of qualia to another
person, or yourself.
There is more at work in your mind than
you can access; beneath the rock there is
more complexity to your thoughts and feel-
ings than you can directly behold. For some
behaviors, the antecedent is something old
and evolved, a predilection passed down
through thousands of generations of people
68/599

like you trying to survive and thrive. You
want to take a nap on a rainy afternoon be-
cause perhaps your ancestors sought shelter
and safety in the same conditions. For other
behaviors, the impetus may have come from
something you simply didn’t notice. You
don’t know why you feel like leaving in the
middle of Thanksgiving dinner, but you
come up with an explanation that seems to
make sense at the time. Looking back, the
explanation may change.
Philosopher Daniel Dennett calls seeing
yourself in this way heterophenomenology.
Basically, he suggests when you explain why
you feel the way you do, or why you behaved
as you did, to take it with a grain of salt, as if
you were listening to someone tell you about
their night out. When you listen to someone
else tell a story, you expect some embellish-
ment and you know they are only telling you
how the events seemed to transpire to them.
In the same way, you know how reality
69/599

seems to be unfolding, how it seems to have
unfolded in the past, but you should take
your own perception with a grain of salt.
In the Miller and Nisbett paper, they cited
many studies in which people were aware of
their thoughts but not how they arrived at
them. Despite this, subjects usually had no
problem providing an explanation, an intro-
spection, which failed to address the true
cause. In one, two groups were given electric
shocks while they performed memory tasks.
Both groups were then asked to run through
the tasks again after the experiment ended.
One group was told the second set of shocks
was important in the pursuit of understand-
ing the human mind. The other group was
told the new round of shocks was just being
used to satisfy the scientist’s curiosity. The
second group then performed better on the
memory tasks, because they had to come up
with their own motivation for continuing,
which was to believe the shocks didn’t hurt.
70/599

In their minds the shocks really didn’t hurt
as much as they did for the first group, at
least they said as much when interviewed
later.
In another study, two groups of people
who said they were very afraid of snakes
were shown slides of snakes while listening
to what they believed was their heart rate.
Occasionally one group would see a slide
with the word “shock” printed on it. They
were given a jolt of electricity when they saw
this slide, and the researchers falsely in-
creased the sound of the beating of their
hearts in the monitor. When they later were
asked to hold a snake, they were far more
likely to give it a shot than the group who
didn’t see the shock slide and hear a fake in-
crease in heart rate. They had convinced
themselves they were more afraid of being
shocked than of snakes and then used this
introspection to truly be less afraid.
71/599

Nisbett and Miller set up their own study
in a department store where they arranged
nylon stockings side by side. When people
came by, they asked them to say which of
four items in a set was the best quality. Four-
to-one, people chose the stocking on the
right-hand side even though they were all
identical. When the researchers asked why,
people would comment on the texture or the
color, but never the position. When asked if
the order of the presentation influenced their
choice, they assured the scientists it had
nothing to do with it.
In these and many other studies the sub-
jects never said they didn’t know why they
felt and acted as they did. Not knowing why
didn’t confuse them; they instead found jus-
tification for their thoughts, feelings, and ac-
tions and moved on, unaware of the ma-
chinery of their minds.
How do you separate fantasy from reality?
How can you be sure the story of your life
72/599

both from long ago and minute to minute is
true? There is a pleasant vindication to be
found when you accept that you can’t. No
one can, yet we persist and thrive. Who you
think you are is sort of like a movie based on
true events, which is not necessarily a bad
thing. The details may be embellished, but
the big picture, the general idea, is probably
a good story worth hearing about.
73/599

3
Confirmation Bias
THE MISCONCEPTION: Your opin-
ions are the result of years of ration-
al, objective analysis.
THE TRUTH: Your opinions are the
result of years of paying attention to
information that confirmed what you
believed, while ignoring information
that challenged your preconceived
notions.
Have you ever had a conversation in which
some old movie was mentioned, something
like
The
Golden
Child,
or
maybe
even
something more obscure?

You laughed about it, quoted lines from it,
wondered what happened to the actors you
never saw again, and then you forgot about
it.
Until . . .
You are flipping channels one night and all
of the sudden you see The Golden Child is
playing. Weird.
The next day you are reading a news story,
and out of nowhere it mentions forgotten
movies from the 1980s, and holy shit, there
are three paragraphs about The Golden
Child. You see a trailer that night at the
theater for a new Eddie Murphy movie, and
then you see a billboard on the street pro-
moting Charlie Murphy doing stand-up in
town, and then one of your friends sends you
a link to a post at TMZ showing recent pho-
tos of the actress from The Golden Child.
What is happening here? Is the universe
trying to tell you something?
No. This is how confirmation bias works.
75/599

Since the conversation with your friends,
you’ve flipped channels plenty of times;
you’ve walked past lots of billboards; you’ve
seen dozens of stories about celebrities;
you’ve been exposed to a handful of movie
trailers.
The thing is, you disregarded all the other
information, all the stuff unrelated to The
Golden Child. Out of all the chaos, all the
morsels of data, you noticed only the bits
that called back to something sitting on top
of your brain. A few weeks back, when Eddie
Murphy and his Tibetan adventure were still
submerged beneath a heap of pop culture at
the bottom of your skull, you wouldn’t have
paid any special attention to references to it.
If you are thinking about buying a particu-
lar make of new car, you suddenly see people
driving that car all over the roads. If you just
ended a longtime relationship, every song
you hear seems to be written about love. If
you are having a baby, you start to see babies
76/599

everywhere. Confirmation bias is seeing the
world through a filter.
The examples above are a sort of passive
version of the phenomenon. The real trouble
begins when confirmation bias distorts your
active pursuit of facts.
Punditry is an industry built on confirma-
tion bias. Rush Limbaugh and Keith Olber-
mann, Glenn Beck and Arianna Huffing-ton,
Rachel Maddow and Ann Coulter—these
people provide fuel for beliefs, they pre-filter
the world to match existing worldviews. If
their filter is like your filter, you love them. If
it isn’t, you hate them. You watch them not
for information, but for confirmation.
Be careful. People like to be told what
they already know. Remember that.
They get uncomfortable when you tell
them new things. New things . . . well,
new things aren’t what they expect.
They like to know that, say, a dog will
bite a man. That is what dogs do. They
77/599

don’t want to know that man bites a
dog, because the world is not sup-
posed to happen like that. In short,
what people think they want is news,
but what they really crave is olds . . .
Not news but olds, telling people that
what they think they already know is
true.
—TERRY PRATCHETT THROUGH
THE CHARACTER
LORD VETINARI FROM HIS The
Truth: a Novel of Discworld
During the 2008 U.S. presidential elec-
tion, researcher Valdis Krebs at orgnet.com
analyzed
purchasing
trends
on
Amazon.
People who already supported Obama were
the same people buying books that painted
him in a positive light. People who already
disliked Obama were the ones buying books
painting him in a negative light. Just as with
pundits, people weren’t buying books for the
information, they were buying them for the
78/599

confirmation. Krebs has researched purchas-
ing trends on Amazon and the clustering
habits of people on social networks for years,
and his research shows what psychological
research into confirmation bias predicts: you
want to be right about how you see the
world, so you seek out information that con-
firms your beliefs and avoid contradictory
evidence and opinions.
Half a century of research has placed con-
firmation bias among the most dependable
of mental stumbling blocks. Journalists look-
ing to tell a certain story must avoid the
tendency to ignore evidence to the contrary;
scientists looking to prove a hypothesis must
avoid
designing
experiments
with
little
wiggle room for alternate outcomes. Without
confirmation bias, conspiracy theories would
fall apart. Did we really put a man on the
moon? If you are looking for proof we didn’t,
you can find it.
79/599

In a 1979 University of Minnesota study by
Mark Snyder and Nancy Cantor, people read
about a week in the life of an imaginary wo-
man named Jane. Throughout the week,
Jane did things that showcased she could be
extroverted in some situations and introver-
ted in others. A few days passed. The sub-
jects were asked to return. Researchers di-
vided the people into groups and asked them
to help decide if Jane would be suited for a
particular job. One group was asked if she
would be a good librarian; the other group
was asked if she would be a good real estate
agent. In the librarian group, people re-
membered Jane as an introvert. In the real
estate group, they remembered her being an
extrovert. After this, when each group was
asked if she would be good at the other pro-
fession, people stuck with their original as-
sessment, saying she wasn’t suited for the
other job. The study suggests even in your
memories you fall prey to confirmation bias,
80/599

recalling those things that support even
recently-arrived-at
beliefs
and
forgetting
those things that contradict them.
An Ohio State study in 2009 showed
people spend 36 percent more time reading
an essay if that essay aligns with their opin-
ions. Another study at Ohio State in 2009
showed subjects clips of the parody show
The Colbert Report, and people who con-
sidered themselves politically conservative
consistently reported “Colbert only pretends
to be joking and genuinely meant what he
said.”
Over time, by never seeking the antithetic-
al, through accumulating subscriptions to
magazines, stacks of books, and hours of
television, you can become so confident in
your worldview that no one can dissuade
you.
Remember, there’s always someone out
there willing to sell eyeballs to advertisers by
offering a guaranteed audience of people
81/599

looking for validation. Ask yourself if you are
in that audience. In science, you move closer
to the truth by seeking evidence to the con-
trary. Perhaps the same method should in-
form your opinions as well.
82/599

4
Hindsight Bias
THE MISCONCEPTION: After you
learn something new, you remember
how
you
were
once
ignorant
or
wrong.
THE TRUTH: You often look back on
the things you’ve just learned and as-
sume you knew them or believed
them all along.
“I knew they were going to lose.”
“That’s exactly what I thought was going to
happen.”
“I saw this coming.”
“That’s just common sense.”
“I had a feeling you might say that.”

How many times have you said something
similar and believed it?
Here’s the thing: You tend to edit your
memories so you don’t seem like such a dim-
wit when things happen you couldn’t have
predicted. When you learn things you wish
you had known all along, you go ahead and
assume you did know them. This tendency is
just part of being a person, and it is called
the Hindsight Bias.
Take a look at the results of this study:
A recent study by researchers at Har-
vard shows as people grow older they
tend to stick to old beliefs and find it
difficult to accept conflicting informa-
tion about topics they are already fa-
miliar with. The findings seem to sug-
gest you can’t teach an old dog new
tricks.
Of course the study showed this. You’ve
known this your whole life; it’s common
knowledge.
84/599

Consider this study:
A study out of the University of Al-
berta shows older people, with years
of wisdom and a virtual library of
facts from decades of exposure to me-
dia, find it much easier to finish a
four-year degree ahead of time than
an eighteen-year-old who has to con-
tend with an unfinished, still-growing
brain. The findings show you are nev-
er too old to learn.
Wait a second. That seems like common
knowledge too.
So which is it—you can’t teach an old dog
new tricks, or you are never too old to learn?
Actually, I made both of these up. Neither
one is a real study. (Using fake studies is a
favorite way of researchers to demonstrate
hindsight bias.) Both of them seemed prob-
able because when you learn something new,
you quickly redact your past so you can feel
the comfort of always being right.
85/599

In
1986,
Karl
Teigen,
now
at
the
University of Oslo, did a study in which he
asked students to evaluate proverbs. Teigen
gave participants famous sayings to evaluate.
When participants were given adages, like
“You can’t judge a book by its cover,” they
tended to agree with the wisdom. What
would you say? Is it fair to say you can’t
judge a book by its cover? From experience,
can you remember times when this was true?
What about the expression “If it looks like a
duck, swims like a duck, and quacks like a
duck, then it probably is a duck?” Seems like
common sense too, huh? So which is it?
In Teigen’s study, most people agreed with
all the proverbs he showed them, and then
agreed once again when he read to them pro-
verbs that stated opposing views. When he
asked them to evaluate the phrase “Love is
stronger than fear,” they agreed with it.
When he presented them the opposite, “Fear
is stronger than love,” they agreed with that
86/599

too. He was trying to show how what you
think is just common sense usually isn’t.
Often, when students and journalists and
laypeople hear about the results of a scientif-
ic study, they agree with the findings and
say, “Yeah, no shit.” Teigen showed this is
just hindsight bias at work.
You are always looking back at the person
you used to be, always reconstructing the
story of your life to better match the person
you are today. You have needed to keep a
tidy mind to navigate the world ever since
you
lived
in
jungles
and
on
savannas.
Cluttered minds got bogged down, and the
bodies they controlled got eaten. Once you
learn from your mistakes, or replace bad info
with good, there isn’t much use in retaining
the garbage, so you delete it. This deletion of
your old, incorrect assumptions de-clutters
your mind. Sure, you are lying to yourself,
but it’s for a good cause. You take all you
87/599

know about a topic, all you can conjure up on
the spot, and construct a mental model.
Right before President Nixon left for Ch-
ina, a researcher asked people what they
thought the chances were for certain things
to happen on his trip. Later, once the trip
was over, knowing the outcomes, people re-
membered their statistical assumptions as
being far more accurate than they were. The
same thing happened with people who felt
that another terrorist attack was likely after
9/11. When no attack happened, these people
recalled having made much lower estimates
of the risk of another attack.
Hindsight bias is a close relative of the
availability heuristic. You tend to believe an-
ecdotes
and
individual
sensational
news
stories are more representative of the big
picture than they are. If you see lots of shark
attacks in the news, you think, “Gosh, sharks
are out of control.” What you should think is
“Gosh,
the
news
loves
to
cover
shark
88/599

attacks.” The availability heuristic shows you
make decisions and think thoughts based on
the information you have at hand, while ig-
noring all the other information that might
be out there. You do the same thing with
Hindsight Bias, by thinking thoughts and
making decisions based on what you know
now, not what you used to know.
Knowing hindsight bias exists should arm
you with healthy skepticism when politicians
and businessmen talk about their past de-
cisions. Also, keep it in mind the next time
you get into a debate online or an argument
with a boyfriend or girlfriend, husband or
wife—the other person really does think he
or she was never wrong, and so do you.
89/599

5
The Texas Sharpshooter Fallacy
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
take
randomness into account when de-
termining cause and effect.
THE TRUTH: You tend to ignore ran-
dom chance when the results seem
meaningful or when you want a ran-
dom event to have a meaningful
cause.
Abraham Lincoln and John F. Kennedy were
both presidents of the United States, elected
one hundred years apart. Both were shot and
killed by assassins who were known by three
names with fifteen letters, John Wilkes
Booth and Lee Harvey Oswald, and neither

killer would make it to trial. Spooky, huh? It
gets better. Kennedy had a secretary named
Lincoln. They were both killed on a Friday
while sitting next to their wives, Lincoln in
the Ford Theater, Kennedy in a Lincoln
made by Ford. Both men were succeeded by
a man named Johnson—Andrew for Lincoln
and Lyndon for Kennedy. Andrew was born
in 1808, Lyndon in 1908. What are the odds?
In 1898, Morgan Robertson wrote a novel
titled Futility. Given that it was written four-
teen years before the Titanic sank, eleven
years before construction on the vessel even
began, the similarities between the book and
the real event are eerie. The novel describes a
giant boat called the Titan which everyone
considers unsinkable. It is the largest ever
created, and inside, it seems like a luxury
hotel—just like the as yet unbuilt Titanic.
Titan had only twenty lifeboats, half of what
it would need should the great ship sink. The
Titanic had twenty-four, also half what it
91/599

needed. In the book, the Titan hits an ice-
berg in April four hundred miles from New-
foundland. The Titanic, years later, would do
the same in the same month in the same
place. The Titan sinks, and more than half of
the passengers die, just as with the Titanic.
The number of people on board who die in
the book and the number in the future acci-
dent are nearly identical. The similarities
don’t stop there. The fictional Titan and the
real Titanic both had three propellers and
two masts. Both had a capacity of three thou-
sand people. Both hit the iceberg close to
midnight. Did Robertson have a premoni-
tion? I mean, what are the odds?
In the 1500s, Nostradamus wrote:
B’tes
farouches
de
faim
fleuves
tranner
Plus part du champ encore Hister
sera,
En caige de fer le grand sera treisner,
92/599

Quand
rien
enfant
de
Germain
observa.
This is often translated to:
Beasts wild with hunger will cross the
rivers,
The greater part of the battle will be
against Hister.
He will cause great men to be dragged
in a cage of iron,
When the son of Germany obeys no
law.
That’s rather creepy, considering that it
seems to describe a guy with a tiny mustache
born about four hundred years later. Here is
another prophecy:
Out of the deepest part of the west of
Europe,
From poor people a young child shall
be born,
Who with his tongue shall seduce
many people,
93/599

His fame shall increase in the Eastern
Kingdom.
Wow. Hister certainly sounds like Hitler,
and that second quatrain seems to drive it
home. Actually, many of Nostradamus’s pre-
dictions are about a guy from Germania who
wages a great war and dies mysteriously.
What are the odds?
If any of this seems too amazing to be co-
incidence, too odd to be random, too similar
to be chance, you are not so smart. Allow me
to explain.
Say you go on a date, and the other person
reveals he or she drives the same kind of car
you do. It’s a different color, but the same
model. Well, that’s sort of neat, but nothing
amazing.
Let’s say later on you learn your date’s
mom’s name is the same as your mom’s, and
your mothers have the same birthday. Hold
on a second. That’s pretty cool. Maybe the
hand of fate is pushing you toward the other
94/599

person. Later still, you find out you both own
the box set of Monty Python’s Flying Circus,
and
you
both
grew
up
loving
Rescue
Rangers. You both love pizza, but hate
rutabagas. This is meant to be, you think.
You are made for each other.
But, take a step back. Now take another.
How many people in the world own that
model of car? You are both about the same
age, so your mothers are too, and their
names were probably common in their time.
Since you and your date have similar back-
grounds and grew up in the same decade,
you probably share the same childhood TV
shows. Everyone loves Monty Python. Every-
one loves pizza. Many people hate rutabagas.
Looking at the factors from a distance, you
can accept the reality of random chance. You
are lulled by the signal. You forget about
noise. With meaning, you overlook random-
ness, but meaning is a human construction.
95/599

You have just committed the Texas sharp-
shooter fallacy.
The fallacy gets its name from imagining a
cowboy shooting at a barn. Over time, the
side of the barn becomes riddled with holes.
In some places there are lots of them, in oth-
ers there are few. If the cowboy later paints a
bull’s-eye over a spot where his bullet holes
clustered together, it looks like he is pretty
good with a gun. By painting a bull’s-eye
over a cluster of bullet holes, the cowboy
places artificial order over natural random
chance. If you have a human brain, you do
this all of the time. Picking out clusters of co-
incidence is a predictable malfunction of
normal human logic.
When you are dazzled by the idea of
Nostradamus predicting Hitler, you ignore
how he wrote almost one thousand ambigu-
ous predictions, and most of them make no
sense at all. He seems even less interesting
when you find out Hister is the Latin name
96/599

for the Danube River. When you marvel at
the similarities between the Titan and the
Titanic, you disregard that in the novel only
thirteen people survived, and the ship sank
right away, and the Titan had made many
voyages, and it had sails. In the novel, one of
the survivors fought a polar bear before be-
ing rescued. When you are befuddled by the
Lincoln and Kennedy connections, you neg-
lect to notice Kennedy was Catholic and Lin-
coln was born Baptist. Kennedy was killed
with a rifle, Lincoln with a pistol. Kennedy
was shot in Texas, Lincoln in Washington,
D.C. Kennedy had lustrous auburn hair,
while Lincoln wore a haberdasher’s wet
dream.
With all three examples there are thou-
sands of differences, all of which you ig-
nored, but when you draw the bull’s-eye
around the clusters, the similarities—whoa.
If hindsight bias and confirmation bias had a
97/599

baby, it would be the Texas sharpshooter
fallacy.
When reality shows are filmed, the produ-
cers have hundreds of hours of footage.
When they condense that footage into an
hour, they paint a bull’s-eye around a cluster
of holes. They find a narrative in all the
mundane moments, extracting the good bits
and tossing aside the rest. This means they
can create any orderly story they wish from
their reserves of chaos. Was that one girl
really a horrific bitch? Was that guy with the
gelled hair and fake tan really that dumb?
Unless you can pull back and see the entire
barn, you’ll never know.
The reach of the fallacy is far greater than
reality shows, presidential trivia, and spooky
coincidences. When you use the sharpshoot-
er fallacy to determine cause from effect, it
can harm people. One of the reasons scient-
ists form a hypothesis and then try to dis-
prove it with new research is to avoid the
98/599

Texas sharpshooter fallacy. Epidemiologists
are especially wary of it as they study the
factors that lead to the spread of disease. If
you look at a map of the United States with
dots assigned to where cancer rates are
highest, you will notice areas of clumping. It
looks like you have a pretty good indication
of where the groundwater must be poisoned,
or where high-voltage power lines are bom-
barding people with damaging energy fields,
or
where
cell
phone
towers
are
frying
people’s organs, or where nuclear bombs
must have been tested. A map like that is a
lot like the side of the sharpshooter’s barn,
and presuming there must be a cause for
cancer clusters is the same as drawing bull’s-
eyes around them. More often than not, can-
cer clusters have no scary environmental
cause. There are many agents at work.
People who are related tend to live near one
another. Old people tend to retire in the
same areas. Eating, smoking, and exercise
99/599

habits tend to be similar region to region.
And, after all, one in three people will devel-
op cancer in his or her lifetime. To accept
that things like residential cancer clusters
are often just coincidence is deeply unsatis-
fying. The powerlessness, the feeling you are
defenseless to the whims of chance, can be
assuaged by singling out an antagonist. So-
metimes you need a bad guy, and the Texas
sharpshooter fallacy is one way you can cre-
ate one.
According to the Centers for Disease Con-
trol the number of autism cases among
eight-year-olds increased 57 percent from
2002 to the 2006. Looking back over the last
twenty years, the rate of autism has gone up
200 percent. Today, one in seventy male
children has some form of autism spectrum
disorder. It seemed absolutely nuts when
those numbers were first released. Parents
around the world panicked. Something must
be causing autism numbers to rise, right?
100/599

Early on, a bull’s-eye was painted around
vaccines because symptoms seemed to show
up about the same time as kids were getting
vaccinated. Once they had a target, a cluster,
people failed to see all the other correlations.
After years of research and millions of dol-
lars, vaccines have been ruled out, but many
refuse to accept the findings. Singling out
vaccines while ignoring the millions of other
factors is the same as noting the Titan hit an
iceberg but omitting it had sails.
Lucky streaks at the casino, hot hands in
basketball,
a
tornado
sparing
a
church—these are all examples of humans
finding meaning after the fact, after the odds
are tallied and the numbers have moved on.
You are ignoring the times you lost, the
times the ball missed the basket, and all the
homes the tornado blindly devoured.
In World War II, Londoners took notice
when bombing raids consistently missed cer-
tain neighborhoods. People began to believe
101/599

German spies lived in the spared buildings.
They didn’t. Analysis afterward by psycholo-
gists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky
showed the bombing strike patterns were
random.
Anywhere people are searching for mean-
ing, you will see the Texas sharpshooter fal-
lacy. For many, the world loses luster when
you accept the idea that random mutations
can lead to eyeballs or random burn patterns
on toast can look like a person’s face.
If you were to shuffle a deck and draw out
ten cards, the chances of the sequence you
drew coming up are in the trillions, no mat-
ter what the cards are. If you drew out an
ordered suit, it would be astonishing, but the
chances are the same as any other set of ten
cards. The meaning is a human construct.
Look outside. See that tree? The chances
of it growing there on that spot, on this plan-
et, circling this star, in this galaxy, among
the
billions
of
galaxies
in
the
known
102/599

universe, are so incredibly small it seems to
have meaning, but that meaning is only a fig-
ment of your imagination. You are drawing a
bull’s-eye around a cluster on a vast barn.
The odds of it being there are no less astro-
nomical than the odds of it being in the
patch of dirt beside it. The same is true if you
looked out onto a desert and found a lizard,
or into the sky and found a cloud, or into
space and saw nothing but hydrogen atoms
floating alone. There is a 100 percent chance
something will be there, be anywhere, when
you look; only the need for meaning changes
how you feel about what you see.
To admit the messy slog of chaos, dis-
order, and random chance rules your life,
rules the universe itself, is a painful conceit.
You commit the Texas sharpshooter fallacy
when you need a pattern to provide meaning,
to console you, to lay blame. You mow your
lawn, arrange your silverware, comb your
hair. Whenever possible, you oppose the
103/599

forces of entropy and thwart their relentless
derangement. Your drive to do this is primal.
You need order. Order makes it easier to be a
person, to navigate this sloppy world. For
ancient man, pattern recognition led to food
and protected people from harm. You are
able to read these words because your an-
cestors recognized patterns and changed
their behavior to better acquire food and
avoiding becoming it. Evolution has made us
into beings looking for clusters where chance
events have built up like sand into dunes.
Carl Sagan said in the vastness of space
and the immensity of time it was a joy to
share a planet and epoch with his wife. Even
though he knew fate didn’t put them togeth-
er, it didn’t take away the wonder he felt
when he was with her.
You see patterns everywhere, but some of
them are formed by chance and mean noth-
ing. Against the noisy background of probab-
ility things are bound to line up from time to
104/599

time for no reason at all. It’s just how the
math works out. Recognizing this is an im-
portant part of ignoring coincidences when
they don’t matter and realizing what has real
meaning for you on this planet, in this epoch.
105/599

6
Procrastination
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
pro-
crastinate because you are lazy and
can’t manage your time well.
THE
TRUTH:
Procrastination
is
fueled by weakness in the face of im-
pulse and a failure to think about
thinking.
Netflix reveals something about your own
behavior you should have noticed by now,
something that keeps getting between you
and the things you want to accomplish. If
you have Netflix, especially if you stream it
to your TV, you tend to gradually accumulate

a cache of hundreds of films you think you’ll
watch one day.
Take a look at your queue. Why are there
so damn many documentaries and dramatic
epics collecting virtual dust in there? By now
you could draw the cover art to Dead Man
Walking from memory. Why do you keep
passing over it?
Psychologists actually know the answer to
this
question,
to why you keep
adding
movies you will never watch to your growing
collection of future rentals, and it’s the same
reason you believe you will eventually do
what’s best for yourself in all the other parts
of your life, but rarely do.
A study conducted in 1999 by Read,
Loewenstein, and Kalyanaraman had people
pick three movies out of a selection of
twenty-four. Some were lowbrow, like Sleep-
less in Seattle or Mrs. Doubtfire. Some were
highbrow, like Schindler’s List or The Piano.
In other words, it was a choice between
107/599

movies that promised to be fun and forget-
table and those that would be memorable
but required more effort to absorb. After
picking, the subjects had to watch one movie
right away. They then had to watch another
in two days and a third two days after that.
Most people picked Schindler’s List as one of
their three. They knew it was a great movie
because all of their friends said it was, and it
had earned dozens of the highest awards.
Most didn’t, however, choose to watch it on
the first day. Instead, people tended to pick
lowbrow movies on the first day. Only 44
percent went for the heavier stuff first. The
majority tended to pick comedies, like The
Mask, or action flicks, like Speed, when they
knew they had to watch their choice forth-
with. Planning ahead, people picked high-
brow movies 63 percent of the time for their
second movie and 71 percent of the time for
their third. When they ran the experiment
again but told subjects they had to watch all
108/599

three
selections
back-to-back,
Schindler’s
List was thirteen times less likely to be
chosen at all. The researchers had a hunch
people would go for the junk food first, but
plan healthy meals in the future.
Many studies over the years have shown
you tend to have time-inconsistent prefer-
ences. When asked if you would rather have
fruit or cake one week from now, you will
usually say fruit. A week later, when the slice
of German chocolate and the apple are
offered, you are statistically more likely to go
for the cake.
This is why your Netflix queue is full of
great films you keep passing over for Family
Guy. With Netflix, the choice of what to
watch right now and what to watch later is
like candy bars versus carrot sticks. When
you are making plans, your better angels
point to the nourishing choices, but in the
moment you go for what tastes good.
109/599

This is sometimes called present bias—be-
ing unable to grasp that what you want will
change over time, and what you want now
isn’t the same thing you will want later.
Present bias explains why you buy lettuce
and bananas only to throw them out later
when you forget to eat them. This is why
when you are a kid you wonder why adults
don’t own more toys. Present bias is why
you’ve made the same resolution for the
tenth year in a row, but this time you mean
it. You are going to lose weight and forge a
six-pack of abs so ripped you can deflect
arrows.
You weigh yourself. You buy a workout
DVD. You order a set of weights. One day
you have the choice between going for a run
or watching a movie, and you choose the
movie. Another day you are out with friends
and can choose a cheeseburger or a salad.
You choose the cheeseburger. The slips be-
come more frequent, but you keep saying
110/599

you’ll get around to it. You’ll start again on
Monday,
which
becomes
a
week
from
Monday. Your will succumbs to a death by a
thousand cuts. By the time winter comes, it
looks like you already know what your resol-
ution will be the next year.
Procrastination
manifests
itself
within
every aspect of your life.
You wait until the last minute to buy
Christmas presents. You put off seeing the
dentist, or getting that thing checked out by
the doctor, or filing your taxes. You forget to
register to vote. You need to get an oil
change. There is a pile of dishes getting high-
er in the kitchen. Shouldn’t you wash clothes
now so you don’t have to waste a Sunday
cleaning everything you own?
Perhaps the stakes are higher than choos-
ing to play Angry Birds instead of doing sit-
ups. You might have a deadline for a grant
proposal, or a dissertation, or a book.
111/599

You’ll get around to it. You’ll start tomor-
row. You’ll take the time to learn a foreign
language, to learn how to play an instru-
ment. There’s a growing list of books you will
read one day.
Before you do though, maybe you should
check your e-mail. You should head over to
Facebook too, just to get it out of the way. A
cup of coffee would probably get you going;
it won’t take long to go grab one. Maybe just
a few episodes of that show you like.
You can try to fight it back. You can buy a
daily planner and a to-do list application for
your phone. You can write yourself notes and
fill out schedules. You can become a pro-
ductivity junkie surrounded by instruments
to make life more efficient, but these tools
alone will not help, because the problem isn’t
you are a bad manager of your time—you are
a bad tactician in the war inside your brain.
Procrastination is such a pervasive ele-
ment of the human experience there are
112/599

more than 600 books for sale promising to
snap you out of your bad habits, and this
year alone 120 new books on the topic were
published. Obviously this is a problem every-
one admits to, so why is it so hard to defeat?
To
explain,
consider
the
power
of
marshmallows.
Walter Mischel conducted experiments at
Stanford
University
throughout
the
late
1960s and early 1970s in which he and his
researchers offered a bargain to children.
The kids sat at a table in front of a bell and
some treats. They could pick a pretzel, a
cookie, or a giant marshmallow. They told
the little boys and girls they could either eat
the treat right away or wait a few minutes. If
they waited, they would double their payoff
and get two treats. If they couldn’t wait, they
had to ring the bell, after which the research-
er would end the experiment.
Some made no attempt at self-control and
just ate right away. Others stared intensely at
113/599

the object of their desire until they gave in to
temptation. Many writhed in agony, twisting
their hands and feet while looking away.
Some made silly noises. In the end, one third
couldn’t resist. What started as an experi-
ment about delayed gratification has now,
decades later, yielded a far more interesting
set
of
revelations
about
metacogni-
tion—thinking about thinking.
Mischel has followed the lives of all his
subjects through high school, college, and in-
to adulthood, where they accumulated chil-
dren, mortgages, and jobs. The revelation
from this research is kids who were able to
overcome their desire for short-term reward
in favor of a better outcome later weren’t
smarter than the other kids, nor were they
less gluttonous. They just had a better grasp
of how to trick themselves into doing what
was best for them. They watched the wall in-
stead of looking at the food. They tapped
their feet instead of smelling the confection.
114/599

The wait was torture for all, but some knew it
was going to be impossible to just sit there
and stare at the delicious, gigantic marsh-
mallow without giving in. The ones who were
better at holding off their desire to snatch
the marshmallow used that same power to
squeeze more out of life. The ones who rang
the bell quickly showed a higher incidence of
behavioral problems. The ones who could
hold out ended up with SAT scores that were
on average more than two hundred points
higher than scores for the ones who ate the
marshmallow.
Thinking about thinking—this is the key.
In the struggle between should versus want,
some people have figured out something cru-
cial: Want never goes away. Procrastination
is all about choosing want over should be-
cause you don’t have a plan for those times
when you can expect to be tempted. You are
really bad at predicting your future mental
states.
In
addition,
you
are
terrible
at
115/599

choosing between now and later. Later is a
murky place where anything could go wrong.
If I were to offer you $50 now or $100 in a
year, which would you take? Clearly, you’ll
take the $50 now. After all, who knows what
could happen in a year, right? OK, so what if
I instead offered you $50 in five years or
$100 in six years? Nothing has changed oth-
er than adding a delay, but now it feels just
as natural to wait for the $100. After all, you
already have to wait a long time. A being of
pure logic would think, more is more, and
pick the higher amount every time, but you
aren’t a being of pure logic. Faced with two
possible rewards, you are more likely to take
the one that you can enjoy now over one you
will enjoy later—even if the later reward is
far greater. In the moment, rearranging the
folders on your computer seems a lot more
rewarding than some task due in a month
which might cost you your job or your dip-
loma, so you wait until the night before. If
116/599

you considered which would be more valu-
able in a month—continuing to get your
paycheck
or
having
an
immaculate
desktop—you would pick the greater reward.
The tendency to get more rational when you
are forced to wait is called hyperbolic dis-
counting, because your dismissal of the bet-
ter payoff later diminishes over time and
makes a nice slope on a graph.
Evolutionarily it makes sense to always go
for the sure bet now; your ancestors didn’t
have to think about retirement or heart dis-
ease. Your brain evolved in a world where
you probably wouldn’t live to meet your
grandchildren. The stupid monkey part of
your brain wants to gobble up candy bars
and go deeply into debt.
Hyperbolic discounting makes later an
easy place to throw all the things you don’t
want to deal with, but you also overcommit
to future plans for the same reason. You run
out of time to get things done because you
117/599

think in the future, that mysterious fantastic-
al realm of possibilities, you’ll have more free
time than you do now.
One of the best ways to see how bad you
are at coping with procrastination is to no-
tice how you deal with deadlines. Let’s ima-
gine you are in a class where you must com-
plete three research papers in three weeks,
and the instructor is willing to allow you to
set your own due dates. You can choose to
turn in your papers once a week, or two in
the first week and one in the second. You can
turn them all in on the last day, or you can
spread them out. You could even choose to
turn in all three at the end of the first week
and be done. It’s up to you, but once you pick
you have to stick with your choice. If you
miss your deadlines, you get a big fat zero.
How would you pick? The most rational
choice would be the last day for every paper.
It gives you plenty of time to work hard on
all three and turn in the best possible work.
118/599

This seems like a wise choice, but you are not
so smart.
The same choice was offered to a selection
of students in a 2002 study conducted by
Klaus Wertenbroch and Dan Ariely. They set
up three classes, and each had three weeks to
finish three papers. Class A had to turn in all
three papers on the last day of class, Class B
had to pick three different deadlines and
stick to them, and Class C had to turn in one
paper a week. Which class had the better
grades? Class C, the one with three specific
deadlines, did the best. Class B, which had to
pick deadlines ahead of time but had com-
plete freedom, did the second best, and the
group whose only deadline was the last day,
Class A, did the worst. Students who could
pick any three deadlines tended to spread
them out at about one week apart on their
own. They knew they would procrastinate, so
they set up zones in which they would be
forced to perform. Still, overly optimistic
119/599

outliers who either waited until the last
minute or chose unrealistic goals pulled
down the overall class grade. Students with
no guidelines at all tended to put off their
work until the last week for all three papers.
The ones who had no choice and were forced
to spread out their procrastination did the
best because the outliers were eliminated.
Those people who weren’t honest with them-
selves about their own tendencies to put off
their work or who were too confident didn’t
have a chance to fool themselves.
If you fail to believe you will procrastinate
or become idealistic about how awesome you
are at working hard and managing your
time, you never develop a strategy for out-
maneuvering your own weakness.
Procrastination is an impulse; it’s buying
candy at the checkout. Procrastination is also
hyperbolic discounting, taking the sure thing
in the present over the caliginous prospect
someday far away. You must be adept at
120/599

thinking about thinking to defeat yourself at
procrastination. You must realize there is the
you who sits there now reading this, and
there is the you some time in the future who
will be influenced by a different set of ideas
and desires; a you for whom an alternate
palette of brain functions will be available for
painting reality.
The now-you may see the costs and re-
wards at stake when it comes time to choose
studying for the test instead of going to the
club, eating the salad instead of the cupcake,
writing the article instead of playing the
video game. The trick is to accept that the
now-you will not be the person facing those
choices, it will be the future-you—a person
who can’t be trusted. Future-you will give in,
and then you’ll go back to being now-you and
feel weak and ashamed. Now-you must trick
future-you into doing what is right for both
parties. This is why food plans like Nutrisys-
tem
work
for
many
people.
Now-you
121/599

commits to spending a lot of money on a gi-
ant box of food that future-you will have to
deal with. People who get this concept use
programs like Freedom, which disables In-
ternet access on a computer for up to eight
hours, a tool allowing now-you to make it
impossible for future-you to sabotage your
work.
Capable psychonauts who think about
thinking, about states of mind, about set and
setting, can get things done not because they
have more willpower or drive, but because
they know productivity is a game played
against a childish primal human predilection
for pleasure and novelty that can never be
excised from the soul. Your effort is better
spent
outsmarting
yourself
than
making
empty promises through plugging dates into
a calendar or setting deadlines for push-ups.
122/599

7
Normalcy Bias
THE MISCONCEPTION: Your fight-
or-flight instincts kick in and you
panic when disaster strikes.
THE TRUTH: You often become ab-
normally
calm
and
pretend
everything is normal in a crisis.
If you knew a horrific mile-wide force of
nature was headed toward your home, what
would you do? Would you call your loved
ones? Would you head outside and look for
the oncoming storm? Would you leap into a
bathtub and cover yourself with a mattress?
No matter what you encounter in life, your
first analysis of any situation is to see it in

the context of what is normal for you and
then compare and contrast the new informa-
tion against what you know usually happens.
Because of this, you have a tendency to inter-
pret strange and alarming situations as if
they were just part of business as usual.
For three days in 1999, a series of horrific
tornadoes scrubbed clean the Oklahoma
countryside. Among them was a monster
force
of
nature
later
called
the
Bridge
Creek–Moore F5. The F5 part of the name
comes from the Enhanced Fujita Scale. It
goes from EF1 to EF5 and measures the in-
tensity of a twister. Less than 1 percent of
tornadoes ever reach the top level. At 4, cars
go airborne and whole houses are leveled. To
reach level 5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale, a
tornado’s winds must exceed 200 miles per
hour. The winds in Bridge Creek–Moore
reached 320. Warnings were issued thirteen
minutes in advance, yet many people did
nothing as the monster approached. They
124/599

milled around and hoped the killer would
spare them. They didn’t attempt to run for
safety. In the end, the beast destroyed 8,000
homes and killed 36 people. Many more
would surely have perished if there had been
no warning at all. For instance, a similar
twister in 1925 killed 695. So, given there
was a warning, why did some people not
heed the call to action and seek shelter from
the colossus?
The tendency to flounder in the face of
danger is well understood and expected
among tornado chasers and meteorologists.
Tales of those who choose to ride out hur-
ricanes and tornado-spewing storm clouds
are common. Weather experts and emer-
gency management workers know you can
become enveloped in a blanket of calm when
terror enters your heart. Psychologists refer
to it as normalcy bias. First responders call it
negative panic. This strange counterproduct-
ive tendency to forget self-preservation in
125/599

the event of an emergency is often factored
into fatality predictions in everything from
ship
sinkings
to
stadium
evacuations.
Disaster movies get it all wrong. When you
and others are warned of danger, you don’t
evacuate immediately while screaming and
flailing your arms.
In his book Big Weather, tornado chaser
Mark Svenvold wrote about how contagious
normalcy bias can be. He recalled how
people often tried to convince him to chill
out while fleeing from impending doom. He
said even when tornado warnings were is-
sued, people assumed it was someone else’s
problem. Stake-holding peers, he said, would
try to shame him into denial so they could
remain calm. They didn’t want him deflating
their attempts at feeling normal.
Normalcy bias flows into the brain no mat-
ter the scale of the problem. It will appear
whether you have days and plenty of warning
126/599

or are blindsided with only seconds between
life and death.
Imagine you are in a Boeing 747 airplane
as it touches down after a long flight. You
hide a sigh of relief once the ground ceases to
rush closer and you hear the landing gear
chirp against the runway. You release the
hand rests as the engines power down. You
sense the bustle of four hundred people pre-
paring to leave. The tedious process of taxi-
ing to the terminal begins. You play back
some of the moments on the giant plane,
thinking how it was a pleasant flight with few
bumps and nice people all around. You are
already collecting your things and getting
ready to remove your seat belt. You look out
the window and try to make out something
familiar in the fog. Without warning, shock
waves of heat and pressure tear into your
flesh. A terrible blast rattles your organs and
tears at all corners of the plane. A noise like
two trains colliding under your chin bursts
127/599

eardrums up and down the aisles. An explo-
sion tunnels through the spaces around you,
filling every gap and crevice with streamers
of flame surging down the aisles and over
your head, under your feet. They recede just
as quickly, leaving unbearable heat. Clumps
of your hair crumple into ashes. Now all you
hear is the crackle of fire.
Imagine you are sitting on this plane now.
The top of the craft is gone and you can see
the sky above you. Columns of flame are
growing. Holes in the sides of the airliner
lead to freedom. How would you react?
You probably think you would leap to your
feet and yell, “Let’s get the hell out of here!”
If not this, then you might assume you would
coil into a fetal position and freak out. Stat-
istically, neither of these is likely. What you
would probably do is far weirder.
In 1977, on an island in the Canaries called
Tenerife, a series of mistakes led to two
128/599

enormous 747 passenger planes colliding
with each other as one attempted takeoff.
A Pan Am aircraft with 496 people on
board was taxiing along the runway in dense
fog when a Dutch KLM flight with 248 inside
asked to be cleared for takeoff on the same
airstrip. The fog was so thick the KLM crew
couldn’t see the other airplane, and both
were invisible to the control tower. The crew
misheard their instructions. Thinking they
had just been given permission, they began
to speed toward the other plane. Air traffic
controllers tried to warn them, but radio in-
terference garbled the messages. Too late,
the captain of the KLM flight saw the other
craft ahead of him. He pulled up hard, drag-
ging the tail along the ground, but couldn’t
take flight. He screamed as half of the KLM
aircraft smashed into the Pan Am at 160
miles per hour.
The KLM airplane bounced off the Pan Am
jet, soared for five hundred feet, and then
129/599

tumbled in a terrible jet fuel explosion.
Everyone on board disintegrated. The fire
was so intense it would burn until the next
day.
Rescue crews spilled out onto the tarmac,
but they didn’t drive out to the Pan Am
flight. Instead, they rushed to the flaming
wreckage of the KLM plane. For twenty
minutes, in the chaos, firefighters and emer-
gency personnel thought they were dealing
with only one problem and believed the
flames peeking out from the fog in the dis-
tance were just more wreckage. The surviv-
ors on board the Pan Am flight would not be
rescued. The engines were still running at
full power because the pilot had attempted to
turn at the last second, and the crew couldn’t
switch them off because the wires had been
severed. The crash sheared away most of the
top half of the 747. People lay in pieces from
the
impact.
Flames
spread
through
the
carnage. A massive fire began to take over
130/599

the plane. Smoke filled the fuselage. To live,
people had to act quickly. They had to un-
buckle, move through the chaos onto the in-
tact wing, and then jump twenty feet onto
wreckage. Escape was possible, but not all of
the survivors would attempt it. Some bolted
into
action,
unbuckled
loved
ones
and
strangers and pushed them out to safety.
Others stayed put and were consumed. Soon
after, the center fuel tank exploded, killing
all but the seventy people who had made
their way outside.
According to Amanda Ripley’s book, The
Unthinkable, investigators later said the sur-
vivors of the initial impact had one minute
before the fire took them. In that one
minute, several dozen people who could have
escaped failed to take action, failed to break
free of paralysis.
Why did so many people flounder when
seconds mattered?
131/599

Psychologist Daniel Johnson has rigor-
ously studied this strange behavior. In his re-
search he interviewed survivors of the Ten-
erife crash among many other disasters, in-
cluding skyscraper fires and sinking ships, to
better understand why some people flee
when others do not.
In Johnson’s interview with Paul and Floy
Heck, both passengers on the Pan Am flight,
they recalled not only their traveling com-
panions sitting motionless as they hustled to
find a way out, but dozens of others who also
made no effort to stand as the Hecks raced
past them.
In the first moments of the incident, right
after the top of the plane was sliced open,
Paul Heck looked over to his wife, Floy. She
was motionless, frozen in place and unable
to
process
what
was
happening.
He
screamed for her to follow him. They un-
buckled, clasped hands, and he led her out of
the plane as the smoke began to billow. Floy
132/599

later realized she possibly could have saved
those sitting in a stupor just by yelling for
them to join her, but she too was in a daze,
with no thoughts of escape as she blindly fol-
lowed her husband. Years later, Floy Heck
was interviewed by the Orange County Re-
gister. She told the reporter she remembered
looking back just before leaping out of a gash
in the wall. She saw her friend still in the seat
next to where they had been sitting with her
hands folded in her lap, her eyes glassed
over. Her friend did not survive the fire.
In any perilous event, like a sinking ship or
a towering inferno, a shooting rampage or a
tornado, there is a chance you will become so
overwhelmed by the perilous overflow of am-
biguous information that you will do nothing
at all. You will float away and leave a sense-
less statue in your place. You may even lie
down. If no one comes to your aid, you will
die.
133/599

John
Leach,
a
psychologist
at
the
University of Lancaster, also studies freezing
under stress. He says about 75 percent of
people find it impossible to reason during a
catastrophic event or impending doom. On
the edges, the 15 or so percent on either side
of the bell curve react either with unim-
paired, heightened awareness or blubbering,
confused panic.
According to Johnson and Leach, the sort
of people who survive are the sort of people
who prepare for the worst and practice
ahead of time. They’ve done the research, or
built the shelter, or run the drills. They look
for the exits and imagine what they will do.
They were in a fire as a child or survived a
typhoon. These people don’t deliberate dur-
ing calamity because they’ve already done
the deliberation the other people around
them are just now going through.
Normalcy bias is stalling during a crisis
and pretending everything will continue to
134/599

be as fine and predictable as it was before.
Those who defeat it act when others don’t.
They move when others are considering
whether or not they should.
As Johnson points out, the brain must go
through
a
procedure
before
the
body
acts—cognition, perception, comprehension,
decision, implementation, and then move-
ment. There’s no way to overclock this, but
you can practice until these steps individu-
ally are no longer complex, and thus no
longer take up valuable brain computation
cycles. Johnson likens it to playing an instru-
ment. If you’ve never played a C chord on a
guitar, you have to think your way through it
and awkwardly press down on the strings
until you make a clumsy twang. With a few
minutes of practice, you can strum without
as much deliberation and create a more
pleasant sound.
To be clear, normalcy bias isn’t freezing at
the first signs of danger like a rabbit who
135/599

confronts a snake, which is a real behavior
humans can succumb to. To suddenly stop
moving and hope for the best is called fear
bradycardia, and it is an automatic and in-
voluntarily instinct. This is sometimes re-
ferred to as tonic immobility. Animals like
gazelles will become motionless if they sense
a predator is nearby in the hopes of tricking
its motion-tracking abilities by blending into
the background. Some animals go so far as to
feign death in what is called thanatosis.
In 2005, researchers at the University of
Rio de Janeiro were able to induce fear
bradycardia in humans just by showing sub-
jects photos of injured people. The parti-
cipants’ heart rates plummeted and their
muscles stiffened immediately. To be sure,
this sort of behavior happens in a disaster,
but we are talking about something different
with normalcy bias.
Much of your behavior is an attempt to
lower anxiety. You know you aren’t in any
136/599

danger when everything is safe and expected.
Normalcy bias is self-soothing through be-
lieving everything is just fine. If you can still
engage in your normal habits, still see the
world as if nothing bad is happening, then
your anxiety stays put. Normalcy bias is a
state of mind out of which you are attempt-
ing to make everything OK by believing it
still is.
Normalcy bias is refusing to believe ter-
rible events will include you even though you
have every reason to think otherwise. The
first thing you are likely to feel in the event of
a disaster is the supreme need to feel safe
and secure. When it becomes clear this is im-
possible, you drift into a daydream where it
is.
Survivors of 9/11 say they remember gath-
ering belongings before leaving offices and
cubicles. They put on coats and called loved
ones. They shut down their computers and
had conversations. Even in their descent,
137/599

most moved at a leisurely pace—no scream-
ing or running. There was no need for any-
one to say “Remain calm everyone,” because
they weren’t freaking out. They were begging
the world to return to normal by engaging in
acts of normalcy.
To reduce the anxiety of impending doom,
you first cling to what you know. You then
mine others for information. You strike up
dialogs with coworkers, friends, and family.
You become glued to the television and the
radio. You gather with others to trade what
you know so far. Some believe this is what
happened as the Bridge Creek–Moore F5
tornado approached, which caused some
people not to seek shelter. All the tools of
pattern recognition, all the routines you’ve
become accustomed to are rendered useless
in a horrific event. The emergency situation
is too novel and ambiguous. You have a tend-
ency
to
freeze
not
because
panic
has
138/599

overwhelmed you but because normalcy has
disappeared.
Ripley calls this moment when you freeze
“reflexive incredulity.” As your brain at-
tempts to disseminate the data, your deepest
desire is for everyone around you to assure
you the bad thing isn’t real. You wait for this
to happen past the point when it becomes
obvious it will not.
The holding pattern of normalcy bias con-
tinues until the ship lurches or the building
shifts. You may remain placid until the tor-
nado throws a car through your house or the
hurricane snaps the power lines. If everyone
else is milling around waiting for informa-
tion, you will too.
Those who are deeply concerned with
evacuation procedures—first responders, ar-
chitects, stadium personnel, the travel in-
dustry—are aware of normalcy bias, and
write about it in manuals and trade journals.
In
a
1985
paper
published
in
the
139/599

International Journal of Mass Emergencies
and Disasters, sociologists Shunji Mikami
and Ken’Ichi Ikeda at the University of
Tokyo identified the steps you are likely to go
through in a disaster. They said you have a
tendency to first interpret the situation with-
in the context of what you are familiar with
and to greatly underestimate the severity.
This is the moment, when seconds count,
that normalcy bias costs lives. A predictable
order of behaviors, they said, will then un-
fold. You will seek information from those
you trust first and then move on to those
nearby. Next, you’ll try to contact your family
if possible, and then you’ll begin to prepare
to evacuate or seek shelter. Finally, after all
of this, you’ll move. Mikami and Ikeda say
you are more likely to dawdle if you fail to
understand the seriousness of the situation
and have never been exposed to advice about
what to do or been in a similar circumstance.
Even worse, you stall longer if you fall back
140/599

on the old compare-and-contrast tendencies
where you try to convince yourself the en-
croaching peril is not much different than
what you are used to—normalcy bias.
They use a 1982 flood in Nagasaki as an
example. Light flooding occurred there every
year, and the residents assumed the heavy
rainfall was part of a familiar routine. Soon,
though, they realized the waters were getting
higher and doing so faster than in years past.
At 4:55 P.M., the government issued a flood
warning. Still, some waited to see just how
peculiar the flooding would be, how out of
the ordinary. Only 13 percent of residents
had evacuated by 9 P.M. In the end, 265
were killed.
When Hurricane Katrina bore down on my
home in Mississippi, I remember going to
the grocery store for food, water, and sup-
plies and being shocked by the number of
people who had only a few loaves of bread
and couple of bottles of soda in their carts. I
141/599

remember their frustration as they waited in
line behind me with all my bottled water and
canned goods. I told them, “Sorry, but you
can never be too prepared.” Their response?
“I don’t think it’s going to be a big deal.” I of-
ten wonder what those people did for the two
weeks we were without electricity and the
roads were impassable.
Normalcy bias is a proclivity you can’t be
rid of. Everyday life seems prosaic and
mundane because you are wired to see it as
such. If you weren’t, you would never be able
to handle the information overload. Think of
moving into a new apartment or home, or
buying a new car or cell phone. At first, you
notice everything and spend hours adjusting
settings or arranging furniture. After a while,
you get used to the normalcy and let things
go. You may even forget certain aspects of
your new home until a visitor points them
out to you and you rediscover them. You ac-
climate to your surroundings so you can
142/599

notice when things go awry; otherwise life
would be all noise and no signal.
Sometimes though, this habit of creating
background static and then ignoring it gets
in the way. Sometimes you see static when
you shouldn’t and yearn for normalcy when
it cannot be found. Hurricanes and floods,
for example, can be too big, slow, and ab-
stract to startle you into action. You truly
can’t see them coming. The solution, accord-
ing to Mikami, Ikeda, and other experts, is
repetition on the part of those who can help,
those who can see the danger better than
you. If enough warnings are given and
enough
instructions
are
broadcast,
then
those things become the new normal, and
you will spring into action.
Normalcy bias can be scaled up to larger
events as well. Global climate change, peak
oil, obesity epidemics, and stock market
crashes are good examples of larger, more
complex events in which people fail to act
143/599

because it is difficult to imagine just how ab-
normal life could become if the predictions
are true. Regular media over-hyping and
panic-building over issues like Y2K, swine
flu, SARS, and the like help fuel normalcy bi-
as on a global scale. Pundits on both sides of
politics warn of crises that can be averted
only by voting one way or the other. With so
much crying wolf, it can be difficult to de-
termine in the frenzied information land-
scape when to be alarmed, when it really is
not a drill. The first instinct is to gauge how
out of the norm the situation truly is and act
only when the problem crosses a threshold
past which it becomes impossible to ignore.
Of course, this is often after it is too late to
act.
144/599

8
Introspection
THE MISCONCEPTION: You know
why you like the things you like and
feel the way you feel.
THE TRUTH: The origin of certain
emotional states is unavailable to
you, and when pressed to explain
them, you will just make something
up.
Imagine a painting the world considers
beautiful, something like Starry Night by
Van Gogh. Now imagine you have to write an
essay on why it is popular. Go ahead, think of
a reasonable explanation. No, don’t keep

reading. Give it a shot. Explain why Van
Gogh’s work is great.
Is there a certain song you love, or a pho-
tograph? Perhaps there is a movie you keep
returning to over the years, or a book. Go
ahead and imagine one of those favorite
things. Now, in one sentence, try to explain
why you like it. Chances are, you will find it
difficult to put into words, but if pressed you
will probably be able to come up with
something.
The problem is, according to research,
your explanation is probably going to be total
bullshit. Tim Wilson at the University of Vir-
ginia demonstrated this in 1990 with the
Poster Test. He brought a group of students
into a room and showed them a series of
posters. The students were told they could
take any one they wanted as a gift and keep
it. He then brought in another group and
told them the same thing, but this time they
had to explain why they wanted the poster
146/599

they each picked. Wilson then waited six
months and asked the two groups what they
thought of their choices. The first group, the
ones who just got to grab a poster and leave,
all loved their choice. The second group, the
ones who had to write out why they were
choosing one over the others, hated theirs.
The first group, the grab-and-go people, usu-
ally picked a nice, fancy painting. The second
group, the ones who had to explain their
choice, usually picked an inspirational poster
with a cat clinging to a rope.
According to Wilson, when you are faced
with a decision in which you are forced to
think about your rationale, you start to turn
the volume in your emotional brain down
and the volume in your logical brain up. You
start creating a mental list of pros and cons
that would never have been conjured up if
you had gone with your gut. As Wilson noted
in his research, “Forming preferences is akin
147/599

to riding a bicycle; we can do it easily but
cannot easily explain how.”
Before Wilson’s work, the general con-
sensus was to see careful deliberation as
good, but he showed how the act of intro-
spection can sometimes lead you to make de-
cisions that look good on virtual paper but
leave you emotionally lacking. Wilson knew
previous research at Kent State had shown
that ruminations about your own depression
tend to make you more depressed, but dis-
traction leads to an improved mood. Some-
times, introspection is simply counterpro-
ductive. Research into introspection calls in-
to question the entire industry of critical
analysis of art—video games, music, film, po-
etry, literature—all of it. It also makes things
like focus groups and market analysis seem
less about the intrinsic quality of the things
being judged and more about what the
people doing the judging find to be plausible
explanations of their own feelings. When you
148/599

ask people why they do or do not like things,
they must then translate something from a
deep, emotional, primal part of their psyche
into the language of the higher, logical, ra-
tional world of words and sentences and
paragraphs. The problem here is those deep-
er recesses of the mind are perhaps inaccess-
ible and unconscious. The things that are
available to consciousness might not have
much to do with your preferences. Later,
when you attempt to justify your decisions or
emotional attachments, you start worrying
about what your explanation says about you
as a person, further tainting the validity of
your inner narrative.
In the Poster Test, most people truly pre-
ferred the nice painting to the inspirational
cat, but they couldn’t conjure up a rational
explanation of why, at least not in a way that
would make logical sense on paper. On the
other hand, you can write all sorts of bullshit
149/599

about a motivational poster. It has a stated
and tangible purpose.
Wilson conducted another experiment in
which people were shown two small photos
of two different people and were asked which
one was more attractive. They were then
handed what they were told was a larger ver-
sion of the photo they’d picked, but it was ac-
tually a picture of a completely different per-
son. They were then asked why they’d chosen
it. Each time, the person dutifully spun a
yarn explaining his or her choice. The person
had never seen the photo before, but that
didn’t make the task of explaining why he or
she had preferred it in an imaginary past any
more difficult.
Another of Wilson’s experiments had sub-
jects rate the quality of jam. He placed before
them five varieties of jam which had previ-
ously been ranked by Consumer Reports as
the first,
eleventh,
twenty-fourth,
thirty-
second, and forty-fourth best jams on the
150/599

market. One group tasted and ranked how
good they thought the jams were. The other
group had to write out what they did and did
not like about each one as they tasted it. As
with the posters, the people who didn’t have
to explain themselves gravitated toward the
same ones Consumer Reports said were best.
The people forced to introspect rated the
jams inconsistently and had varying prefer-
ences based on their explanations. Taste is
difficult to quantify and put into words, so
the explainers focused on other aspects like
texture or color or viscosity. None of which
in the end made much difference to the non-
explainers.
Believing you understand your motiva-
tions and desires, your likes and dislikes, is
called the introspection illusion. You believe
you know yourself and why you are the way
you are. You believe this knowledge tells you
how you will act in all future situations. Re-
search shows otherwise. Time after time,
151/599

experiments show introspection is not the
act of tapping into your innermost mental
constructs but is instead a fabrication. You
look at what you did, or how you felt, and
you make up some sort of explanation that
you can reasonably believe. If you have to tell
others, you make up an explanation they can
believe too. When it comes to explaining why
you like the things you like, you are not so
smart, and the very act of having to explain
yourself can change your attitudes.
In this new era of Twitter and Facebook
and blogs, just about everyone is broadcast-
ing his or her love or hate of art. Just look at
all the vitriol and praise being lobbed back
and forth over Avatar or Black Swan. When
Titanic earned its Oscars, some people were
saying it might just be the greatest film ever
made.
Now
it’s
considered
good
but
schmaltzy, a well-made film but decidedly
melodramatic. What will people think in a
hundred years?
152/599

It would be wise to remember that many of
the works we now consider classics were in
their time critically panned. For instance,
this is how one reviewer described Moby
Dick in 1851:
This is an ill-compounded mixture of
romance and matter-of-fact. The idea
of a connected and collected story has
obviously visited and abandoned its
writer again and again in the course of
composition. The style of his tale is in
places disfigured by mad (rather than
bad) English; and its catastrophe is
hastily, weakly, and obscurely man-
aged. We have little more to say in
reprobation or in recommendation of
this absurd book. Mr. Melville has to
thank himself only if his horrors and
his heroics are flung aside by the gen-
eral reader, as so much trash belong-
ing to the worst school of Bedlam lit-
erature—since he seems not so much
153/599

unable to learn as disdainful of learn-
ing the craft of an artist.
—HENRY F. CHORLEY, IN London
Athenaeum
This book is now considered one of a
handful of great American novels and is held
up as an example of the best pieces of literat-
ure ever written. Chances are, though, no
one can truly explain why.
154/599

9
The Availability Heuristic
THE MISCONCEPTION: With the ad-
vent of mass media, you understand
how the world works based on stat-
istics and facts culled from many
examples.
THE TRUTH: You are far more likely
to believe something is commonplace
if you can find just one example of it,
and you are far less likely to believe
in something you’ve never seen or
heard of before.
Do more words begin with “r” or have “r”
as the third letter?

Think about it for a second—rip, rat, re-
volver, reality, relinquish. If you are like
most people, you think there are more that
begin with “r”—but you’re wrong. More
words in the English language have the letter
in the third position than in the first—car,
bar, farce, market, dart. It is much easier to
believe the first option because it takes more
concentration to think of words with “r” in
the third position. Try it.
If someone you know gets sick from taking
a flu shot, you will be less likely to get one
even if it is statistically safe. In fact, if you
see a story on the news about someone dying
from the flu shot, that one isolated case
could be enough to keep you away from the
vaccine forever. On the other hand, if you
hear a news story about how eating sausage
leads to anal cancer, you will be skeptical,
because it has never happened to anyone you
know, and sausage, after all, is delicious. The
tendency to react more rapidly and to a
156/599

greater degree when considering information
you are familiar with is called the availability
heuristic.
The human mind is generated by a brain
that was formed under far different circum-
stances than the modern world offers up on a
daily basis. Over the last few million years,
much of our time was spent with fewer than
150 people, and what we knew about the
world was based on examples from our daily
lives. Mass media, statistical data, scientific
findings—these things are not digested as
easily as something you’ve seen with your
own eyes. The old adage “I’ll believe it when
I see it” is the availability heuristic at work.
Politicians use this all the time. Whenever
you hear a story that begins with “I met a
mother of two in Michigan who lost her job
because of a lack of funding for . . .” or
something similar, the politician hopes the
anecdote will sway your opinion. He or she is
betting that the availability heuristic will
157/599

influence you to assume that this one ex-
ample is indicative of a much larger group of
people.
It’s simply easier to believe something if
you are presented with examples than it is to
accept something presented in numbers or
abstract facts.
School shootings were considered to be a
dangerous
new
phenomenon
after
Columbine.
That
event
fundamentally
changed the way kids are treated in Americ-
an schools, and hundreds of books, sem-
inars, and films have been produced in an at-
tempt to understand the sudden epidemic.
The truth, however, was that there hadn’t
been an increase in school shootings. Ac-
cording to research by Barry Glassner, au-
thor of The Culture of Fear, during the time
when Columbine and other school shootings
got
major
media
attention,
violence
in
schools was down over 30 percent. Kids were
more likely to get shot in school before
158/599

Columbine, but the media during that time
hadn’t given you many examples. A typical
schoolkid is three times more likely to get hit
by lightning than to be shot by a classmate,
yet schools continue to guard against it as if
it could happen at any second.
Amos Tverksy and Daniel Kahneman pin-
pointed the availability heuristic, in their
1973 research. Their subjects had to listen to
a tape recording of names being said aloud
that included nineteen famous men and
twenty that the subjects had never heard be-
fore. They repeated the study with names of
women as well. After they heard the names,
subjects had to either recall as many names
as they could or identify them from a word
bank. About 66 percent of the people re-
called famous people more often than the
unfamiliar names, and 80 percent said the
lists contained more famous names than
non-famous. The word test about how often
“r” is in the third position was Tversky and
159/599

Kahneman’s idea too. In both studies they
showed the more available a bit of informa-
tion is, the faster you process it. The faster
you process it, the more you believe it and
the less likely you become to consider other
bits of info.
When you buy a lottery ticket, you imagine
yourself winning like those people on televi-
sion who get suddenly famous when their
numbers are chosen, because people who
don’t win don’t get interviewed. You are far
more likely to die in a car crash on the way to
buy the ticket than you are to win, but this
information isn’t as available. You don’t
think in statistics, you think in examples, in
stories. When it comes to buying lottery tick-
ets, fearing the West Nile virus, looking for
child molesters, and so on, you use the avail-
ability heuristic first and the facts second.
You decide the likelihood of a future event
on how easily you can imagine it, and if
you’ve been bombarded by reports or have
160/599

filled your head with fears, those images will
overshadow new information that might
contradict your beliefs.
161/599

10
The Bystander Effect
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
When
someone is hurt, people rush to their
aid.
THE TRUTH: The more people who
witness a person in distress, the less
likely it is that any one person will
help.
If your car were to break down and your cell
phone had no service, where do you think
you would have a better chance of getting
help—a country road or a busy street? To be
sure, more people will see you on a busy
street. On the country road, you might have

to wait a long time before someone comes
by. So which one?
Studies show you have a better chance on
the country road. Why?
Have you ever seen someone broken down
on the side of the road and thought, “I could
help them, but I’m sure someone will be
along.” Everyone thinks that. And no one
stops. This is called the bystander effect.
In 1968, Eleanor Bradley fell and broke
her leg in a busy department store. For forty
minutes,
people
just
stepped
over
and
around her until one man finally stopped to
see what was wrong. In 2000, a group of
young men attacked sixty women at a Cent-
ral Park parade in New York City. Thousands
of people looked on. No one used a cell
phone to call police. The culprit in both cases
was the bystander effect. In a crowd, your in-
clination to rush to someone’s aid fades, as if
diluted by the potential of the group. Every-
one thinks someone is going to eventually do
163/599

something, but with everyone waiting to-
gether, no one does.
The most famous illustration of this phe-
nomenon is the story of Kitty Genovese. Ac-
cording to a newspaper article in 1964, she
was stabbed by an attacker at 3 A.M. in a
parking lot in front of her New York City
apartment complex. The attacker ran away
when she screamed for help, but not one of
the thirty-eight witnesses came to her rescue.
The story goes on to say the attacker re-
turned over and over for thirty minutes while
people watched on from surrounding apart-
ment windows as he stabbed her. The story
has since been thoroughly debunked, a case
of sensational reporting, but at the time it
was written it led to intense interest in the
phenomenon from psychologists. Social psy-
chologists started studying the bystander ef-
fect soon after the story went viral, and they
determined that the more people present
when a person needs emergency help, the
164/599

less likely it is any one of them will lend a
hand.
In 1970, psychologists Bibb Latane and
John Darley created an experiment in which
they would drop pencils or coins. Sometimes
they would be in a group, sometimes with
one other person. They did this six thousand
times. The results? They got help 20 percent
of the time in a group, 40 percent of the time
with one other person. They decided to up
the stakes, and in their next experiment they
had someone fill out a questionnaire. After a
few minutes, smoke would start to fill the
room, billowing in from a wall vent. They ran
two versions of the experiment. In one, the
person was alone; in the other, two other
people were also filling out the question-
naire. When alone, people took about five
seconds to get up and freak out. Within
groups people took an average of 20 seconds
to notice. When alone, the subject would go
inspect the smoke and then leave the room
165/599

to tell the experimenter he or she thought
something was wrong. When in a group,
people just sat there looking at one another
until the smoke was so thick they couldn’t
see the questionnaire. Only three people in
eight runs of the group experiment left the
room, and they took an average of six
minutes to get up.
The findings suggest the fear of embar-
rassment plays into group dynamics. You see
the smoke, but you don’t want to look like a
fool, so you glance over at the other person
to see what they are doing. The other person
is thinking the same thing. Neither of you re-
act, so neither of you becomes alarmed. The
third person sees two people acting like
everything is OK, so that third person is even
less likely to freak out. Everyone is influen-
cing every other person’s perception of real-
ity thanks to another behavior called the illu-
sion of transparency. You tend to think other
people can tell what you are thinking and
166/599

feeling just by looking at you. You think the
other people can tell you are really worried
about the smoke, but they can’t. They think
the same thing. No one freaks out. This leads
to pluralistic ignorance—a situation where
everyone is thinking the same thing but be-
lieves he or she is the only person who thinks
it. After the smoke-filled room experiment,
all the participants reported they were freak-
ing out on the inside, but since no one else
seemed alarmed, they assumed it must just
be their own anxiety.
The researchers decided to up the ante
once more. This time, they had people fill out
a questionnaire while the experimenter, a
woman, shouted in the other room about
how she had injured her leg. When alone, 70
percent of people left the room to check on
her. When in a group, 40 percent checked. If
you were to walk along a bridge and see
someone in the water screaming for help,
you would feel a much greater urge to leap in
167/599

and pull them to safety than you would if you
were part of a crowd. When it’s just you, all
the responsibility to help is yours. The
bystander effect gets stronger when you
think the person who needs help is being
harmed by someone that person knows.
Lance Shotland and Margaret Straw showed
in a 1978 experiment when people saw two
actors, a man and a woman, pretending to
physically fight, they often wouldn’t inter-
vene if the woman shouted, “I don’t know
why I ever married you!” People helped 65
percent of the time if she instead shouted, “I
don’t know you!” Many other studies have
shown it takes only one person to help for
others to join in. Whether it is to donate
blood, assist someone in changing a tire,
drop money into a performer’s coffers, or
stop a fight—people rush to help once they
see another person leading by example.
One final, awesome example is the Good
Samaritan experiment. Darley and Batson in
168/599

1973 got a group of Princeton Theological
Seminary students together and told them to
prepare a speech on the parable of the Good
Samaritan from the Bible. The point of the
parable is to stop and help people in need. In
the Gospel of Luke, Jesus tells his disciples
about a traveler who is beaten and robbed
then left to die along a road. A priest and an-
other man walk past him, but a Samaritan
stops to help even though the man is Jewish
and Samaritans weren’t in the habit of help-
ing out Jews. After filling out some question-
naires, with the story fresh in their minds,
some groups were told they were late to give
the speech in a nearby building. In other
groups the subjects were told they had plenty
of time. Along their path to the other build-
ing an actor was slumped over and groaning,
pretending to be sick and in need of help. Of
the seminary students who had plenty of
time, about 60 percent stopped and helped.
The ones in a rush? Ten percent helped, and
169/599

some even stepped over the actor on their
way.
So the takeaway here is to remember you
are not so smart when it comes to helping
people. In a crowded room, or a public
street, you can expect people to freeze up
and look around at one another.
Knowing that, you should always be the
first person to break away from the pack and
offer help—or attempt escape—because you
can be certain no one else will.
170/599

11
The Dunning-Kruger Effect
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
can
predict how well you would perform
in any situation.
THE
TRUTH:
You
are
generally
pretty bad at estimating your com-
petence and the difficulty of complex
tasks.
Imagine you are very good at a particular
game. Pick anything—chess, Street Fighter,
poker—doesn’t matter. You play this game
with friends all the time, and you always win.
You get so good at it, you start to think you
could win a tournament. You get online and
find where the next regional tournament is;

you pay the entrance fee and get your ass
handed to you in the first round. It turns out,
you are not so smart. All this time, you
thought you were among the best of the best,
but you were really just an amateur. This is
the Dunning-Kruger effect, and it’s a basic
element of human nature.
Think of all the You Tube stars over the
last few years—the people poorly twirling
weapons and singing off-key. These perform-
ances are terrible, and not in a self-aware,
ironic way. No, they are genuinely awful, and
you wonder why someone would put them-
selves on a worldwide stage in such an em-
barrassing way. The thing is, they don’t ima-
gine the worldwide audience as being more
sophisticated than the small audience of
friends, family, and peers they usually stand
before. As the philosopher Bertrand Russell
once said, “In the modern world the stupid
are cocksure while the intelligent are full of
doubt.”
172/599

The Dunning-Kruger effect is what makes
America’s Got Talent and American Idol
possible. At the local karaoke bar you might
be the best singer in the room. Up against
the entire country? Not so much.
Have you ever wondered why people with
advanced degrees in climate science or bio-
logy don’t get online and debate global
warming or evolution? The less you know
about a subject, the less you believe there is
to know in total. Only once you have some
experience do you start to recognize the
breadth and depth you have yet to plunder.
Of course, these are generalities. The eco-
nomist Robin Hanson noted in 2008 that the
Dunning-Kruger effect becomes a popular
catchphrase near election time because it
helps to paint opponents as being morons.
The actual research that coined the term
was performed by Justin Kruger and David
Dunning in experiments at Cornell around
1999. They had students take humor and
173/599

logic tests and then report how well they
thought they had scored. Some people accur-
ately predicted their own skill levels. Some
knew they sucked at humor, and they were
right. Others had a hunch they were better at
telling jokes than most and had this belief
confirmed. So sometimes people who are
really good at something are well aware and
can accurately predict their scores, but not
always. Overall, the study showed you are
not
very
good
at
estimating
your
own
competence.
More recent studies have attempted to re-
fute the absolute black-and-white predic-
tions of Dunning-Kruger—that the unskilled
are the least aware of it. A study by Burson,
Larrick, and Klayman in 2006 showed that
“on easy tasks, where there is a positive bias,
the best performers are also the most accur-
ate in estimating their standing, but on diffi-
cult tasks, where there is a negative bias, the
worst performers are the most accurate.”
174/599

So the Dunning-Kruger effect isn’t always
influencing you to think that you are awe-
some when you are actually mediocre. It
breaks down like this: The more skilled you
are, the more practice you’ve put in, the
more experience you have, the better you can
compare yourself to others. As you strive to
improve, you begin to better understand
where you need work. You start to see the
complexity and nuance; you discover mas-
ters of your craft and compare yourself to
them and see where you are lacking. On the
other hand, the less skilled you are, the less
practice you’ve put in, and the fewer experi-
ences you have, the worse you are at compar-
ing yourself to others on certain tasks. Your
peers don’t call you out because they know as
little as you do, or they don’t want to hurt
your feelings. Your narrow advantage over
novices leads you to think you are the shit.
Charles Darwin said it best: “Ignorance more
frequently
begets
confidence
than
does
175/599

knowledge.” Whether it’s playing guitar or
writing short stories or telling jokes or taking
photos—whatever—amateurs are far more
likely to think they are experts than actual
experts are. Education is as much about
learning what you don’t know as it is about
adding to what you do.
The recent explosion of reality program-
ming is a great example of the Dunning-
Kruger effect. A whole industry of assholes is
making a living off of making attractive yet
untalented people believe they are actually
genius auteurs. The bubble around reality
stars is so thick, they may never escape it. At
some point, the audience is in on the
joke—yet the people in the center of the
tragedy are often completely unaware.
As someone moves from novice to amateur
to expert to master, the lines between each
stage are difficult to recognize. The farther
ahead you get, the longer it takes to progress.
Yet the time it takes to go from novice to
176/599

amateur feels rapid, and that’s where the
Dunning-Kruger effect strikes. You think the
same amount of practice will move you from
amateur to expert, but it won’t.
Everyone experiences the Dunning-Kruger
effect from time to time. Being honest with
yourself and recognizing all your faults and
weaknesses is not a pleasant way to live.
Feeling inadequate or incompetent is para-
lyzing—you have to plow through those emo-
tions to get out of bed. Seen along a
spectrum, Dunning-Kruger is on the oppos-
ite end from depression with its crippling
insecurity.
Don’t let the Dunning-Kruger effect cast
its shadow over you. If you want to be great
at something, you have to practice, and then
you have to sample the work of people who
have been doing it for their whole lives.
Compare and contrast and eat some humble
pie.
177/599

12
Apophenia
THE MISCONCEPTION: Some coin-
cidences are so miraculous, they must
have meaning.
THE TRUTH: Coincidences are a
routine part of life, even the seem-
ingly miraculous ones. Any meaning
applied to them comes from your
mind.
Screenwriters and novelists have discovered
over the years a number of tropes that you
tend to understand without much explana-
tion, plots that satisfy the mind of every
viewer or reader.

Every story needs a strong protagonist
with whom you can identify. If they are down
on their luck or recently fell from grace, you
see them as being approachable. If they are
plucky and face great odds, again, you root
for them without having to think about it.
Early on, the protagonist will save someone
without having to, and you start to like him
or her. On the other side, you need a dast-
ardly antagonist who harms someone for no
reason, a person who ignores the rules and
wants only to satisfy him- or herself no mat-
ter the cost. The hero or heroine leaves his or
her normal world and enters into a new life
full of adventure. Just when it seems as
though the protagonist will fail, he or she
overcomes whatever has been in the way, in
order to defeat the antagonist, sometimes
even saving the world in the process. When
the hero or heroine returns to home, he or
she has been changed for the better. If the
179/599

story is a tragedy, the protagonist ends up
worse off than when the story began.
Joseph Campbell made it his life’s work to
identify the common mythology in all hu-
mans, the stories you and everyone else
know in your hearts. He called the outline
above the hero’s journey, and if you think
about all the movies and books you’ve diges-
ted over the years, you will recognize almost
every story is some variation of this tale.
From folklore and theater, to modern cinema
and video games, the hero’s journey is a
monomyth that plugs into your mind like a
key into a lock.
You love to watch highly paid actors play
professional make-believe because you nat-
urally think in images and stories, in narrat-
ives that unfold with characters who fill up
your world. Math, science, and logic are
much harder to contemplate than social situ-
ations. You are keenly aware of what role you
play and who is on the stage, the story of
180/599

your life. Just as with television and film,
your memory tends to delete the boring parts
and focus on the highlights—the plot points.
A certain kind of story, a mystery, plays on
a type of narrative you often believe to be un-
folding in the real world. In a mystery like
The Da Vinci Code, or in a television series
like Lost, where mysterious happenings are
at the center of the plot, clues pop up that
turn out to be connected in some strange
way. You can’t help but be intrigued by the
patterns slowly coalescing. It drives you
crazy. You find yourself compelled to keep
turning the page or popping in the next disc
to see what happens, to see how everything
connects in the end.
When you do this in the real world, it is
called apophenia. Apophenia is an umbrella
term that encompasses other phenomena,
like the Texas sharpshooter fallacy and par-
eidolia. When you commit the Texas sharp-
shooter fallacy, you draw a circle around a
181/599

series of random events and decide there is
some meaning in the chaos that isn’t really
there. In pareidolia, you see shapes like
clouds or tree limbs as people or faces.
Apophenia is refusing to believe in clutter
and noise, in coincidence and chance.
Apophenia most often appears in your life
when you experience synchronicity. Small
moments of synchronicity seem meaningful
even when you know they can’t be. If the
date lines up in an interesting way, like say
8/9/10, people talk about it. You can’t just
ignore it when something that should be ran-
dom sorts itself out and becomes orderly.
The clock reads 11:11 P.M. The next time you
look, it reads 12:12 A.M. A brief sense of
wonder turns your head askew, and then you
move on. Synchronicity may show up in big-
ger ways as well. If you had a dream about a
terrible flood and then turned on the morn-
ing news to see a flood had washed away the
homes of hundreds of people in a distant
182/599

place, it would be hard not to feel a chill run
down your spine.
Apophenia becomes an issue only when
you decide coincidences and random sorting
are more than the occasional signal rising
from the noise. You might think deaths al-
ways come in threes when deaths are a con-
stant part of life. You might find it amazing
you share the same birthday as a dozen of
your favorite celebrities, even though at any
given time you share your birthday with
about 16 million people. You might think the
number 23 has some special power because
it appears so often, when it doesn’t appear
any more than other numbers. Maybe you
gamble all night, convinced you are seeing
patterns in the cards or meaning in the
wheels of the slot machine, yet the odds nev-
er change. You might see a person who wins
the lottery three times in a row as having an
extra helping of magical luck, but multiple
lottery winners are actually rather common.
183/599

When you connect the dots in your life in a
way that tells a story, and then you interpret
the story to have a special meaning, this is
true apophenia. Say you are crossing the
street when a homeless man grabs your shirt
and pulls you out of traffic just as a motor-
cycle goes screaming by. You offer to give
him money in appreciation for saving your
life, and he refuses. The next day you read in
the newspaper about the rise in homeless-
ness in your city. A week later, you are
searching online for a new job and see a pos-
ition is open for a social worker in a city
you’ve always wanted to live in. You might
think, in the story of your life, these are all
scenes leading up to your destiny as a cham-
pion of the downtrodden. You quit your job,
move far away, and pay it forward. In this
way, you can see apophenia isn’t always a
bad thing. You need a sense of meaning to
get out of bed, to push forward against the
184/599

grain. Just remember that meaning comes
only from within.
Your mind is preorganized to notice order,
even when the order is defined by your cul-
ture and not your synapses. The ancient
Greeks and Babylonians believed numbers
held special sacred meanings, and they at-
tached numerical values to all aspects of hu-
manity. The early Christians were fond of do-
ing the same, especially (cf. the number
three and the Trinity). In all religions and
cultures, certain numbers are occasionally
promoted above the others as having special
significance. Once this happens, apophenia
causes people to notice them more than usu-
al. In general, you prefer nice round num-
bers that correspond to the decimal system
you’ve grown accustomed to using. When
you have a choice, apophenia influences you
to sort items into groups that have meaning,
like ten, fifty, one hundred, and so on. As a
185/599

society, currency notes are influenced by the
same affection for pleasing numerals.
The
law
of
truly
large
numbers
is
something skeptics like to point out when
apophenia strikes. The law says in a large
sample of occurrences, many coincidences
will emerge. On a planet with close to 7 bil-
lion people, there is a lot of opportunity for
flukes. When people notice coincidences,
they remember them and tell others. Some-
times they make their way into the news.
When coincidences don’t happen, no one
cares. You end up with an echo chamber of
tales where stories of coincidence have no
competition.
J. E. Littlewood, a mathematician at Cam-
bridge University, wrote about the law of
truly large numbers in his 1986 book, Little-
wood’s Miscellany. He said the average per-
son is alert for about eight hours every day,
and something happens to the average per-
son about once a second. At this rate, you
186/599

will experience 1 million events every thirty-
five days. This means when you say the
chances of something happening are one in a
million, it also means about once a month.
The monthly miracle is called Littlewood’s
Law.
More often than not, apophenia is the res-
ult of the most dependable of all delu-
sions—the confirmation bias. You see what
you want to see and ignore the rest. When
what you want to see is something meaning-
ful, you ignore all the things in the story of
your life that are meaningless. Apophenia
isn’t just seeing order in chaos, it is believing
you were destined to see it. It is believing
miracles are so rare you should stand up and
take notice when they occur, so you can de-
code their meaning. Mathematically speak-
ing, though, there is a miracle happening
every time you turn a page of this book.
187/599

13
Brand Loyalty
THE MISCONCEPTION: You prefer
the things you own over the things
you don’t because you made rational
choices when you bought them.
THE TRUTH: You prefer the things
you
own
because
you
rationalize
your past choices to protect your
sense of self.
The Internet changed the way people argue.
Check any comment system, forum, or
message board and you will find people go-
ing at it, debating why their chosen product
is better than the other guy’s.

Mac vs. PC, PS3 vs. Xbox 360, iPhone vs.
Android—it goes on and on.
Usually,
these
arguments
are
between
men, because men will defend their ego no
matter how slight the insult. These are also
usually about geeky things that cost lots of
money, because these battles take place on
the Internet, where tech-savvy people get
rowdy, and the more expensive a purchase,
the greater the loyalty to it.
In the world of Web site comment sec-
tions, rabid fans are often called fanboys. It
is Internet slang for obsessive fandom. The
term originated at a comic book convention
in 1973 as the title of a fan-made magazine
about Marvel comics, but in recent years it
mutated into a soft insult that can be applied
to anyone who goes out of his way to tell oth-
ers about his love for . . . stuff. When
someone writes a dozen paragraphs online
defending his favorite thing or slandering a
competitor, he is quickly branded as a
189/599

fanboy. Fanboyism isn’t anything new, it’s
just a component of branding, which is
something marketers and advertisers have
known about since Quaker Oats created a
friendly logo to go on their burlap sacks.
There was, of course, no friendly Quaker
family making the oats back in 1877. The
company wanted people to associate the
trustworthiness and honesty of Quakers with
their product. It worked.
This was one of the first attempts to create
brand loyalty—that nebulous emotional con-
nection people have with certain companies,
which turns them into defenders and advoc-
ates for corporations who don’t give a shit.
In experiments at Baylor University where
people were given Coke and Pepsi in un-
marked cups and then hooked up to a brain
scanner, the device clearly showed a certain
number of them preferred Pepsi while tast-
ing it. When those people were told they
were drinking Pepsi, a fraction of them, the
190/599

ones who had enjoyed Coke all their lives,
did
something
unexpected.
The
scanner
showed their brains scrambling the pleasure
signals, dampening them. They then told the
experimenter afterward they had preferred
Coke in the taste tests.
They lied, but in their subjective experi-
ence of the situation, they didn’t. They really
did feel like they preferred Coke after it was
all over, and they altered their memories to
match
their
emotions.
They
had
been
branded somewhere in the past and were
loyal to Coke. Even if they actually enjoyed
Pepsi more, huge mental constructs preven-
ted
them
from
admitting
it,
even
to
themselves.
Add this sort of loyalty to something ex-
pensive, or a hobby that demands a large in-
vestment of time and money, and you get a
fanboy. Fanboys defend their favorite stuff
and ridicule the competition, ignoring facts if
they contradict their emotional connection.
191/599

So what creates this emotional connection
to
stuff
and
the
companies
who
make
doodads?
Choice.
Those people who have no choice but to
buy certain products, like toilet paper and
gasoline, are called “hostages” by marketers
and advertising agencies. Since they can’t
choose to own or not to own the product,
they are far less likely to care if one version
of toilet paper is better than another, or one
gas
station’s
fuel
is
made
by
Shell
or
Chevron.
On the other hand, if the product is unne-
cessary, like an iPad, there is a great chance
the customer will become a fanboy because
he had to choose to spend a big chunk of
money on it. It’s the choosing of one thing
over another that leads to narratives about
why you did it, which usually tie in to your
self-image.
192/599

Branding builds on this by giving you the
option to create the person you think you are
through choosing to align yourself with the
mystique of certain products.
Apple advertising, for instance, doesn’t
mention how good their computers are. In-
stead, they give you examples of the sort of
people who purchase those computers. The
idea is to encourage you to say, Yeah, I’m not
some stuffy, conservative nerd. I have taste
and talent and took art classes in college.
Are
Apple
computers
better
than
Microsoft-based computers? Is one better
than the other when looked at empirically,
based on data and analysis and testing and
objective comparisons?
It doesn’t matter, because those considera-
tions come after a person has begun to see
him- or herself as the sort of person who
would own one. If you see yourself as the
kind of person who owns Apple computers,
or who drives hybrids, or who smokes
193/599

Camels, you’ve been branded. And once a
person is branded, that person will defend
the brand by finding flaws in the alternative
choice and pointing out benefits in his or her
own.
There are a number of cognitive biases
that converge to create this behavior.
The endowment effect pops up when you
feel like the things you own are superior to
the things you do not.
Psychologists demonstrate this by asking a
group of people how much they think a water
bottle is worth. The group will agree to an
amount around $5, and then someone in the
group will be given the bottle for free.
Then, after an hour, they ask the person
how much they would be willing to sell the
bottle back to the experimenter for. They
usually ask for more money, like $8. Owner-
ship adds special emotional value to things,
even if those things were free.
194/599

Another bias is the sunk cost fallacy. This
is when you’ve spent money on something
you don’t want to own or don’t want to do
and can’t get it back. For instance, you might
pay too much for some take-out food that
really sucks, but you eat it anyway, or you sit
through a movie even after you realize it’s
terrible.
Sunk cost can creep up on you too. Maybe
you’ve been a subscriber to something for a
long time and you realize it costs too much,
but you don’t end your subscription because
of all the money you’ve invested in the ser-
vice so far. Is Blockbuster better than Netflix,
or TiVo better than a generic DVR? If you’ve
spent a lot of money on subscription fees,
you might be unwilling to switch to alternat-
ives because you feel invested in the brand.
These biases feed into the big daddy of be-
haviors that are responsible for branding,
fanboyism, and Internet arguments about
why the thing you own is better than the
195/599

thing the other guy owns—choice supportive
bias.
It works like this: You have several options
for, say, a new television. Before you make a
choice, you tend to compare and contrast all
the different qualities of all the televisions on
the market. Which is better, Samsung or
Sony, plasma or LCD, 1080p or 1080i—ugh,
so many variables! You eventually settle on
one option, and after you make your decision
you then look back and rationalize your ac-
tions by believing your television was the
best of all the televisions you could have
picked.
In retail, this is a well-understood phe-
nomenon, and to prevent buyer’s remorse
they try not to overwhelm you with choice.
Studies show that if you have only a handful
of options at the point of purchase, you will
be less likely to fret about your decision
afterward.
196/599

It’s purely emotional, the moment you
pick. People with brain damage to their emo-
tional centers who have been rendered into
Spock-like beings of pure logic find it im-
possible to decide things as simple as which
brand of cereal to buy. They stand transfixed
in the aisle, contemplating every element of
their potential decision—the calories, the
shapes, the net weight—everything. They
can’t pick because they have no emotional
connection to anything.
To combat post-decisional dissonance, the
feeling you have committed to one option
when the other option may have been better,
you make yourself feel justified in what you
selected to lower the anxiety brought on by
questioning yourself.
All of this forms a giant neurological
cluster of associations, emotions, details of
self-image, and biases around the things you
own.
197/599

So the next time you get ready to launch
into one hundred reasons why your cell
phone or TV or car is better than someone
else’s, hesitate. Because you’re not trying to
change the other person’s mind—you’re try-
ing to prop up your own.
198/599

14
The Argument from Authority
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
are
more concerned with the validity of
information than the person deliver-
ing it.
THE TRUTH: The status and creden-
tials of an individual greatly influ-
ence your perception of that individu-
al’s message.
It would be hard not to feel somewhat intim-
idated while sitting across from a professor
with all his or her degrees and certificates
staring back at you. Behind that huge desk,
surrounded by books and ancient statues, in-
side
an
aging,
hallowed
building,
the

professor seems to channel the might and
weight of all of academia.
When he or she opines on the history of
civilization, you might be inclined to see the
professor’s point of view as more correct,
more thoroughly meditated upon than that
of your cousin who collects ketchup packets.
You would be right. Indeed, it is more likely
that a professor of history will know why the
Roman Empire fell and what can be learned
from it than your condiment-obsessed relat-
ive will know these things. Those who devote
their lives to the study or practice of a given
idea are worth listening to when it comes to
the areas of their expertise, but this doesn’t
mean all their opinions are golden.
If the professor tells you how much he or
she wishes the Spice Girls would reunite and
play on campus, you would be committing
logical fallacy if you decided you should
maybe rethink your musical taste. When you
see the opinions of some people as better
200/599

than others on the merit of their status or
training
alone,
you
are
arguing
from
authority.
Should you listen to a highly trained scuba
diver’s
advice
before
plunging
into
the
depths of the ocean? Yes. Should you believe
that person when the diver talks about see-
ing a mermaid making love to a dolphin? No.
This book often brings up the consensus of
scientists on certain behaviors as a way to
prove how deluded you are. It is not a fallacy
to trust the consensus of thousands of re-
searchers on how to interpret the evidence
provided by decades of studies. Science fo-
cuses on the facts, not the people who un-
earth them, but that doesn’t mean large
groups of people can’t agree on something
that is totally wrong.
Neurologist Walter Freeman won the 1949
Nobel Prize for Medicine in honor of his
work—lobotomizing mentally ill people by
jabbing a spike behind their eyeballs. Some
201/599

reports say he performed this technique
around 2,500 times, often without anes-
thesia. He took a practice that had previously
required drilling into the skull and turned it
into an outpatient procedure. At first, he
used an ice pick, but eventually he developed
short, thin metal spears he drove through the
back of the eye socket with a mallet. The
technique made formerly unruly mental pa-
tients calmer, as you might imagine severe
brain damage would. It became a popular
way to treat patients in mental facilities, and
Freeman drove a van he called the loboto-
mobile around the country to teach the tech-
nique wherever he could. Somewhere close
to twenty thousand people were lobotomized
in this way before science corrected itself.
Freeman was criticized by many in his hey-
day, but for two decades his work continued,
and it earned him the highest accolade pos-
sible. Even the sister of President John F.
Kennedy was lobotomized. Today, the ice-
202/599

pick lobotomy is condemned by medicine as
a barbaric and naive approach to dealing
with mental illness.
The rise and fall of the ice-pick lobotomy
had a lot to do with the argument from au-
thority. Freeman and others had jumped the
gun on the scientific evidence. Without all
the facts in place, they used psychosurgery
because it gave them the results they were
looking for. Hospitals welcomed Dr. Free-
man; his authority went unquestioned as,
one after another, he pulled aside patients
who needed help and turned them into zom-
bies. Just two decades later, the science
caught up to Freeman and revealed that
what he was doing was unnecessary from a
medical standpoint and horrific from a mor-
al one. His license to practice was revoked,
and he died an outcast. The same community
who lauded him in one era rejected him in
another.
203/599

This sort of turnover in science is com-
mon, although it happens less today than in
years past when so little was understood
about these sorts of influences. Like most
modern professions, science guards against
the argument from authority by working
against it, questioning every nugget of new
info so as to avoid what happened in neuro-
logy throughout the 1940s. Still, the argu-
ment does play a role. Whether in churches
or legislatures, botany or business, those
who are held in high regard can cause a lot of
damage when no one is willing to question
their authority.
You naturally look to those in power as
having something special you lack, a spark of
something you would like to see inside your-
self. This is why people sometimes subscribe
to the beliefs of celebrities who endorse exot-
ic religions or denounce sound medicines.
If
you
feel
more
inclined
to
believe
something is true because it comes from a
204/599

person with prestige, you are letting the ar-
gument from authority spin your head. If
something is controversial, it usually means
there are many experts who disagree. You
would be wise to come to your own conclu-
sions based on the evidence, not the people
delivering it. On the other hand, if there is
widespread consensus, you can relax your
skepticism. Just don’t relax it completely.
If a celebrity basketball player tells you to
buy a particular brand of batteries, ask your-
self if the basketball player seems like an ex-
pert on electrochemical energy storage units
before you take the player’s word.
205/599

15
The Argument from Ignorance
THE MISCONCEPTION: When you
can’t explain something, you focus on
what you can prove.
THE TRUTH: When you are unsure
of something, you are more likely to
accept strange explanations.
There is a pleasant sense of wonder that can
fill your heart when you take in the natural
world and realize how much you don’t know.
How does the mighty oak spring from a
lowly acorn? How does a river carve out a
vast canyon? How could the universe begin
from a microscopic dot and explode into all
the matter and energy you see today? How

can you be thinking about calling someone
right as they dial your number and tell you
they were thinking of you too?
It is easy to succumb to mystical thinking
when you compare what you know for sure
to the vast expanse of things yet unsolved. If
you aren’t up-to-date on the latest scientific
research, you may put concepts like tiny
seeds becoming giant plants in the realm of
the unknown. You’ve probably met people
like this, who see things like magnets and
Stonehenge as unsolvable mysteries. People
in awe of such things see them as magical
and miraculous, or perhaps believe the ex-
planation is beyond modern human compre-
hension. The emotions roused when you are
humbled by the splendor of nature and the
ingenuity of ancient people are nice. It feels
good to ponder the mysterious.
The only problem with these emotions is
science has explained much of the world
both outside and inside your head. This is a
207/599

bummer for fans of Unsolved Mysteries or
Ripley’s Believe it or Not or In Search Of.
More recently, Ghost Hunters and The Unex-
plained have earned big ratings by showcas-
ing the spooky stuff science has ruined.
Outside of science, mystical New Age
props like crystals and dowsing rods play on
your tendency toward pattern recognition.
You look for cause and effect, but when the
cause is unclear you commit a logical fallacy
by thinking all the possible causes are equal.
That strange feeling you get when you
walk into an old house—could it be a haunt-
ing? Are those strange creaks and bumps at-
tempts at communication from the spirit
realm? The strange lights in the sky, are they
aliens preparing to probe unsuspecting farm
families? Did those tracks in the forest come
from a friendly, misunderstood Sasquatch?
Most of what gets filed under the realm of
the paranormal is the result of people com-
mitting
the
argument-from-ignorance
208/599

fallacy, or argumentum ad ignorantiam if
you prefer the Latin logic terminology. Put
simply, this is when you decide something is
true or false because you can’t find evidence
to the contrary. You don’t know what the
truth is, so you assume any explanation is as
good as another. Maybe those lights were ali-
en spacecraft, maybe not. You don’t know, so
you think the likelihood they were inter-
galactic visitors is roughly the same as those
lights being from a helicopter far away.
You can’t disprove something you don’t
know anything about, and the argument-
from-ignorance fallacy can make you feel as
though something is possible because you
can’t prove otherwise. You know this book is
in your hands right now, but when you leave
the room you can’t be sure it does not come
to life and eat your dust bunnies for susten-
ance. Despite this, you don’t feel inclined to
lock away this book at night just in case it
builds up enough strength to devour your
209/599

face. You not being able to disprove this book
secretly hungers for flesh does not improve
the odds it does. The same holds true for lep-
rechauns and unicorns, chupacabra and the
Loch Ness Monster. These things aren’t
more likely just because you can’t prove they
don’t exist.
Lack of proof neither confirms nor denies
a proposition. Is there life on other planets?
We can’t say yes or no just because it hasn’t
been discovered yet. No matter how you feel
about the question, you would be incorrect to
assume the lack of evidence proves your as-
sumption. At the same time, you can’t just
live your life so open-minded you never ac-
cept proof. Was Michael Jackson a time trav-
eler sent from the future to teach the world
to moonwalk? You can’t exactly prove this is
false, but there is enough evidence to the
contrary to assume he was a singer born in
1958, not a time lord from 3022.
210/599

Some people think the Holocaust didn’t
happen, or human beings never walked on
the moon, but there is plenty of evidence for
both. People who refuse to believe such
things claim they need more evidence before
they can change their minds, but no amount
of evidence will satisfy them. Any shred of
doubt allows them to argue from ignorance.
211/599

16
The Straw Man Fallacy
THE MISCONCEPTION: When you
argue, you try to stick to the facts.
THE TRUTH: In any argument, an-
ger will tempt you to reframe your
opponent’s position.
When you are losing an argument, you often
use a variety of deceptive techniques to bol-
ster your opinion. You aren’t trying to be
sneaky, but the human mind tends to follow
predictable patterns when you get angry with
other people and do battle with words.
One of the most reliable and sturdy logical
fallacies is the straw man, and even though
its probability of appearing is high, you often

don’t notice when you are using it or being
beat over the head with it.
It works like this: When you get into an ar-
gument about either something personal or
something more public and abstract, you
sometimes resort to constructing a character
who you find easier to refute, argue, and dis-
agree with, or you create a position the other
person isn’t even suggesting or defending.
This is a straw man.
It happens so often, professional debaters
and science advocates are trained to look for
the straw man fallacy both in themselves and
opponents when asserting their opinions or
shooting down the claims of others. The
straw man fallacy takes the facts and asser-
tions of your opponent and replaces them
with an artificial argument you feel more
comfortable dealing with.
The straw man fallacy follows a familiar
pattern. You first build the straw man, then
you attack it, then you point out how easy it
213/599

was to defeat it, and then you come to a
conclusion.
For instance, say you are arguing about
whether or not people should be allowed to
own pet chickens. You think chickens are
hideous creatures, thanks to an unfortunate
incident in childhood when you were at-
tacked by a bloodthirsty hen at a petting zoo,
and since then you have made it your life’s
mission to keep poultry away from children.
Your opponent wants the city ordinances to
be changed so he can breed fancy varieties of
chickens who look like sea anemones and sell
them to pet stores.
You say, “If we allow people to breed
chickens in their backyards, soon they’ll be
in the streets and on the subway. Eventually,
people will be taking their chickens to work
with them and including them in Christmas
cards with the rest of the family. In a world
like that, what will happen to the poultry in-
dustry? No one will want to eat something
214/599

that could be their pet. I don’t think I want to
live in a world like that, would you? So, no,
we shouldn’t allow this ordinance to pass.”
In creating a fantasy scenario where the
world goes mad if the other person’s argu-
ment were to win, you have constructed a
straw man. It is easy to see the downsides of
and hard to defend, but it also isn’t what the
other person was suggesting. Now the other
person has to clarify his or her argument by
assuring everyone he or she has no desire to
see restaurant chains close because of this
proposal. The other person now must argue
against the feathery doomsday you’ve inven-
ted instead of just pointing out the reason-
able ways people could be allowed to raise a
few domesticated fowl.
Within any debate over a controversial
topic, you will see straw men tossed out by
both sides. Sometimes people morph the
straw man into a warning about a slippery
slope where allowing one side to win would
215/599

put humanity on a course of destruction. Any
time someone begins an attack with “So
you’re saying we should all just . . .” or
“Everyone knows . . . ,” you can bet a straw
man is coming. When you start or someone
else starts to imagine a future hellscape
thanks to the ideas of the opposition becom-
ing reality, there is a straw man in the room.
Straw men can also be born out of ignorance.
If someone says, “Scientists tell us we all
come
from
monkeys,
and
that’s
why
I
homeschool,” this person is using a straw
man, because science doesn’t say we all come
from monkeys.
Pay attention the next time you disagree
with someone, and see if you start or the oth-
er person starts to construct a man out of
straw. Keep in mind whoever does it is using
a logical fallacy, and even if that person suc-
ceeds, he or she didn’t really win.
216/599

17
The Ad Hominem Fallacy
THE MISCONCEPTION: If you can’t
trust someone, you should ignore that
person’s claims.
THE TRUTH: What someone says
and why they say it should be judged
separately.
Sometimes an argument can get so heated
you start calling the other person names. You
attack the other person instead of the posi-
tion that person has taken. It is easier to dis-
agree with someone you see as nasty or ig-
norant. Calling someone a bigot, or an idiot,
or an asshole feels good, but it does not
prove you right or that person wrong.

This makes sense, but you don’t always
notice when you are doing it. When you as-
sume someone is incorrect based on who
that person is or what group he or she be-
longs to, you have committed the ad hom-
inem fallacy. Ad hominem is Latin for “to the
person,” which is where you sometimes take
the argument when things get out of hand.
Imagine you are part of jury in the case of
a man who is accused of stealing a car. The
prosecutor might bring up the past of the de-
fendant to show he’s committed crimes be-
fore, or have people from his past claim he is
a liar. Once the seed is planted—this guy is a
liar and a thief—it might sway your opinion
of the argument at hand. No matter what the
man says, somewhere in your head you will
doubt it because you don’t trust liars. If the
guy on trial told you the sky was blue and
bread was edible, you would have no prob-
lem believing it. The fallacy disappears. Only
his argument about something you are still
218/599

unsure of is affected. If he tells you he didn’t
steal the car, the lawyer’s ad hominem attack
may cause you to ignore the evidence and
commit a logical fallacy.
What if a prominent scientist is caught
falsifying his research? Do you now see
everything that scientist has ever discovered
as bunk? What if all the research leading up
to the unethical act was properly peer-re-
viewed and scrutinized? The tendency to la-
bel the scientist as a shifty and unprincipled
person is hard to shake. The logical misstep
is to assume all the scientist’s work is false
because of who he or she is, the label you
have placed on this person. You might do the
same with a journalist who gets too many
facts wrong. You think if this journalist made
up one story, then all the writer’s other stor-
ies are probably made up too. You would be
right to feel skeptical, but jumping to a con-
clusion based on how you feel about the
219/599

journalist
as
an
individual
would
be
a
mistake.
Perhaps someone criticizes your driving
and you respond with “You have no room to
talk. You are the worst driver in the world.”
There it is again. You are dismissing the oth-
er person’s argument by attacking the person
instead of the claim.
Just calling someone a name is not a fal-
lacy. You must discount the person’s position
based on your impression of his or her char-
acter before you get into trouble. If you re-
fuse to listen to the financial advice of a drug
addict because the addict wastes money on
pills, now you’re cooking with fallacies. If a
smoker tells you he or she thinks it should be
legal to smoke in restaurants, you can’t wave
your hand in the air and dismiss that opinion
just because the person offering it has a per-
sonal stake in the matter. Maybe the smoker
has a point, maybe not, but the fact that he
220/599

or she is a smoker shouldn’t confuse your
thinking.
A political attack ad might say something
like “Don’t vote for Susan Smith because she
practiced voodoo in college.” Just because
someone is a practicing voodoo priestess
doesn’t mean she can’t balance a budget.
Political opponents also hope you will com-
mit the ad hominem fallacy when they point
out who their opponent hangs out with or
who they have done business with in the
past. Guilt by association is often the ad
hominem fallacy at work. If someone hangs
out with crooks or crazies, maybe that per-
son is a criminal or a lunatic. A politician’s
policies and the people he or she barbecues
with are separate issues.
However, this is not to say that if you see a
man in a banana suit playing a flute and car-
rying a sign that reads THE END IS NEAR!
you should race home to kiss your family
good-bye. Avoiding the ad hominem fallacy
221/599

does not mean you have to trust everything
you hear equally. Still, you can’t be logically
certain the banana man is wrong. Maybe the
end is near, but you should make up your
mind based on the evidence he can bring to
the table. If his opinion is based on the chat-
ter of pigeons, you can probably ignore it.
The ad hominem fallacy can also work in
reverse. You might assume someone is trust-
worthy because they speak well, or have a re-
spectable job. It is hard to believe an astro-
naut would put on a diaper and drive across
the country to kill the wife of her lover, but it
did happen once. The inverse ad hominem
fallacy would steer you into delusion if you
were on the jury in the astronaut’s trial and
refused to believe the evidence because of
your respect for space explorers.
You tend to see people as characters and
look for consistency in their behavior. This is
usually a good thing, as it helps you sort out
whom you can trust. Wondering whether or
222/599

not someone can be trusted and wondering
whether or not someone is telling the truth
are two different things. Judging character
has been such a useful tool for so long in the
evolutionary history of human beings it can
overshadow your logic. You might be a great
judge of character, but you need to be a great
judge of evidence to avoid delusion.
223/599

18
The Just-World Fallacy
THE MISCONCEPTION: People who
are losing at the game of life must
have done something to deserve it.
THE TRUTH: The beneficiaries of
good fortune often do nothing to earn
it, and bad people often get away
with
their
actions
without
consequences.
A woman goes out to a club wearing stilettos
and a miniskirt with no underwear. She gets
pretty drunk and stumbles home in the
wrong direction. She ends up lost in a bad
neighborhood. She gets raped.

Is she to blame in some way? Was this her
fault? Was she asking for it?
People often say yes to all three in studies
asking similar questions after presenting
similar scenarios. When you hear about a
situation you hope never happens to you, you
tend to blame the victim, not because you are
a terrible person but because you want to be-
lieve you are smart enough to avoid the same
fate. You inflate whatever amount of re-
sponsibility
the
victim
may
bear
into
something bigger, something you would nev-
er do. The truth, though, is rape is rarely
something predicated on bad behavior on
the part of the victim. Usually, the rapist is
someone familiar, and it doesn’t matter what
the victim was wearing or doing beforehand.
The rapist is always to blame, but most
awareness campaigns are targeted at women,
not men. The message boils downs to “Don’t
do something that might get you raped.”
225/599

It is common in fiction for the bad guys to
lose and the good guys to win. This is how
you would like to see the world—just and
fair. In psychology, the tendency to believe
that this is how the real world works is called
the just-world fallacy.
More specifically, this is the tendency to
react to horrible misfortune, like homeless-
ness or drug addiction, by believing the
people stuck in these situations must have
done something to deserve it. The key word
there is “deserve.” This is not an observation
that bad choices may lead to bad outcomes.
The just-world fallacy helps you to build a
false sense of security. You want to feel in
control, so you assume as long as you avoid
bad behavior, you won’t be harmed. You feel
safer when you believe those who engage in
bad behavior end up on the street, or preg-
nant, or addicted, or raped.
In a 1966 study by Melvin Lerner and
Carolyn
Simmons,
seventy-two
women
226/599

watched a woman solve problems and get
electric shocks when she messed up. The wo-
man was actually pretending, but the women
watching didn’t know this. When asked to
describe the woman getting shocked, many
of the observers devalued her. They berated
her character and her appearance. They said
she deserved it.
Lerner also taught a class on society and
medicine, and he noticed many students
thought the poor were just lazy people who
wanted a handout. So he conducted another
study where he had two men solve puzzles.
At the end, one of them was randomly awar-
ded a large sum of money. The observers
were told the reward was completely ran-
dom. Still, when asked later to evaluate the
two men, people said the one who got the
award was smarter, more talented, better at
solving puzzles, and more productive. A gi-
ant amount of research has been done since
Lerner’s studies, and most psychologists
227/599

have come to the same conclusion: You want
the world to be fair, so you pretend it is.
The just-world fallacy is probably built in-
to the human mind. No matter how liberal or
conservative you are, some notion of it pulls
on your emotional reaction to hearing about
the suffering of others. In a study published
in 2010 by Robert Thornberg and Sven
Knutsen at Linkoping University in Sweden,
researchers asked teenagers to explain what
causes bullying in school. While most stu-
dents said the bullies were power-hungry
and cruel, 42 percent blamed the victim for
being an easy target. Ask yourself: When you
saw people bullying others in school, did you
think the victims should stand up for them-
selves? Did you think the ones being har-
assed and teased should learn how to dress,
how to act more confident, how to hide their
nerdishness? In movies about bullies, the
main character always has to learn how to
stand up and fight back. The bullies get
228/599

theirs only when the victim takes responsib-
ility. The research says that while you know
bullies are the bad guys, you accept it as un-
changeable. The world is full of bad guys.
The victims, however, have the power to end
their own torment. In the same study, 21
percent
of
the
students
blamed
them-
selves—the audience. Fewer still said the cul-
prit was society or human nature. The world,
most thought, was just and fair, only the
people in it—victims and bullies—were to
blame when bad things happened.
You’ve heard that what goes around comes
around, or maybe you’ve seen a person get
what was coming to them and thought,
“That’s karma for you.” These are shades of
the just-world fallacy. It sucks to think the
world isn’t fair. A world with the righteous
on one side of the scale and evil on the oth-
er—that seems to make sense. You want to
believe those who work hard and sacrifice
get ahead and those who are lazy and cheat
229/599

do not. This, of course, is not always true.
Success is often greatly influenced by when
you were born, where you grew up, the so-
cioeconomic status of your family, and ran-
dom chance. All the hard work in the world
can’t change those initial factors. Accepting
this does not mean those born poor should
just give up. After all, not taking action guar-
antees not getting results. In a just world,
this would be the only rule, no matter what
the initial conditions of your struggle were.
The real world is more complicated. People
can and do escape, but this doesn’t mean
those
who
haven’t
aren’t
trying
their
damnedest to claw out of bad situations. If
you look to the downtrodden and wonder
why they can’t pull themselves out of poverty
and get a nice job like you, you are commit-
ting the just-world fallacy. You are ignoring
the unearned blessings of your station.
It is infuriating when cheats and con
artists get ahead in the world while firemen
230/599

and policemen put in long hours for little
pay. Deep down, you want to believe hard
work and virtue will lead to success, and evil
and manipulation will lead to ruin, so you go
ahead and edit the world to match those ex-
pectations. Yet, in reality, evil often prospers
and never pays the price.
The
psychologist
Jonathan
Haidt
says
many people who don’t consciously believe
in karma still believe deep down in some ver-
sion of it, calling it whatever seems appropri-
ate in their own culture. They see systems
like welfare or affirmative action as disrupt-
ing the balance of the natural world. Slack-
ers, they think, would get what they deserve
if the government kept their noses out of it.
Their bad karma would come around to
crush them, but unnatural forces prevent it.
Meanwhile, since these people play by the
rules, pay taxes, and sacrifice hours of life for
overtime pay, they assume it has to be for a
reason. Their pursuit of the good life can’t be
231/599

futile. The rich, they think, must deserve
what they have. One day all the good karma
they are generating will lift them even higher
up in the social hierarchy to join the others
who have what they deserve. The just-world
fallacy tells them fairness is built into the
system, and so they rage when the system ar-
tificially unbalances karmic justice.
Why do we think this way?
Psychologists are unsure. Some say it is a
need to be able to predict the outcome of
your own behavior, or to feel secure in your
past decisions. More research is needed. To
be sure, you would like to live in a world
where people in white hats bring people in
black hats to justice, but you don’t.
Don’t let this discourage you, though. You
can accept that life is unfair and still relish it.
You aren’t in total control of your life, but
there is a nice big chunk of your life over
which you have complete authority—beat
that part to a pulp. Just remember the unfair
232/599

nature of the world, the randomness of
birthright, means people often suffer ad-
versity and enjoy opulence through no effort
of their own. If you think the world is just
and fair, people who need help may never get
it. Realize that even though we are all re-
sponsible for our actions, the blame for evil
acts rests on the perpetrator and never the
victim. No one deserves to be raped or bul-
lied, robbed or murdered. To make the world
more just and fair, you have to make it
harder for evil to thrive, and you can’t do this
just by reducing the number of its potential
targets.
233/599

19
The Public Goods Game
THE MISCONCEPTION: We could
create a system with no regulations
where everyone would contribute to
the good of society, everyone would
benefit,
and
everyone
would
be
happy.
THE TRUTH: Without some form of
regulation, slackers and cheaters will
crash
economic
systems
because
people don’t want to feel like suckers.
Before you hear about the public goods
game, you need to understand the tragedy of
the commons. The idea comes from a 1968

essay by geologist Garrett Hardin that sug-
gested you aren’t very good at sharing.
Imagine a giant lake filled with fish. You
and three others are the only people who
know about it. You all agree to take just as
many fish from the lake as you need to eat.
As long as everyone takes just what he or she
needs, the lake will stay full of fish.
One day, you happen to notice one of the
others has started taking more than he or
she needs and is selling the extra fish in a
nearby town. Eventually that person has a
better fishing rod than you.
What do you do?
If you start overfishing too, you will also be
able to get a better rod, maybe even a boat.
Maybe you could partner up against the
cheater. Maybe everyone will just start tak-
ing as many fish as desired. Maybe you could
just tell the world about the lake. All of these
scenarios will probably lead to the ruin of the
common good. If you do nothing, the lake
235/599

will still be able to support you and the other
two, but the cheater wins. Anger over unfair
situations is something you can’t help but
feel.
In situations like the imaginary lake above,
in an effort not to fall behind, everyone loses.
A big holiday meal, for example, can become
a zero-sum game if everyone piles a plate,
but if everyone takes only what he or she
needs, everyone wins. The tragedy of taking
from a common good is over time the com-
mon good will be depleted out of just a tiny
amount of greed. One misguided exploiter
can crash the system. Greed is contagious.
So what about a public good, a thing which
everyone contributes to instead of takes
from? It seems the same is true. Cheaters
can ruin the system, not by themselves, but
because the infectious nature of their glut-
tony is spread as people catch on to being
shortchanged. Unfortunately, research into
human behavior shows you are not so smart
236/599

when it comes to contributing to the public
good.
The public goods game works like this:
A group of people sits around a table, and
each person is given a few dollars. The group
is told they can put as much money as they
want in the community pot. An experimenter
then doubles the pot, and everyone then gets
an equal portion back.
If it’s ten people and everyone gets $2, and
everyone puts in that money, the pot would
be $20. It gets doubled to $40 and divided
by ten. Everyone gets back $4. The game
proceeds in rounds, and you would think
everyone
would
just
put
the
maximum
amount in the pot each time—but they don’t.
Someone usually gets the gist of the game
and realizes that one can put in very little, or
nothing at all, and start making more money
than everyone else.
If everyone but you puts in $2, the pot
would be $18. It gets doubled to $36 and
237/599

everyone gets back $3.60—including you, the
one who put nothing in at all.
In experiments where this game is played
so everyone can see who puts in a fair share,
the pot tends to grow for a while and then it
starts to shrink as people test the water by
withholding funds. The behavior spreads, be-
cause no one wants to be a chump, and even-
tually the economy grinds to a halt. If people
are allowed the option of punishing cheaters,
the cheating stops, and everyone wins. If in-
stead of punishment, people are given the
choice to reward good players, the economy
again crashes after a few rounds.
The crazy thing about this game is how il-
logical it is to stop contributing just because
someone in the group is free riding. If every-
one else is still being a good citizen of the
game, everyone will still win. The old emo-
tional brain kicks in, however, when you see
cheating. It’s an innate response that served
your ancestors well. You know deep down
238/599

that cheaters must be punished because it
takes only one cheater to make the economy
sputter out. You would rather lose the game
than help someone who isn’t helping you.
This game is sometimes used to illustrate
how regulation is necessary to keep any sort
of nonprofit public good alive. Streetlights
would never get put along dark roads, and
bridges would collapse if people weren’t
forced to pay taxes. Purely logical creatures
could be trusted to figure out life isn’t a zero-
sum game, but you are not a purely logical
creature. You will cheat if you think the sys-
tem is cheating you.
The urge to help others and discourage
cheating is something that helped primates
like you survive in small groups for millions
of years, but when the system becomes gi-
gantic and abstract like the budget for a na-
tion or the welfare system for an entire state,
it becomes difficult to make sense of the
239/599

world
through
those
old
evolutionary
behaviors.
The tragedy of the commons can be used
to make a case for private property in order
to encourage you to take care of your piece of
the world, but you might think not everyone
is going to buy a fuel-efficient car and recycle
plastic, so why should you?
The public goods game suggests regulation
through punishment discourages slackers.
It isn’t you don’t want to help; you just
don’t want to help a cheater or do more work
than a slacker—even if your not helping leads
to ruining the game for you and everyone
else.
240/599

20
The Ultimatum Game
THE MISCONCEPTION: You choose
to accept or refuse an offer based on
logic.
THE TRUTH: When it comes to mak-
ing a deal, you base your decision on
your status.
Imagine you win $1 million in the lottery,
but there’s a catch.
This is a new experimental lottery in which
the state says you must share your winnings
with a stranger. You get to decide how the
money is split, but the other person can re-
ject your offer. If the other person rejects it,
you both get nothing. You get only one

chance, and the two of you will never see
each other again. How much do you offer?
Right about now the very thing that most
makes you human has been activated. What
separates you most from the rest of the an-
imals is your complex social reasoning skills.
Millions of variables are interplaying in your
head, and you are running as many simula-
tions as you can conjure to predict the fu-
ture. You are imagining what the other per-
son will do based on all your instincts and
experiences.
You now have ten seconds to decide.
Oh no. What to do?
The most logical thing to do would be to
offer the stranger a small sum. How about
$1,000? After all, if that person refuses, he
or she gets nothing. Unfortunately for you,
people don’t approach a situation like this
with logic. When fairness is at stake, emo-
tions take over. Somewhere deep in your
brain, you can predict this, and like most
242/599

people, you will offer the other person
something closer to half.
When this experiment is performed with
real money and real people in the lab, most
offers less than 20 percent of the total
amount are rejected. In this scenario, the
bare minimum you would have to offer is
$200,000—even though you are the one who
won the money.
Give this problem to a computer, and it
will take anything above zero. Something is
better than nothing to a purely logical mind.
Give this problem to a human, and you must
deal with 3 million years of evolution.
In the wild, we lived in small groups—usu-
ally fewer than 150 people. It was vitally im-
portant to understand where you ranked in
such a group. Survival depended on your re-
lationships and your standing. Reputation
and status are more important than money
to primates. People with lots of money gain
high status, but if you were in the middle of a
243/599

zombie apocalypse, the money would sud-
denly
become
paper
again.
Your
status
would
quickly
be
determined
by
other
factors.
In the lottery situation, the money you of-
fer to the other person is interpreted as your
estimation of his or her status in the social
hierarchy. If the other person accepts less
than 20 percent, he or she will feel inferior
and disrespected. The person will lose status
in the eyes of others. No matter how large or
small the amount, in experiments with real
people, offering less than 20 percent ensures
that both parties lose. You know this in-
stinctively, and most people offer around
half of their prize when the ultimatum game
is played in a laboratory. When you know the
other party could exact revenge on you for
being unfair, it encourages the sort of altru-
ism that allowed your ancestors to escape in-
to civilization.
244/599

This effect is even greater if the person
making the final decision has low serotonin
levels. If a person feels sad and unwanted, he
or she will demand more money before ac-
cepting. That person’s default settings give
him or her a sense of lower status, and thus
the person is unwilling to lower it even fur-
ther by accepting an unfair offer.
When experimenters change the rules so
the person making the offer gets to keep his
or her share no matter what, just about
everyone tries to screw the other person by
offering around 10 percent.
This situation comes up in life all the time.
You decide when to ask for a raise, or make a
move in the bar, or get up on stage and sing,
based on your perceived status within a
group. If it is low, you won’t risk further
damage. If it is high, you expect better
treatment.
The promise of revenge is one way human
beings ensure fairness, and you are precisely
245/599

tuned to expect it. Your perceived status is
part of the unconscious equation you work
out when accepting, refusing, and making of-
fers with other people. You are not so smart,
so you are willing to get nothing if it ensures
fair treatment in the future and a more se-
cure place on the social ladder.
246/599

21
Subjective Validation
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
are
skeptical of generalities.
THE TRUTH: You are prone to be-
lieving vague statements and predic-
tions are true, especially if they are
positive and address you personally.
Based on the data I’ve collected from the
comments, e-mails, and other browsing in-
formation generated by the You Are Not So
Smart blog, all cross-referenced with demo-
graphics information prepared in marketing
studies for the placement of this book on
shelves around the world, I have a pretty
good idea of who you are.

Here are my findings:
You have a need for other people to
like and admire you, and yet you tend
to be critical of yourself. While you
have some personality weaknesses,
you are generally able to compensate
for them. You have considerable un-
used
capacity
that
you
have
not
turned to your advantage. Disciplined
and self-controlled on the outside, you
tend to be worried and insecure on
the inside. At times you have serious
doubts as to whether you have made
the right decision or done the right
thing. You prefer a certain amount of
change and variety and become dis-
satisfied when hemmed in by restric-
tions and limitations. You also pride
yourself on being an independent
thinker and do not accept others’
statements without satisfactory proof.
But you have found it unwise to be too
248/599

frank in revealing yourself to others.
At times you are extroverted, affable,
and sociable, while at other times you
are introverted, wary, and reserved.
Some of your aspirations tend to be
rather unrealistic.
Does this sound accurate? Does it describe
you?
It should. It describes everyone.
All the above statements came from a 1948
experiment by Bertram R. Forer. He gave his
students a personality test and told them
each one had been personally assessed, but
then gave everyone the same analysis.
He asked his students to look over the
statements and rate them for accuracy. On
average, they rated the bogus analysis as 85
percent correct—as if it had been personally
prepared to describe each one of them. The
block of text above was actually a mishmash
of lines from horoscopes collected by Forer
for the experiment.
249/599

The tendency to believe vague statements
designed to appeal to just about anyone is
called the Forer effect, and psychologists
point to this phenomenon to explain why
people
fall
for
pseudoscience
like
bio-
rhythms, iridology, and phrenology, or mys-
ticism like astrology, numerology, and tarot
cards. The Forer effect is part of a larger phe-
nomenon psychologists refer to as subjective
validation, which is a fancy way of saying you
are far more vulnerable to suggestion when
the subject of the conversation is you.
Since you are always in your own head,
thoughts about what it means to be you take
up a lot of mental space. With some cultural
variations, most people are keen on being in-
dividuals, unique and special persons whose
hopes and dreams and fears and doubts are
all their own. If you have the means, you per-
sonalize everything: your license plate, your
ring tone, your computer’s desktop wallpa-
per, your bedroom’s walls.
250/599

Everything around you says something
about your personality. Cultivating an in-
comparable self either through consumption
or creation is not something you take lightly.
Yet somewhere between nature and nurture,
we are all far more similar than we think.
Genetically, you and your friends are almost
identical. Those genes create the brain that
generates
the
mind
from
which
your
thoughts
spring.
Thus,
genetically,
your
mental life is as similar to everyone else’s as
the feet in your shoes. Culturally, we differ.
Our varying experiences in our varying en-
vironments shape us. Still, deep below, we
are the same, and the failure to notice this
can be exploited.
If a statement is ambiguous and you think
it addresses you directly, you will boil away
the ambiguity by finding ways to match the
information up with your own traits. You
think back to all the time spent figuring out
251/599

who you are, dividing your qualities from the
qualities of others, and apply the same logic.
Here’s an excerpt from a real horoscope at
horoscopes.com: “At some point during the
day, you might have the feeling that you
aren’t working hard enough to keep the for-
ward motion going, and you might feel panic
rise. This could prove a good motivating
factor, but you don’t need to push yourself
harder than you’re going now. You’re on a
roll and it’s likely to continue. Just pace
yourself.”
Now here’s another one from the same
source on the same day but for a different
sign: “Don’t be too hard on yourself if you’re
dragging a little toward the end of the day.
You’ll be able to recharge your batteries be-
fore tomorrow. In the evening, relax at home
with a good book.”
Seen straight on, horoscopes describe the
sort of things we all experience, but pluck
one from the bunch, turn it ever so slightly,
252/599

and you will see it matching all the details of
your life. If you believe you live under a sign,
and the movement of the planets can divine
your future, a general statement becomes
specific.
It is this hope that gives subjective valida-
tion its power. If you want the psychic to be
real, or the sacred stones to forecast the un-
known, you will find a way to believe them
even when they falter. When you need
something to be true, you will look for pat-
terns; you connect the dots like the stars of a
constellation. Your brain abhors disorder.
You see faces in clouds and demons in bon-
fires. Those who claim the powers of divina-
tion hijack these natural human tendencies.
They know they can depend on you to use
subjective validation in the moment and con-
firmation bias afterward.
The psychologist Ray Hyman has spent
most of his life studying the art of deception.
Before he entered the halls of science, he
253/599

worked as a magician and then moved on to
mentalism after discovering he could make
more money reading palms than performing
card tricks. The crazy thing about Hyman’s
career as a palm reader is, like many psych-
ics, over time he began to believe he actually
did have psychic powers. The people who
came to him were so satisfied, so bowled
over, he thought he must have a real gift.
Subjective validation cuts both ways.
Hyman was using a technique called cold
reading, where you start with the wide-angle
lens of generalities and watch the other per-
son for cues so you can constrict the focus
down to what seems like a powerful insight
into the other person’s soul. It works because
people tend to ignore the little misses and fo-
cus on the hits. As he worked his way
through college, another mentalist, Stanley
Jaks, took Hyman aside and saved him from
delusion by asking him to try something
new—tell people the opposite of what he
254/599

believed their palms revealed. The result?
They were just as flabbergasted by his abilit-
ies, if not more so. Cold reading was power-
ful, but tossing it aside, he was still able to
amaze. Hyman realized what he said didn’t
matter as long as his presentation was good.
The other person was doing all the work,
tricking him- or herself, seeing the general as
the specific just like in the Forer effect.
Mediums and palm readers, those who
speak for the dead or see into the beyond for
cash, depend on subjective validation. Re-
member, your capacity to fool yourself is
greater than the abilities of any conjurer, and
conjurers come in many guises. You are a
creature impelled to hope. As you attempt to
make sense of the world, you focus on what
falls
into
place
and
neglect
that
which
doesn’t fit, and there is so much in life that
does not fit.
When you see a set of horoscopes, read all
of them. When someone claims he or she can
255/599

see into your heart, realize that all of our
hearts are much the same.
256/599

22
Cult Indoctrination
THE MISCONCEPTION: You are too
smart to join a cult.
THE TRUTH: Cults are populated by
people just like you.
Cults are a side effect of natural human tend-
encies. You have an innate desire to belong
to a group and to hang out with interesting
people. If you have ever admired someone
you have never actually met—like a musi-
cian—you’ve experienced the seed of the cult
phenomenon.
The word “cult” is slippery, because seen
from far away, many organizations, institu-
tions, and religions could be seen as cults.

The line between groups and cults is blurry.
The fuzzy line is why you are far more likely
to end up in a cult than you think.
The research on cults suggests you don’t
usually join for any particular reason; you
just sort of fall into them the way you fall in-
to any social group. After all, when did you
join your circle of friends? Your group of
close friends has likely changed a great deal
over the years, but have you made many act-
ive choices concerning who you hang out
with other than avoiding the ones who are a
pain in the ass?
The sorts of people who join cults are not
all insecure or emotionally weak. You’d like
to think that you are not the sort of person
who could be beguiled by a charismatic lead-
er with a clear vision—but you are not so
smart. According to psychologist David My-
ers, cults form around sparkly, interesting
individuals—Jim Jones, David Koresh, L.
Ron Hubbard, Charles Manson—but people
258/599

don’t usually follow the leader, they follow
the ideals the leader proclaims to be serving.
These leaders seem to have things figured
out, and you want to figure those things out
too.
Gandhi,
Che
Guevara,
Terence
McKenna, and Socrates are all great thinkers
who seemed to have access to secrets, in-
sights
into
something
bigger.
Naturally,
people followed them, hoping to gain their
mojo through osmosis. Were their followers
in a cult? See, that’s where the definition
falls apart. This is why you are susceptible to
this sort of behavior.
As a primate, you are keenly aware of
group dynamics. You are hardwired to want
to hang out with people and associate your-
self with groups. Your survival has depended
on it for millions of years. In addition, you
don’t evaluate your behavior and choices and
feelings in order to understand who you are.
Instead, you have an idealistic vision of your-
self, a character you’ve dreamed up in your
259/599

mind, and you are always trying to become
this character. You seek out groups to affili-
ate with to better solidify who you are in the
story you tell yourself—the story explaining
why you do the things you do.
Myers says cults start with a charismatic
individual. Maybe this person believes he is
special in some way, or maybe he is just nat-
urally interesting. People start hanging out
with him, and a spontaneous group forms
with the charismatic person becoming an au-
thority figure. If this person has an agenda,
or a goal, or enemies he wants eliminated, he
will cultivate the goodwill of his fans into ac-
tion. If he has difficult goals to reach, he will
try to expand his group with recruitment or
proselytizing, often hiding his true intentions
so as not to scare away potential members.
Some leaders know what they are doing, but
some just serve their instincts and accident-
ally form cults around themselves before
they realize what they’ve done. How these
260/599

people wield their power over others ulti-
mately determines how history will label
them. Those who abuse their power and take
advantage of their followers, like Jim Jones
and Charles Manson, form what you tradi-
tionally consider a cult. Others, like Mohan-
das Ghandi, who convinced thousands to fol-
low him on foot for 241 miles as he walked to
the sea to protest a tax on salt, aren’t seen as
cult leaders. Any group with a charismatic
leader has the potential to break away and
form a subculture. Some make the world a
better place. Others convince people to kill
themselves.
If you have ever called yourself a fan of
anyone—a musician, a director, a writer, a
politician, a technological genius, a scient-
ist—you are experiencing the first stage of
cult indoctrination. If you were to meet the
person you most admire and be offered the
chance to hang out with him or her on a reg-
ular basis—would you? You would. What
261/599

happens next would depend on a chaotic
series of variables; sometimes the result is a
cult, and sometimes those cults live on bey-
ond their leaders. There is no agent behind
it, no person deciding to form or join a cult.
Cults aren’t designed. They form as a result
of normal human tendencies going awry.
262/599

23
Groupthink
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
Problems
are easier to solve when a group of
people
get
together
to
discuss
solutions.
THE TRUTH: The desire to reach
consensus and avoid confrontation
hinders progress.
When a group of people come together to
make a decision, every demon in the psycho-
logical bestiary will be summoned.
Conformity, rationalization, stereotyping,
delusions of grandeur—they all come out to
play, and no one is willing to fight them back
into hell because it might lead to abandoning

the plan or a nasty argument. Groups survive
by maintaining harmony. When everyone is
happy and all egos are free from harm it
tends to increase productivity. This is true
whether you are hunting buffalo or selling
televisions. Team spirit, morale, group cohe-
sion—these are golden principles long held
high by managers, commanders, chieftains,
and kings. You know instinctively that dis-
sent leads to chaos, so you avoid it.
This is all well and good until you find
yourself in a group your brain isn’t equipped
to deal with—like at work. The same mind
that was formed to deal with group survival
around predators and prey doesn’t fare so
well when dealing with bosses and fiscal pro-
jections. No matter what sort of job you
have, from time to time everyone has to get
together and come up with a plan. Some-
times you do this in small groups, sometimes
as an entire company. If your group includes
264/599

a person who can hire or fire, groupthink
comes into play.
With a boss hanging around, you get
nervous. You start observing the other mem-
bers of the group in an attempt to figure out
what the consensus opinion is. Meanwhile,
you are simultaneously weighing the con-
sequences of disagreeing. The problem is,
every other person in the group is doing the
same thing, and if everyone decides it would
be a bad idea to risk losing friends or a job, a
false consensus will be reached and no one
will do anything about it.
Often, after these sorts of meetings, two
people will talk in private and agree they
think a mistake is being made. Why didn’t
they just say so in the meeting?
Psychologist Irving Janis mapped out this
behavior
through
research
after
reading
about the U.S. decision to invade southern
Cuba—the Bay of Pigs. In 1961, President
John F. Kennedy tried to overthrow Fidel
265/599

Castro with a force of 1,400 exiles. They wer-
en’t
professional
soldiers.
There
weren’t
many of them. Cuba knew they were coming.
They were slaughtered. This led to Cuba get-
ting friendly with the USSR and almost led
to nuclear apocalypse. John F. Kennedy and
his advisers were brilliant people with all the
data in front of them who had gotten togeth-
er and planned something incredibly stupid.
After it was over, they couldn’t explain why
they did it. Janis wanted to get to the bottom
of it, and his research led to the scientific
categorization of groupthink, a term coined
earlier by William H. White in Fortune
magazine.
It turns out, for any plan to work, every
team needs at least one asshole who doesn’t
give a shit if he or she gets fired or exiled or
excommunicated. For a group to make good
decisions, they must allow dissent and con-
vince everyone they are free to speak their
mind without risk of punishment.
266/599

It seems like common sense, but you will
rationalize consensus unless you know how
to avoid it. How many times have you settled
on a bar or restaurant no one really wanted
to go to? How many times have you given
advice to someone that you knew wasn’t
really your honest opinion?
The recent housing market collapse, the
failure to prevent the attack at Pearl Harbor,
the sinking of the Titanic, the invasion of
Iraq—all of these can be attributed to situ-
ations in which groupthink led to awful
decisions.
True groupthink depends on three condi-
tions—a group of people who like one anoth-
er, isolation, and a deadline for a crucial
decision.
As a primate, you are quick to form groups
and then feel as if you should defend those
groups from the ill wishes of other groups.
When groups get together to make a de-
cision, an illusion of invulnerability can
267/599

emerge in which everyone feels secure in the
cohesion. You begin to rationalize other
people’s ideas and don’t reconsider your
own. You want to defend the group’s cohe-
sion from all harm, so you suppress doubts,
you don’t argue, you don’t offer alternat-
ives—and since everyone is doing this, the
leader of the group falsely assumes everyone
is in agreement.
Research says the situation can be avoided
if the boss is not allowed to express his or her
expectations,
thus
preventing
the
boss’s
opinion from automatically becoming the
opinion of others. In addition, if the group
breaks into pairs every once in a while to dis-
cuss the issue at hand, a manageable level of
dissent can be fostered. Even better, allow
outsiders to offer their opinions periodically
during the process, to keep people’s objectiv-
ity afloat. Finally, assign one person the role
of asshole and charge that person with the
responsibility of finding fault in the plan.
268/599

Before you come to a consensus, allow a
cooling off period so emotions can return to
normal.
The research shows that groups of friends
who allow members to disagree and still be
friends are more likely to come to better de-
cisions. So the next time you are in a group
of people trying to reach consensus, be the
asshole. Every group needs one, and it might
as well be you.
269/599

24
Supernormal Releasers
THE MISCONCEPTION: Men who
have sex with RealDolls are insane,
and women who marry eighty-year-
old billionaires are gold diggers.
THE TRUTH: The RealDoll and rich
old sugar daddies are both supernor-
mal releasers.
The Australian jewel beetle has sex with beer
bottles.
The beetles are a light chocolate color with
dimples all down their back and dark black
legs and heads that peek out from under-
neath their carapaces. Their bodies are big

and long instead of round, and they resemble
cicadas more than they do ladybugs.
The male Australian jewel beetle is hard-
wired to like certain aspects about the female
jewel beetle. They like females to be big,
brown, and shiny. The bottles they make love
to are bigger, browner, and shinier than any
female could ever hope to be. In Australia, a
certain type of bottle called stubbies over-
stimulates male jewel beetles. In a trash heap
filled with bottles, you will often see every
single stubby covered in male jewel beetles
trying to get it on. The stubbies are what
evolutionary psychologists call supernormal
releasers. They are superstimuli, better than
the real thing. The beetles will mate with
these bottles even while being devoured by
ants.
This sort of behavior is common across the
animal kingdom. Anything that directly af-
fects your survival can become a superstimu-
lus if exaggerated enough. Birds can become
271/599

confused by eggs from other, parasitic birds
who hijack their nests. The eggs look like
theirs, but are much bigger, so they sit atop
them even though they belong to another.
There are orchids that have powerful scents
like a female wasp’s or a bee queen’s, and
males mate with the flower, getting covered
in pollen in the process. Back when people
lived in the wild, where high-calorie food was
scarce, your ancestors developed an intense
desire to gobble up as much animal fat as
they could when they were lucky enough to
find it. Now you can’t stop eating french fries
and cheeseburgers.
If you associate something with survival,
but find an example of that thing that is
more perfect than anything your ancestors
could have ever dreamed of—it will overstim-
ulate you.
When it comes to mate selection, the
genders are usually divided into two camps.
One has to carry the offspring and reproduce
272/599

less often; the other can reproduce many
times over without much risk. In this scen-
ario, supernormal releasers either exaggerate
the fertility and health of the egg carriers, or
the
status
and
resources
of
the
sperm
carriers.
For human ladies, a tux on a man who
owns a private jet and three homes in Italy
creates a powerful set of supernormal releas-
ers. Most women wouldn’t hook up with a
man who looks like the Crypt Keeper, but if
he owns a publishing empire or a fortune
equivalent to the gross domestic product of a
European nation, some will. For human
guys, symmetry, big breasts, wide hips, nar-
row waists, lustrous hair, and voluptuous
lips add up to a powerful supernormal re-
leaser. Most men wouldn’t have sex with a
plastic corpse, but the strength of RealDoll
sales over the years shows some will. Both of
these examples are the human equivalent of
those sexy beer bottles.
273/599

Psychologist David Buss has spent his ca-
reer studying the preferences of men and
women when it comes to selecting a mate
both for short-term flings and long-term re-
lationships. In his book The Evolution of
Desire, he points to one crucial aspect which
seems to be held above all others when men
are making a snap judgment about physical
attraction—the hip-to-waist ratio. In many
studies around the world, no matter what
cultural significance is placed on body type, a
ratio in which the waist is about 70 percent
the width of the hips is always preferred. Ac-
cording to Buss, a hip-to-waist ratio of .67 to
.80 correlates to health, reproductive and
otherwise. Women with this ratio truly are
healthier, and this is something men know
unconsciously.
Psychologist
Devendra
Singh’s 1993 study of Playboy centerfolds
showed although the women in the magazine
had become thinner over the years, their
274/599

average hip-to-waist ratio remained a con-
stant .70.
The strange thing about this natural tend-
ency for men to prefer small waists and big
hips is how a superstimulus with physically
impossible features produces even more at-
traction. Psychologist Kerri Johnson’s re-
search
into
hip-to-waist
ratios
in
2005
showed both men and women used this met-
ric to determine the gender of silhouettes.
Her eye-tracking computer programs clearly
showed both sexes first looked at the face
and then moved around the hip area to see
the telltale signs of gender. Her research also
showed when men were asked to rate attract-
iveness they were drawn to a .70 waist. But
they were drawn to waists of .60 and .50
even more. A waist this small would make it
impossible for a woman to bear children. So
the superstimuli weren’t telling the man this
was an incredibly fertile and healthy woman;
they were just a shortcut, a heuristic. Men’s
275/599

brains were telling them small waists and big
hips were good. Since waists so small the wo-
man wouldn’t be able to bear children were
unlikely in nature, there was no adjustment
built into the heuristic to not be attracted to
super-tiny waists.
Johnson also had men and women walk on
a treadmill and told half of the subjects she
was measuring their efficiency. She told the
other half she was measuring how sexually
attractive they were. When told they were
being judged for sexiness, the women uncon-
sciously swooshed their hips from side to
side, which made it appear to observers as if
their hip-to-waist ratio had magically been
reduced. This is how superstimuli boggle
your mind. Your mental shortcuts aren’t pre-
pared to deal with exaggerations. Barbie
dolls, anime characters, and ancient fertility
statues are impossible versions of women,
but both sexes unconsciously know about the
276/599

magic of the hip-to-waist ratio and the power
of superstimuli.
Men are easy to manipulate thanks to hav-
ing fewer metrics by which they judge poten-
tial mates, and thus advertising has long
been preying on their tendencies. Women
will buy products in an attempt to become
the impossible goal. Men will buy products
in an attempt to mate with the impossible
goal. Sexy and sexist advertising can kill two
birds with one stone. Advertisers use genetic
freaks with abnormal symmetry, lit by pro-
fessionals, altered by makeup artists, and
finished off with Photoshop until they are
nothing more than realistic cartoons—just
like a RealDoll.
For women, a superstimulus has to have
more than just a rocking body and a good
hip-to-waist ratio. Women have more to lose
when they make a bad decision, so they have
evolved a more complex and particular set of
metrics by which potential mates are judged.
277/599

David Buss says those include, but are not
limited to, economic capacity, social status,
ambition,
stability,
intelligence,
commit-
ment, and height. Any one of these guides for
reproductive success in both a short-term or
long-term mate can become a superstimulus,
but for a man to be a supernormal releaser
he would need to possess several. A tall, rich
doctor who is both kind and faithful is far
more attractive than a short waiter who lives
with his parents and is quick to anger, no
matter how sculpted his chest is.
Don’t leave this subject thinking you are
above all of this. Even if you don’t act on
your impulses, you still feel them. Eventu-
ally, something will overtake you, even if it’s
as small as a sandwich with two pieces of
fried chicken for a bun instead of bread. A
study at Rutgers University in 2003 showed
the average size of what most Americans
considered a fair portion of food had in-
creased significantly in twenty years. A glass
278/599

of orange juice is now 40 percent larger. A
bowl of cornflakes is 20 percent bigger.
Plates in restaurants have grown by 25 per-
cent in size. The influence of superstimuli
has changed what people think is a generous
helping, but no one noticed until recently.
Remember, you take mental shortcuts
whenever
possible
to
determine
when
something is awesome. When a stimulus
goes from good to great, it does not mean it
truly is better than the normal version. If the
normal version is something that had to be
created, had to be fabricated into something
illusory, there is a good chance you’ll have to
fight your natural tendencies to be over-
whelmed by superstimuli. Australian jewel
beetles are doomed to lust for beer bottles in
garbage heaps because they can’t overcome
their desires. You can.
279/599

25
The Affect Heuristic
THE MISCONCEPTION: You calcu-
late what is risky or rewarding and
always choose to maximize gains
while minimizing losses.
THE TRUTH: You depend on emo-
tions to tell you if something is good
or
bad,
greatly
overestimate
re-
wards, and tend to stick to your first
impressions.
Suppose I offered you the chance to earn
some fast cash just by picking red jelly beans
out of a bowl.
I give you two options, a giant bowl with
hundreds
of
red
beans
mixed
in
with

hundreds of others, or a small bowl contain-
ing fifty mixed beans with a higher ratio of
red beans than the larger bowl. The bowls
are even labeled with your odds of winning.
The big one says 7 percent; the small one
says 10 percent. Each time you pull out a red
one, I’ll give you $1. Which bowl do you
pick?
In a 1994 study Veronika Denes-Raj and
Seymour Epstein published in the Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, they dis-
covered that people picked the big bowl over
the little bowl, even though the red ratio was
higher in the smaller bowl. When asked why,
they said they just felt like their chances were
better because there were more red beans in
the big bowl despite knowing the true odds
were against them.
The tendency to make poor decisions and
ignore odds in favor of your gut feelings is
called the affect heuristic. It is always getting
between you and your best interests, and it
281/599

starts when you make a snap judgment about
something new.
The first time you meet someone, billions
of microthoughts ricochet through the chem-
ical and electrical conduits in your cranium.
You begin making judgments about the per-
son’s character before you realize it. You may
notice a handshake that is strong and vigor-
ous, that the person’s posture is forward and
sturdy, that his or her smile is perfect and
warm. You take all these features and mul-
tiply them by how the person is dressed, di-
vide by the way the person smells, and factor
age into a huge equation that forms a first
impression in your unconscious. This person
is good. Let’s get to know this person.
What if you meet someone who keeps
making racist remarks, has a swastika tat-
tooed on one wrist, and smells like mush-
room gravy? Before you can turn your emo-
tions into thoughts, you are increasing the
distance between you and that person’s funk.
282/599

Common sense says first impressions fade
as you get to know someone, but first im-
pressions matter more than you realize. Re-
search shows the first impression you have
about a person, or anything else, tends to
linger. A study in 1997 by Wilkielman, Za-
jonc, and Shwartz created first impressions
in subjects with images of smiles and frowns.
The people in the study saw a photo of either
a happy or a sad face flash briefly on a screen
and then were shown an unfamiliar Chinese
character and asked to say whether or not
they liked it. People tended to say they liked
the characters that followed the smiles over
the ones that followed frowns, but later on
when they saw the same characters with the
expressions preceding them reversed, they
didn’t change their answers. Their first im-
pression remained.
You boil down your initial judgment of just
about everything in life to “this is good” or
“this is bad” and then put the burden of
283/599

proof on future experience to show you oth-
erwise. You might like someone early on but
learn of severe faults over time. You wait for
your first impression to be chiseled away in-
stead of promptly changing your opinion of
that person’s character. Maybe the person
dresses well and waxes poetic on the virtues
of good hygiene but gets touchy-feely and
hits on every person of the opposite sex
who’s around for more than four minutes.
Maybe the person beats his or her children
but spends weekends at a nursing home
teaching the elderly how to use computers.
How much evidence would you need to move
a new acquaintance from one category to the
other?
The affect heuristic is one way you rapidly
come to a conclusion about new information.
You use it to drop data into two broad cat-
egories—good and bad—and then you choose
to avoid or seek out what you have judged.
The affect heuristic is the Holy Grail of
284/599

cognitive biases in advertising and politics.
When you can associate your product or can-
didate with positive things or your competit-
ors and opponents with negative things, you
win. If you build up enough associations,
your product can become eponymous with
the category it occupies. Facial tissues be-
come
Kleenex.
Pain
medicine
becomes
Aspirin. Bandages become Band-Aids.
There is debate among psychologists on
just how powerful and trustworthy snap de-
cisions are, but there is no doubt they play a
large role in who you are and how you inter-
pret your senses. When first impressions
linger and influence how you feel about
second, third, and fourth impressions, you
are being befuddled by the affect heuristic.
Much of the machinery of the mind takes
place behind closed doors in corridors of the
unconscious, and these ruminations are part
of a give-and-take with the conscious mind.
Psychologists sometimes divide the mind
285/599

into parts that correspond with the evolution
of the brain. This is an oversimplification,
but it is useful to see in the various parts the
story of how your brain evolved from the
simple versions carried around by insects
and fish. It helps to make sense of how the
mind is formed if you see the brain layered
like an archaeological dig that is stratified
with the oldest artifacts underneath the more
recent. The oldest parts lie mostly in the
hind-brain. These structures, among others,
are concerned with your survival and help
regulate all those things you don’t have to
think about, like breathing and balancing on
one foot. The mid-brain structures were
shaped by your primate ancestors and grant
you emotions and social awareness. The top
layer, the most recently evolved, reasons and
calculates. The frontal lobes and neocortex
act as executive offices of the mind, taking
suggestions from all other structures and
formulating plans of action.
286/599

Your rational, mathematical, reasonable,
and methodical mind is slow and plodding.
It takes notes and uses tools. Your irrational,
emotional, instinctive mind is lightning-fast.
When you decide to change your own oil, or
install a new dishwasher, you depend on pro-
cessing, on instructions and measurements,
but less on emotions. You depend on snap
judgments, on feelings that can’t be de-
scribed with equations, when you decide
where to go to lunch or what movie to rent.
The conscious mind is still making choices,
but the unconscious mind is providing feel-
ings and influence. A great deal of your life is
contemplated by the emotional brain, which
means in social situations and matters of life
and death your thoughts and behaviors are
inspired by automatic and unconscious trig-
gers, suggestions from a shadowy place that
is difficult to access and explain. There are
many books on the topic, but for our pur-
poses just keep in mind how powerful an
287/599

influence your mood is on the decision-mak-
ing regions of your mind. You can see the
mind as divided into automatic, emotional,
and rational spheres of thought. Let’s reduce
this to two, the conscious you and the uncon-
scious you.
Unconscious-you has a lot in common
with mice. A mouse eats about 15 percent of
its body weight in food every day. A 180--
pound man would have to eat more than a
pound of food an hour to match such a
cranked-up metabolism. These tiny, frenetic
creatures are curious but cautious, and like
any animal in the wild, mice base most of
their behavior on the tug-of-war between
risk and reward. Since a mouse needs to eat
all the time, it is constantly faced with situ-
ations where it must weigh the danger of for-
aging against its hunger for calories. The
mouse has a primitive brain, so it can’t base
its choices on reason, on a careful analysis of
economic benefits versus systemic losses. It
288/599

feels its way through life with the rodent
equivalent of intuition. When it faces a novel
situation, it decides whether or not to pro-
ceed without using the same kind of logic
you
are
able
to
summon.
Otherwise,
mousetraps would be useless. Go back far
enough and you share a common ancestor
with the mouse, and those unconscious abil-
ities to recognize risk and reward evolved in-
to the versions you and the mouse both still
use. The recognition of risk isn’t something
you determine with imaginary spreadsheets
and slide rules of the mind. While blueprints
and
diagrams
require
careful
planning,
identifying risk comes from the gut, or, more
accurately, it comes from the emotion-gener-
ating structures in your brain. A simple as-
sessment of a situation as either good or bad
kept your ancestors out of the mouths of
predators and away from the business end of
a spear most of the time, but when the prob-
lem is too complicated—like a mousetrap to
289/599

a foraging rodent—you can really screw
things up.
When you return to a place where snakes
slither underfoot and food grows on bushes,
your attention collapses to what is within
reach. Your risk instincts serve you well
when you are back in the same conditions
your brain was evolved to deal with, like if
you’re lost in the woods while hiking or
hunting. In any circumstance where the only
concerns are those of immediate risk and re-
ward, the software handed down through
your genes can get you pretty far. Fast-for-
ward to typical human life today, and now
your ancient mind must deal with a world
mostly out of reach. Loans and retirement
plans, heart disease and elections are far less
tangible than the growling of your belly and
the creatures that slink through the night.
Your risk-avoidance systems are great when
the situation is concrete but are pretty
crappy when dealing with abstraction.
290/599

Antoine Becharo and Hanna Demasio in
1997 published a study in the journal Science
that is often cited as a great demonstration of
the unconscious
you. They hypothesized
your reasoning “is preceded by a noncon-
scious biasing step that uses neural systems
other than those that support declarative
knowledge.”
In
other
words,
you
are
problem-solving before you are aware of it.
In the study, participants played a card
game without any idea of what the rules
were. They knew only they would earn
money when they won and lose money when
they lost. To play, they drew cards one at a
time off the top of four separate decks until
the psychologists said they were finished.
The first two decks paid handsomely but
were loaded with losing cards that took a lot
of money away from the subjects. The other
two decks paid meagerly, but the losing
card’s fees were small. Over time, the people
playing would shift from the high-reward but
291/599

high-risk decks to the low-reward, low-risk
ones. The powers of pattern recognition
shaped
their
behavior
toward
the
best
choices without their knowing exactly what
they were doing. As fascinating as this is, the
study goes further. The participants were
hooked up to sensors that measured the
moisture levels of their skin, a facet of the
human
body
automatically
and
unconsciously mind-controlled by the sym-
pathetic nervous system. Those levels began
to spike as the people reached for the high-
risk decks well before they stopped picking
those cards. The unconscious was noticing
the risks and placing warnings in the sugges-
tion box about how to proceed long before
the decision-making conscious mind was
able to act. Questioned later, about a third of
the subjects were unable to explain why they
decided to stick to the safe cards.
Decisions about risk and reward begin
with the unconscious you. Unconscious-you
292/599

notices things are either bad or good, dan-
gerous or safe, before conscious-you can put
those feelings into words. Good things re-
ward you, bad things harm you. When you
are determining if something is good, you
are saying it is worth the risk of obtaining it.
Would you sleep overnight with a poisonous
snake loose in your apartment? The risk of
being bitten in your sleep greatly outweighs
the reward of sleeping in your own bed, so
probably not. Would you fly to Las Vegas for
a vacation? The risk of dying in a plane crash
is worth the reward of seeing Penn & Teller
and gambling in the desert, so you buy a
ticket and deal with the turbulence.
These calculations aren’t done on a black-
board in your mind; they are derived from
consultation with gut feelings, emotional
twinges rising like the tips of icebergs from
the inky depths of your unconscious. Your
species, all species, have been making de-
cisions from the gut for far longer than from
293/599

careful contemplation, so the influence of
these mental machinations is great.
In 1982, a patient known to neuroscience
as Elliot developed a brain tumor in his or-
bitofrontal cortex. Although it wrecked his
life, it gave to science an unprecedented look
into how important emotion is to decision
making. Before the tumor, Elliot was a suc-
cessful accountant with a home, a wife, and
savings in the bank. After the tumor, he be-
came unable to make snap decisions and
would instead become transfixed when asked
to choose something as simple as which shirt
to wear in the morning. His emotional brain
became unable to communicate with his ra-
tional brain after his tumor was removed.
When researchers hooked him up to the
same sort of skin conductance measurement
devices used in the card game stud, he re-
gistered no emotional response to photos of
mangled bodies or other images normal
people instantly recoil from. To him, the
294/599

images were neither good nor bad. He be-
came a being of pure rational thought, seeing
every bit of information flowing into his
mind with cold logic. Elliot could no longer
make simple choices because he had no emo-
tions. If he had to pick something to eat from
a menu, he would endlessly pore over all the
variables as if the secrets of the universe
were unfolding before him. Texture, size,
shape, calories, flavor, the history of his diet,
the price—all of these variables and hun-
dreds more would be subdivided into more
variables and then weighed against one an-
other in an endless cycle of computation.
Without emotion, it became incredibly diffi-
cult to settle on any one option. He became a
robot without hate, love, or yearning. He
eventually divorced, lost his job, money,
house, and everything else from his former
life except the love of his parents, who took
him in.
295/599

The affect heuristic, therefore, is often a
good thing. You need it to see danger and
pick a place to eat after a concert. The prob-
lems arise when you must evaluate large
numbers or percentages, when you must see
connections and abstractions. This is why
politicians who bring out charts and graphs
tend to fail, and those who use anecdotes
tend to win. Stories make sense on an emo-
tional level, so anything that conjures fear,
empathy, or pride will trump confusing stat-
istics. It causes you to buy a security system
for your house but neglect to purchase radon
detectors. It makes you carry pepper spray
while you clog your arteries with burritos. It
installs metal detectors in schools but leaves
french fries on the menu. It creates vegetari-
an smokers. Well-known, primal dangers are
easy to see, easy to guard against, even when
greater dangers loom. The affect heuristic
speaks to your basic sensibilities about risk
and reward while neglecting the big picture
296/599

and the dangers of complex systems that re-
quire study and deeper understanding.
In 2000, Melissa L. Funicane, Ali Al-
hakami, Paul Slovic, and Stephen M. John-
son had subjects rate both how risky and
how beneficial they felt natural gas, food pre-
servatives, and nuclear power plants were on
a scale of one to ten. The subjects were di-
vided into groups where some people read
only about the risks while others read about
the benefits, and then each had to come up
with revised ratings. As you might expect,
people who read about the benefits later
rated the technologies as being even more
beneficial to society than they did at first.
The weird part? They rated the risks as being
lower. The gap widened. The same was true
for the other group who rated the dangers as
being more risky than they had in the first
questionnaire and the benefits as less ap-
pealing. They were even more likely to widen
the gap when given a short time limit to give
297/599

an answer. Logically, risks and benefits are
two different things and must be judged sep-
arately, but you don’t judge things logically.
The more something seems to benefit you,
the less risky it seems overall. When you see
something as good, the bad qualities are
played down. When you see something as
risky, the harder it becomes to notice the be-
nefits. The affect heuristic is stronger still
when something is familiar or speaks to the
primal brain.
The feeling you get in your gut telling you
yes or no, good or bad is greatly influenced
by the affect heuristic. Keep this in mind
when you notice fearful language and im-
agery coming from any source with an
agenda. Remember your tendency to rush to
judgment and stick with first impressions
when someone is obviously playing up the
positive side of an issue or begins to use eu-
phemistic language. You are always looking
for risks and rewards, but when you want to
298/599

believe something is good you will uncon-
sciously turn down the volume on the bad
qualities, and vice versa. Any familiar danger
will overshadow new threats, and first im-
pressions are difficult to change.
299/599

26
Dunbar’s Number
THE MISCONCEPTION: There is a
Rolodex in your mind with the names
and faces of everyone you’ve ever
known.
THE TRUTH: You can maintain rela-
tionships and keep up with only
around 150 people at once.
Think of a cup completely filled with water.
You try to add one drop to this cup, and one
drop spills out. You try to pour a cup of water
into it, and a cup of water spills out. This is
called a zero-sum system. To add anything to
it you must remove an equal proportion.

The bank of names and faces and relation-
ships in your mind, the one you use to keep
up with who is a friend, who is a foe, and
who is a potential mate—this bank is a zero-
sum system too. The reason for this doesn’t
really have to do with how much space you
have to keep the information, it has to do
with how much energy you have on tap to
devote to worrying about your place in your
social world.
In other primates, social relationships are
maintained by grooming—picking bugs off of
one another. You don’t go to a Mad Men
party and dig around in your friend’s hair
while watching the show. But getting togeth-
er for any reason is still a grooming behavior.
You hang out, work on projects, and talk on
the phone to keep connected. Visiting friends
just to shoot the shit is the human equivalent
of picking ticks off of one another’s backs. As
technology has allowed you to be farther and
farther apart yet still keep in touch with
301/599

loved ones, your grooming behavior has re-
mained constant. In fact, most of your innate
gregariousness works as it always has by ad-
apting to the norms of the era. In modern
life, human relationships are no longer sep-
arated
geographically.
You
can
probably
start with any one person alive and play six
degrees of separation to get to any other per-
son.
Modern
humans
are
deeply
interconnected.
But you can’t keep up with all those people
and their connections, not in a real social
way—you are not so smart. The truth is, out
of this cluster of humans you can reliably
manage to keep up with only around 150
people. More specifically, it’s between 150
and 230. Giant cities full of other humans,
Internet social networks with hundreds of
people sharing status updates, corporations
with branches around the world—your brain
is incapable of handling the multitude of hu-
man contacts populating these examples. All
302/599

those personalities and quirks, the history of
your interactions with each, it becomes a gi-
ant file of social information that takes con-
stant maintenance. Psychology has shown us
the brain is not like a hard drive, so the prob-
lem with too many relationships isn’t a space
issue. The problem is more about the eco-
nomic limits of your mental human relations
department.
Why is this?
The neocortex of primates is the part of
the brain responsible for keeping up with
others. We can’t be certain of what forces
shaped the size of this part of the brain, but
for each primate the size of the cortex correl-
ates with the size of the average social group.
Apes live in small groups; humans live in big
ones. Robin Dunbar, the anthropologist who
first presented this concept, figures the size
of the average group is directly correlated
with how efficiently the members can so-
cially groom one another. Dunbar says that
303/599

efficiency is predicted by how large the prim-
ate’s neocortex is. According to Dunbar, the
larger the group, the more time must be
spent by each member to maintain social co-
hesion. Each person must do some grooming
with each other person and then also keep up
with who is friends with whom, who has a
beef, and what each other’s relative status is
compared to his or hers and others’. The
complexity builds exponentially with each
new member. If someone you know moves
away, you start to groom that person less and
less, until you start to touch base once a year,
or maybe lose touch for years. It takes far
more effort to stay connected once a friend
escapes your direct contact. That effort takes
away from the time you can spend with other
friends. Your brain was shaped in a world
where this time also took away from other ef-
forts—like hunting, gathering, and building
shelter. There is a maximum amount of time
304/599

and effort you can spend—it is a zero-sum
system.
Since efficiency is the predictor of group
size, you have an advantage over apes and
monkeys in the form of language. Social
grooming through language is more efficient
than grooming through picking lice and
fleas, Dunbar says. The preset amount of ef-
fort afforded you by your neocortex sets the
limit on group size. To add more people to a
group would ruin the cohesion. An unbal-
anced
group
fails.
A
balanced
group
succeeds.
This upper limit shaped the way humans
have organized throughout history.
Sure enough, all the sciences that study
tribes, bands, and villages have approxim-
ated
ancient
groups
usually
maxed
out
around 150 people. This is the approximate
upper limit to how many people you can
trust and count on for favors, whom you can
call up and have a conversation with. Once
305/599

you go over 150 people, Dunbar says about
42 percent of the group’s time would have to
be spent worrying about one another’s rela-
tionships. It would take a lot of pressure
from the environment for it to be worth
growing a group to that level. Once people
started coming up with ways to maintain lar-
ger groups, like armies, cities, and nations,
humans started subdividing those groups.
Dunbar’s number explains why big groups
are
made
of
smaller,
more
manageable
groups
like
companies,
platoons,
and
squads—or
branches,
divisions,
depart-
ments, and committees. No human institu-
tion can efficiently function above 150 mem-
bers without hierarchies, ranks, roles, and
divisions.
In the wild, it takes a lot of work to get a
group of 150 people to cooperate and pursue
a common goal. In modern life, you depend
on institutional structure. As Malcolm Glad-
well pointed out in his book The Tipping
306/599

Point, if a company grows beyond 150
people, productivity sharply declines until
the company divides its outlying entities into
smaller groups. You function better in a
cluster—that way everyone in that cluster is
connected to one another and only certain
individuals connect your cluster to other
clusters.
Dunbar’s number isn’t fixed. It can be in-
creased or decreased depending on the en-
vironment and tools you have available. You
most likely have a much smaller group of
friends than 150 people, but when you are
incentivized to connect to more people than
you would naturally associate with—like at
your job or in a school—150 is the point
where your neocortex cries uncle. With bet-
ter tools—like telephones, Facebook, e-mail,
World of Warcraft guilds, and so on—you
become slightly more efficient at maintain-
ing relationships, so the number can be lar-
ger, but not much larger. Dunbar’s most
307/599

recent research suggests even power-users of
Facebook with 1,000 or more friends still
communicate regularly with only around 150
people, and of that 150 they strongly com-
municate with a group of less than 20.
The social Web is revolutionizing the way
institutions operate, and the way people
communicate, but in the end it might not
have much of an effect on the core social
group you depend on for true friendship. You
can maintain a giant number of weak ties to
people on Facebook, Twitter, and whatever
comes next, much like you can in a giant
company. Strong ties, however, require con-
stant grooming. People who use the number
of friends they have on Facebook as a metric
of their social standing are fooling them-
selves. You can share videos of fainting goats
with hundreds of acquaintances and thou-
sands of followers, but you can trust a secret
only with a handful of true friends.
308/599

27
Selling Out
THE MISCONCEPTION: Both con-
sumerism and capitalism are sus-
tained
by
corporations
and
advertising.
THE TRUTH: Both consumerism and
capitalism are driven by competition
among consumers for status.
Beatniks, hippies, punk rockers, grunge rats,
metal heads, goth kids, hipsters—see a pat-
tern forming here?
Whether you lived through Freedom Sum-
mer or Jem and the Holograms, somewhere
in your youth you started to realize who was
in control, and you rebelled. You needed to

self-actualize, to find your own way, and you
sought out something real, something with
meaning. You waved your hand at popular
music, popular movies, and popular televi-
sion. You dug deeper and disparaged all
those mindless sheeple who gobbled up pop
culture.
Yet you still listened to music and bought
shirts and went to see movies. Someone was
appealing to you despite your dissent. If you
think you can buy your way to individuality,
well, you are not so smart.
Since the 1940s, when capitalism and mar-
keting married psychology and public rela-
tions, the Man has been getting much better
and more efficient at offering you something
to purchase no matter your taste.
Think about an archetypal punk rocker
with chains and spikes, gaudy pants and a
leather jacket. Yeah, he bought all of those
clothes. Someone is making money off of his
revolt.
That’s
the
paradox
of
consumer
310/599

rebellion—everything is part of the system.
We all sell out, because we all buy things.
Every niche opened by rebellion against the
mainstream is immediately filled by entre-
preneurs who figure out how to make a buck
off those who are trying to avoid what the
majority of people are buying.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, there
were many stabs at trying to thwart this
through
artistic
filmmaking—Fight
Club,
American Beauty, Fast Food Nation, The
Corporation, etc. The creators of these works
may have had the best intentions, but their
work still became a product designed for
profit. Their cries against consumption were
consumed.
Michael Moore, Noam Chomsky, Kurt
Cobain, Andy Kaufman—they may have been
solely concerned with creating art or illus-
trating academic principles, but once their
output fell into the marketplace, it found its
311/599

audience, and that audience made them
wealthy.
Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter, both
philosophers, wrote a book about this in
2004 called The Rebel Sell. It’s available in
the United States as Nation of Rebels. The
central theme of the book is you can’t rage
against
the
machine
through
rebellious
consumption.
Here’s the conventional thinking most
countercultures are founded upon:
All the interconnected institutions in the
marketplace need everyone to conform in or-
der to sell the most products to the most
people. The media, through press releases,
advertising, entertainment, and so on, works
to bring everyone into homogeneity by alter-
ing desires. To escape consumerism and con-
formity, you must turn your back and ignore
the mainstream culture. The shackles will
then fall away, the machines will grind to a
halt, the filters will dissolve, and you will see
312/599

the world for what it really is. The illusory
nature of existence will end and we will all,
finally, be real.
The problem, say Heath and Potter, is the
system doesn’t give a shit about conformity.
In fact, it loves diversity and needs people
like hipsters and music snobs so it can
thrive.
For example, say there is this awesome
band no one knows about except you and a
few others. They don’t have a record contract
or an album. They just go out there and play,
and they are great. You tell everyone about
them as they build a decent fan base. They
make an album that sells enough copies to
allow them to quit their day jobs. That album
gets them more gigs and more fans. Soon
they have a huge fan base and get a record
contract and get on the radio and play on
The Tonight Show. Now they’ve sold out. So
you hate them. You abandon the band and
go looking for someone more authentic, and
313/599

it all starts over again. This is the pump by
which artists rise from the depths into the
mainstream. It never stops, and over time it
gets faster and more efficient.
Unknown bands are a special sort of com-
modity. Living in a loft in a dodgy part of
town, wearing clothes from the thrift store,
watching the independent film no one has
heard of—these provide a special social
status that can’t be bought as easily as the
things offered to the mainstream.
In
the
1960s,
it
took
months
before
someone figured out they could sell tie-dyed
shirts and bell bottoms to anyone who
wanted to rebel. In the 1990s, it took weeks
to
start
selling
flannel
shirts
and
Doc
Martens to people in the Deep South. Now
people are hired by corporations to go to
bars and clubs and observe what the coun-
terculture is into and have it on the shelves
in the mall stores right as it becomes
popular.
314/599

The counterculture, the indie fans, and the
underground
stars—they
are
the
driving
force behind capitalism. They are the engine.
This brings us to the point: Competition
among
consumers
is
the
turbine
of
capitalism.
Everyone who lives above the poverty line
but isn’t wealthy pretty much has no choice
but to work for a living doing something that
rewards them with survival tokens. Working
as a telemarketer, for example, allows you to
have food, clothing, and shelter, but doesn’t
put you directly in charge of creating, grow-
ing, or killing those things you need for
sustenance. Instead, you trade in tokens for
those things. As a result, you have a lot of
free time and some leftover tokens.
Back before mass production, people were
often defined by their work, by their output.
The things they owned usually either were
things they hand made or were things other
people made by hand. There was a weight, an
315/599

infusion of soul, in everything a person
owned, used, and lived in.
Today everyone is a consumer and has to
pick from the same selection of goods as
everyone else; and because of this people
now define their personalities by how good
their taste is, or how clever, or how obscure,
or how ironic their choices are.
As Christian Lander, author of Stuff White
People Like, pointed out in an interview with
NPR, you compete with your peers by one-
upping them. You attain status by having
better taste in movies and music, by owning
more authentic furniture and clothing. There
are 100 million versions of every item or in-
tellectual property you can own, so you re-
veal your unique character through how you
consume.
Having a dissenting opinion on movies,
music, or clothes, or owning clever or ob-
scure possessions, is the way middle-class
people fight one another for status. They
316/599

can’t out-consume one another because they
can’t afford it, but they can out-taste one
another.
Since everything is mass-produced, and
often for a mass audience, finding and con-
suming things that appeal to your desire for
authenticity is what moves these items and
artists and services and goods up from the
bottom to the top—where they can be mass-
consumed.
Hipsters, then, are the direct result of this
cycle of indie, authentic, obscure, ironic,
clever consumerism. Which, in itself, is iron-
ic—but not like a trucker hat or Pabst Blue
Ribbon. It is ironic in the sense the very act
of trying to run counter to the culture is what
creates the next wave of culture people will
in turn attempt to counter.
I think “sell out” is yelled by those
who, when they were selling, didn’t
have anything anyone wanted to buy.
—PATTON OSWALT
317/599

Wait long enough, and what was once
mainstream will fall into obscurity. When
that happens, it will become valuable again
to those looking for authenticity or irony or
cleverness. The value, then, is not intrinsic.
The thing itself doesn’t have as much value
as the perception of how it was obtained or
why it is possessed. Once enough people join
in, like with oversized glasses frames or slap
bracelets, the status gained from owning the
item or being a fan of the band is lost, and
the search begins again.
You would compete like this no matter
how society was constructed. Competition
for status is built into the human experience
at the biological level. Poor people compete
with resources. The middle class competes
with selection. The wealthy compete with
possessions.
You sold out long ago in one way or anoth-
er. The specifics of who you sell to and how
much you make—those are only details.
318/599

28
Self-Serving Bias
THE MISCONCEPTION: You evalu-
ate yourself based on past successes
and defeats.
THE TRUTH: You excuse your fail-
ures and see yourself as more suc-
cessful, more intelligent, and more
skilled than you are.
In the early days of psychology there was a
prevailing
belief
among
scientists.
They
thought just about everyone had low self-es-
teem, inferiority complexes, and a cluster of
self-loathing neuroses. Those old beliefs are
still reverberating in the public conscious-
ness, but they were mostly wrong. The

research conducted over the last fifty years
has revealed the complete opposite to be
true. Day to day, you think you are awesome,
or at least far more awesome than you are.
This is good. Self-esteem is mostly self-de-
lusion, but it serves a purpose. You are biolo-
gically driven to think highly of yourself in
order to avoid stagnation. If you were to stop
and truly examine your faults and failures,
you would become paralyzed by fear and
doubt. Despite this, from time to time in
your life, your personal hype machine sput-
ters to a stop. You get depressed and
anxious. You question yourself and your abil-
ities. Usually, it passes as your psychological
immune system fights off the negative atti-
tudes. In some places, like the modern Un-
ited States, this hype machine is reinforced
by a culture of exceptionalism.
This tendency to see yourself as above av-
erage is also bad. If you never see how much
you are screwing up your life, mistreating
320/599

your friends, and being a complete douche
bag, you can destroy yourself without realiz-
ing how bad things have become.
In the 1990s, there was a lot of research
aimed
at
discovering
just
how
deluded
people were when it came to failure and suc-
cess. The findings of these studies showed
you tend to accept credit when you succeed,
but blame bad luck, unfair rules, difficult in-
structors, bad bosses, cheaters, and so on
when you fail. When you are doing well, you
think you are to blame. When you are doing
badly, you think the world is to blame. This
behavior can be observed in board games
and senate races, group projects and final ex-
ams. When things are going your way, you
attribute everything to your amazing skills,
but once the tide turns, you look for external
factors that prevented your genius from
shining through. This gets even weirder
when you let some time pass. All the dumb
things you did when you were younger, all
321/599

those poor decisions, you see them as being
made by your former self. According to re-
search conducted by Anne Wilson and Mi-
chael Ross in 2001, you see the person you
used to be as a foolish bumbler with poor
taste but your current self as a badass who is
worthy of at least three times the praise.
This sort of thinking also spreads to the
way you compare yourself to others. The last
thirty years’ worth of research shows just
about all of us think we are more competent
than our coworkers, more ethical than our
friends, friendlier than the general public,
more intelligent than our peers, more at-
tractive than the average person, less preju-
diced than people in our region, younger-
looking than people the same age, better
drivers than most people we know, better
children than our siblings, and that we will
live longer than the average lifespan. (As you
just read that list, maybe you said to your-
self, “No, I don’t think I’m better than
322/599

everyone.” So you think you’re more honest
with yourself than the average person? You
are not so smart.) No one, it seems, believes
he or she is part of the population contribut-
ing to the statistics generating averages. You
don’t believe you are an average person, but
you do believe everyone else is. This tend-
ency, which springs from self-serving bias, is
called the illusory superiority effect.
You are incredibly egocentric, just like
everyone else. Your world is subjective by de-
fault, so it follows that most of your thoughts
and behaviors are born of a subjective ana-
lysis of your personal world. The things af-
fecting your daily life are always more signi-
ficant than something happening far away or
in the head of another person. When it
comes to judging your abilities or your
status, this egocentricity makes it difficult to
see yourself as a number, an average. You
find the idea repellent and search for a way
to see yourself as unique. In 1999, Justin
323/599

Kruger at the New York University Stern
School of Business showed illusory superior-
ity was more likely to manifest in the minds
of subjects when they were told ahead of
time a certain task was easy. When they
rated their abilities after being primed to
think the task was considered simple, people
said they performed better than average.
When he then told people they were about to
perform a task that was difficult, they rated
their performance as being below average
even when it wasn’t. No matter the actual
difficulty, just telling people ahead of time
how hard the undertaking would be changed
how they saw themselves in comparison to
an imagined average. To defeat feelings of
inadequacy, you first have to imagine a task
as being simple and easy. If you can manage
to do that, illusory superiority takes over.
The self-serving bias and illusory superior-
ity aren’t limited to thoughts about perform-
ance. You also use these mental constructs to
324/599

perceive how you stand in relationships and
social situations. In 1993, Ezra Zuckerman
and John Jost at Stanford University asked
undergraduates at the University of Chicago
to assess their popularity relative to their
peers. They took those estimates and com-
pared them with what others reported. They
were building on the work of Abraham Tess-
er, who created self-evaluation maintenance
theory in 1988. According to his research,
you pay close attention to the successes and
failures of friends more than you do to those
of strangers. You compare yourself to those
who are close to you in order to judge your
own worth. In other words, you know Barack
Obama and Johnny Depp are successful, but
you don’t use them as a standard for your
own life to the degree you do coworkers, fel-
low students, or friends you’ve known since
high school. Zuckerman and Jost had stu-
dents list the number of people they con-
sidered friends and then asked if the subjects
325/599

believed they had more friends than did their
peers and more friends than the average
student. Thirty-five percent of the students
said they had more friends than the typical
student, and 23 percent said they had fewer.
This better-than-average feeling was en-
hanced when considering their peers—41
percent said they had more friendships than
did the people they considered to be their
friends. Only 16 percent said they had fewer.
On average, everyone you know thinks they
are more popular than you, and you think
you are more popular than them.
Sure, some of your faults are just too obvi-
ous, even to you, but you compensate for
those by inflating what you like most about
you. When you compare your skills, accom-
plishments, and friendships with those of
others, you tend to accentuate the positive
and eliminate the negative. You are a liar by
default, and you lie most to yourself. If you
fail, you forget it. If you win, you tell
326/599

everyone. When it comes to being honest
with yourself and those you love, you are not
so smart. But self-serving bias keeps you go-
ing when the hype machine runs low on fuel.
327/599

29
The Spotlight Effect
THE MISCONCEPTION: When you
are around others, you feel as if
everyone is noticing every aspect of
your appearance and behavior.
THE TRUTH: People devote little at-
tention to you unless prompted to.
You spill a drink at a party. You get a mus-
tard stain on your shirt. Your forehead is
breaking out on the day you have to do a
presentation. Oh no. What will people think?
Chances are, they won’t think anything. Most
people won’t notice at all, and if they do,
they’ll probably disregard and forget your
imperfections and faux pas within seconds.

You lose some weight, buy a new pair of
pants, and strut through doors expecting
some sort of acknowledgment. Perhaps you
get a new haircut, or buy a new watch. You
spend an extra fifteen minutes in front of the
mirror expecting the world to notice. You
spend so much time thinking about your own
body, your own thoughts and behaviors, you
begin to think other people must be noticing
too. The research says they aren’t, at least
not nearly as much as you are.
When in a group or public setting, you
think every little nuance of your behavior is
under scrutiny by everyone else. The effect is
even worse if you must stand on a stage or go
out with someone for the first time. You can’t
help but be the center of your universe, and
you find it difficult to gauge just how much
other people are paying attention since you
are paying attention to you all the time.
When you start to imagine yourself in the
audience, you believe every little misstep is
329/599

amplified. You are not so smart when it
comes to dealing with crowds because you
are too egocentric. Fortunately, everyone
else is just as egocentric, and they are just as
convinced that they are being scrutinized.
The spotlight effect was studied at Cornell
in 1996 by Thomas Gilovich, who researched
the degree to which people believe their ac-
tions and appearance are noticed by others.
He had college students put on T-shirts fea-
turing the smiling face of Barry Manilow and
then knock on the door to a classroom where
other subjects were filling out a question-
naire. When you are late to a class or to
work, or walk into a crowded theater or
nightclub, you feel as if all eyes are on you,
judging and criticizing. These students had
to shed their normal clothes for a shirt with a
giant Barry Manilow head beaming back out
into the world, so Gilovich hypothesized they
would feel an especially strong version of the
spotlight effect when they had to walk into
330/599

the classroom. Each person did this, and
then walked over and spoke with the re-
searcher for a moment. The researcher then
pulled up a chair and told the embarrassed
subject to sit down, but right as they did they
were told to stand back up and were then led
out for a debriefing. They asked the subjects
to estimate how many people noticed their
shirt. The people wearing the embarrassing
attire figured about half of the people in the
room saw it and noticed how awful it was.
When the researchers then asked the people
in the classroom to describe the subject,
about 25 percent recalled seeing Manilow. In
a situation designed to draw attention, only a
quarter of the observers noticed the odd
clothing choice, not half. Gilovich repeated
the experiment, but this time allowed the
students to pick a “cool” shirt depicting Jerry
Seinfeld, Bob Marley, or Martin Luther King
Jr. In this run, the estimates were the same.
They thought about half the class saw their
331/599

awesome shirt. Less than 10 percent did.
This suggests the spotlight effect is strong for
both positive and negative images of your-
self, but the real world is far less likely to
give a shit when you are trying to look cool.
Gilovich has repeated his work on crowded
New York streets, and although people felt as
if a giant spotlight was shining down illumin-
ating their tiny place in the world and all
eyes were upon them, in reality, most people
didn’t notice them at all.
The spotlight effect leads you to believe
everyone notices when you drive around
town in a new, expensive car. They don’t.
After all, the last time you saw an awesome
car, do you remember who was driving it?
Do you even remember the last time you saw
an awesome car? This feeling extends into
other situations as well. For instance, if you
are playing Rock Band or singing karaoke or
doing anything where you feel your actions
are being monitored by others, you tend to
332/599

believe every up and down of your perform-
ance is being cataloged and critiqued. Not so.
You will apologize or make fun of yourself
in an attempt to soften the blows, but it
doesn’t matter. In 2001, Gilovich had sub-
jects play a competitive video game and rate
how much attention they thought their team-
mates and opponents were paying to their
performance. He found people paid lots of
attention to how they themselves were doing,
but almost no attention to others. While
playing, they felt like everyone else was keep-
ing up with how good they were at the game.
Research shows people believe others see
their contributions to conversation as being
memorable, but they aren’t. You think every-
one noticed when you stumbled in your
speech, but they didn’t. Well, unless you
drew attention to it by over-apologizing.
The next time you get a pimple on your
forehead, or buy a new pair of shoes, or
Tweet about how boring your day is, don’t
333/599

expect anyone to notice. You are not so
smart or special.
334/599

30
The Third Person Effect
THE MISCONCEPTION: You believe
your
opinions
and
decisions
are
based on experience and facts, while
those who disagree with you are fall-
ing for the lies and propaganda of
sources you don’t trust.
THE TRUTH: Everyone believes the
people they disagree with are gull-
ible, and everyone thinks they are far
less susceptible to persuasion than
they truly are.
I can see right through that politician’s lies.
People are such sheep. People are so stupid.

People will believe anything. I prefer to lead,
not follow.
Have you ever thought like this? Would it
blow your mind to know everyone thinks
this?
If we all think we aren’t gullible and can’t
be swayed by advertising, political rhetoric,
or charismatic con artists, then some of us
must
be
deluding
ourselves.
Sometimes
that’s you.
A great many messages among the count-
less ones bombarding you every day are con-
sidered dangerous because they might sway
other people or fester in their minds until
they act out on the suggestions coming out of
all manner of sources, from violent video
games to late-night pundit programming.
For every outlet of information, there are
some who see it as dangerous not because it
affects them, but because it might affect the
thoughts and opinions of an imaginary third
party. This sense of alarm about the impact
336/599

of speech not on yourself but on others is
called the third person effect.
As a modern human, you are bombarded
with media messages, but you see yourself as
less affected than others. Somehow you have
been inoculated against the persuaders, you
think, so you have nothing to worry about.
You can’t count on everyone else to be as
strong as you are, so if you are like most
people, there are some voices you think
should be quiet. You might even go so far as
to think some messages should be cen-
sored—not for you, for them.
Who is them? It changes with the zeitgeist.
It might be children, or high school kids, or
college students. It might be liberals or con-
servatives.
It
might
be
the
elderly,
the
middle-class,
the
super-rich.
Whatever
groups you don’t belong to become the
groups who you think will be bowled over by
messages you don’t agree with.
337/599

Studies from the beginning of psychology
up until today have revealed many ways in
which people truly are affected by hidden
persuasion. As you learned in the chapters
on priming and the affect heuristic, just
about anything you see or hear will in some
way influence your later behavior. You tend
to accept this as true for everyone but
yourself.
Richard M. Perloff in 1993 and Bryant
Paul in 2000 reviewed all the studies since
researcher W. Phillips Davison first coined
the term “third person effect” in 1983. Davis-
on noticed some people saw certain mes-
sages in the media as a call to action, not be-
cause of what was being said, but because of
who might hear it. He pointed to the third
person effect as the source of outrage from
religious leaders over “heretical propaganda”
and the ire of political rulers over some
speech out of a “fear of dissent.” Further-
more,
Davison
saw
such
censorship
as
338/599

arising out of a belief that some messages
might harm “more impressionable minds.”
Perloff and Paul found that the third person
effect is magnified when you already have a
negative opinion of the source, or if you per-
sonally
think
the
message
is
about
something you aren’t interested in. In all,
their meta-analysis showed the majority of
people believe they aren’t like the majority of
people.
You don’t want to believe you can be per-
suaded, and one way of maintaining this be-
lief is to assume that all the persuasion flying
through the air must be landing on other tar-
gets. Otherwise how could it be successful?
Those advertisements for cheeseburgers are
for fatties with no self-control, you think, un-
til you are ravenous and are forced to choose
between one fast-food place and another.
Those alcohol billboards are for trendy hip-
sters, you assume, until you are at the office
Christmas party and the guy at the open bar
339/599

asks you what you want. Public service an-
nouncements about tex-ting while driving
are for people who don’t live the kind of life
you do, you think, until you find yourself
feeling a twinge of shame when you reach for
the phone to respond to an e-mail while
waiting for the light to turn green.
When you watch your preferred news
channel or read your favorite newspaper or
blog, you tend to believe you are an inde-
pendent thinker. You may disagree with
people on the issues, but you see yourself as
having an open mind, as a person who looks
at the facts and reaches conclusions after ra-
tional objective analysis. On the other side of
the
television,
networks
and
producers
design programming based on statistics and
ratings, on demographic analysis that cuts
through the third person effect so you can
keep on believing you aren’t the kind of per-
son who watches the shows you watch. You
tend to think you are not like the people who
340/599

live in your town, go to your school, work at
your business, and so on. You are unique.
You dance to the beat of a different drum-
mer. You fail to realize just by living in your
town, attending your school, and working at
your job, you are the kind of person who
would do those things. If you weren’t, you
would be doing something else. You might
say, “Well, I have to be here. I have no
choice,” but you ignore how many of your
peers are probably using the same excuse.
The third person effect isn’t limited to ad-
vertising or politics. For just about every top-
ic listed in this book there are many people
who will read or hear about it and think
these
delusions
and
biases
affect
other
people all the time, but not themselves.
The third person effect is a version of the
self-serving bias. You excuse your failures
and see yourself as more successful, more in-
telligent, and more skilled than you are. Re-
search
into
the
self-serving
bias
shows
341/599

subjects tend to rate themselves as more
skilled than their coworkers, better drivers
than the average person, more attractive
than people their age, and likely to live
longer than the people they grew up with. It
follows, then, that most people would believe
they were less gullible than the majority. But
remember, you can’t be in the minority of
every category.
When the third person effect leads you to
condone censorship, take a step back and
imagine the sort of messages people on the
other side might think are brainwashing you,
and then ask yourself if those messages
should be censored too.
342/599

31
Catharsis
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
Venting
your anger is an effective way to re-
duce stress and prevent lashing out
at friends and family.
THE TRUTH: Venting increases ag-
gressive behavior over time.
Let it out.
Left inside you, the anger will fester and
spread, grow like a tumor, boil up until you
punch holes in the wall or slam your car door
so hard the windows shatter.
Those dark thoughts shouldn’t be tamped
down inside your heart where they can con-
dense and strengthen, where they form a

concentrated
stockpile
of
negativity
that
could reach critical mass at any moment.
Go get yourself one of those squishy balls
and work it over with death grips. Use both
hands and choke the imaginary life out of it.
Head to the gym and assault a punching bag.
Shoot some people in a video game. Scream
into a pillow.
Feel better? Sure you do. Venting feels
great.
The problem is, it accomplishes little else.
Actually, it makes matters worse and primes
your future behavior by fogging your mind.
The concept of catharsis goes back at least
as far as Aristotle and Greek drama. The
word itself comes from from the Greek kath-
airein, “to purify” and “to clean.” Releasing
pent-up energy, or fluids, was Aristotle’s
counterargument to Plato, who felt poetry
and drama filled people up with silliness and
made them unbalanced. Aristotle thought it
went the other way, and by watching people
344/599

go muck through a tragedy or rise to a vic-
tory, you in the audience could vicariously
release
your
tears
or
feel
the
rush
of
testosterone. You balanced out your heart by
purging those emotions. It seems to make
sense, and that’s why the meme grafted itself
to so much of human thought well before the
great philosophers.
Releasing
sexual
tension
feels
good.
Throwing up when you are sick feels good.
Finally getting to a restroom feels good. Be it
an exorcism or a laxative, the idea is the
same: Get the bad stuff out and you’ll return
to normal. Balancing the humors—choleric,
melancholic, phlegmatic, and sanguine—was
the basis of medicine from Hippocrates up to
the Old West, and the way you balanced out
often meant draining something.
Fast-forward to Sigmund Freud.
Throughout
the
late
1800s
and
early
1900s, Freud was a superstar of science and
pop
culture,
and
his
work
influenced
345/599

everything from politics and advertising to
business and art. The turn of the century,
nineteenth to twentieth, was an interesting
time to be a scientist devoted to the mind,
because there weren’t many tools available.
It was sort of like being an astronomer be-
fore the invention of telescopes. The rising
stars in psychology made names for them-
selves by constructing elaborate theories of
how the mind was organized and where your
thoughts came from. Since the mind was
completely
unobservable,
these
theorists
didn’t have much data to fall back on, and so
their personal philosophies and conjectures
tended to fill in the gaps. Thanks to Freud,
catharsis theory and psychotherapy became
part of psychology. Mental wellness, he
reasoned, could be achieved by filtering away
impurities in your mind through the siphon
of a therapist. He believed your psyche was
poisoned by repressed fears and desires, un-
resolved arguments, and unhealed wounds.
346/599

The mind formed phobias and obsessions
around these bits of mental detritus. You
needed to rummage around in there, open
up some windows, and let some fresh air and
sunlight in.
The hydraulic model of anger is just what
it sounds like—anger builds up inside the
mind until you let off some steam. If you
don’t let off this steam, the boiler will burst.
It sounds reasonable. You may even look
back on your life and remember times when
you went batshit, punched a wall or broke a
plate, and it made things better. But you are
not so smart.
In the 1990s, psychologist Brad Bushman
at Iowa State decided to study whether or
not venting actually worked. At the time,
self-help books were all the rage, and the
prevailing advice when it came to dealing
with stress and anger was to punch inanim-
ate
objects
and
scream
into
pillows.
347/599

Bushman, like many psychologists before
him, felt this might be bad advice.
In one of Bushman’s studies he divided
180 students into three groups. One group
read a neutral article. One read an article
about a fake study that said venting anger
was effective. The third group read about a
fake study that said venting was pointless.
He then had the students write essays for or
against abortion, a subject about which they
probably had strong feelings. He told them
the essays would be graded by fellow stu-
dents, but they weren’t. When the students
got their essays back, half were told their es-
says were superb. The other half had this
scrawled across the paper: “This is one of the
worst essays I have ever read!” Bushman
then asked the subjects to pick an activity
like playing a game, watching some comedy,
reading a story, or punching a bag. The res-
ults? The people who read the article that
said venting worked, and who later got
348/599

angry, were far more likely to ask to punch
the bag than those who got angry in the oth-
er groups. In all the groups, the people who
got praised tended to pick nonaggressive
activities.
So belief in catharsis makes you more
likely to seek it out. Bushman decided to take
this a step further and let the angry people
seek revenge. He wanted to see if engaging in
cathartic behavior would extinguish the an-
ger, if it would be emancipated from the
mind. The second study was basically the
same, except this time when subjects got
back their papers with “This is one of the
worst essays I have ever read!” they were di-
vided into two groups. The people in both
groups were told they were going to have to
compete against the person who graded their
essay. One group first had to punch a bag,
and the other group had to sit and wait for
two minutes. After the punching and wait-
ing, the competition began. The game was
349/599

simple: Press a button as fast as you can. If
you lose, you get blasted with a horrible
noise. When you win, your opponent gets
blasted. The students could set the volume
the other person had to endure, a setting
between zero and ten, with ten being 105
decibels. Can you predict what they dis-
covered? On average, the punching bag
group set the volume as high as 8.5. The
time-out group set it to 2.47. The people who
got angry didn’t release their anger on the
punching bag—their anger was sustained by
it. The group that cooled off lost their desire
for vengeance. In subsequent studies where
the subjects chose how much hot sauce the
other person had to eat, the punching bag
group piled it on. The cooled off group did
not. When the punching bag group later did
word puzzles where they had to fill in the
blanks to words like ch_ _e, they were more
likely to pick choke instead of chase.
350/599

Bushman has been doing this research for
a while, and it keeps turning up the same
results. If you think catharsis is good, you are
more likely to seek it out when you get
pissed. When you vent, you stay angry and
are more likely to keep doing aggressive
things so you can keep venting. It’s druglike,
because there are brain chemicals and other
behavioral reinforcements at work. If you get
accustomed to blowing off steam, you be-
come dependent on it. The more effective ap-
proach is to just stop. Take your anger off of
the stove.
Bushman’s work also debunks the idea of
redirecting
your
anger
into
exercise
or
something similar. He says it will only main-
tain your state or increase your arousal level,
and afterward you may be even more ag-
gressive than if you had cooled off. Still, cool-
ing off is not the same thing as not dealing
with your anger at all. Bushman suggests you
delay
your
response,
relax
or
distract
351/599

yourself with an activity totally incompatible
with aggression.
If you get into an argument, or someone
cuts you off in traffic, or you get called an
awful name, venting will not dissipate the
negative energy. It will, however, feel great.
That’s the thing. Catharsis will make you feel
good, but it’s an emotional hamster wheel.
The emotion that led you to catharsis will
still be there afterward, and if the catharsis
made you feel good, you’ll seek that emotion
out again in the future.
352/599

32
The Misinformation Effect
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
Memories
are played back like recordings.
THE TRUTH: Memories are con-
structed
anew
each
time
from
whatever information is currently
available, which makes them highly
permeable
to
influences
from
the
present.
One night your friend tells a story about the
time the both of you watched Cool Hand
Luke and decided to try and eat as many
hard-boiled eggs as you could stomach, but
you got sick after five and swore never to eat
them again. You are both laughing and

clinking your glasses at the folly of your
youth, when another friend blows your mind
by saying, “No, that was me. You weren’t
even there.”
Your mind reels as the pages of your own
comic book flip by. You search the panels for
scenes that could confirm or deny whether
you have lost your mind, but you can’t find
conclusive evidence for either person’s ac-
count. Who ate those eggs?
Maybe it’s not this extreme, but every once
in a while someone tells a story that conflicts
with your recollection. The person embel-
lishes with details that slipped past your
mental fact-checkers. When you notice, as
above, it is a truly unsettling experience be-
cause normally you are oblivious to your
faulty reconstruction of memory. Not only is
your memory easily altered by the influence
of others, you also smooth over the incon-
gruences, rearrange time lines, and invent
scenarios, but rarely notice you’re doing this
354/599

until you see yourself in a video, or hear an-
other person’s version of the events. You
tend to see your memories as a continuous,
consistent movie, yet if you think of the last
film you saw, how much of it can you recall?
Could you sit back, close your eyes, and re-
call in perfect detail every scene, every line of
dialog? Of course not, so why do you assume
you can do the same for the movie of your
life?
Take out a piece of paper and get ready to
write. Really do it; it will be fun.
OK.
Now, read the following list of words out
loud one time, and then try to write as many
of them as you can remember on the paper
without looking back. When you think you
have them all down on paper, come back to
the book.
Go:
355/599

door, glass, pane, shade, ledge, sill,
house, open, curtain, frame, view,
breeze, sash, screen, shutter
Now, take a look at the list. How did you
do? Did you write down all the words? Did
you write the word “window” down? If this
test is presented properly, 85 percent of
people taking it will remember seeing “win-
dow” in the list, but it isn’t there. If you did,
you just gave yourself a false memory thanks
to the misinformation effect.
In 1974, Elizabeth Loftus at the University
of Washington conducted a study in which
people watched films of car crashes. She then
asked the participants to estimate how fast
the cars were going, but she divided the
people into groups and asked the question
differently
for
each.
These
were
the
questions:
• About how fast were the cars going
when they smashed into each other?
356/599

• About how fast were the cars going
when they collided into each other?
• About how fast were the cars going
when they bumped into each other?
• About how fast were the cars going
when they hit each other?
• About how fast were the cars going
when they contacted each other?
The people’s answers in miles per hour av-
eraged like this:
• Smashed—40.8
• Collided—39.3
• Bumped—38.1
• Hit—34.0
• Contacted—31.8
Just by changing the wording, the memor-
ies of the subjects were altered. The car
crashes were replayed in the participants’
minds, but this time the word “smashed” ne-
cessitated the new version of the memory
357/599

include cars that were going fast enough to
validate the adjective.
Loftus raised the ante by asking the same
people if they remembered broken glass in
the film. There was no broken glass, but sure
enough the people who were given the word
“smashed” in their question were twice as
likely to remember seeing it.
Since then, hundreds of experiments into
the misinformation effect have been conduc-
ted, and people have been convinced of all
sorts
of
things.
Screwdrivers
become
wrenches, white men become black men, and
experiences
involving
other
people
get
traded back and forth. In one study, Loftus
convinced people they were once lost in a
shopping mall as a child. She had subjects
read four essays provided by family mem-
bers, but the one about getting lost as a kid
was fake. A quarter of the subjects incorpor-
ated the fake story into their memory and
even provided details about the fictional
358/599

event that were not included in the narrative.
Loftus even convinced people they shook
hands with Bugs Bunny, who isn’t a Disney
character, when they visited Disney World as
a kid, just by showing them a fake advertise-
ment where a child was doing the same. She
altered the food preferences of subjects in
one experiment where she lied to people,
telling them they had reported becoming sick
from eating certain things as a child. A few
weeks later, when offered those same foods,
those people avoided them. In other experi-
ments, she implanted memories of surviving
drowning
and
fending
off
animal
at-
tacks—none of them real, all of them accep-
ted into the autobiography of the subjects
without resistance.
Loftus has made it her life’s work to show-
case the unreliability of memory. She has ral-
lied against eyewitness testimony and sus-
pect lineups for decades now, and she also
has criticized psychologists who say they can
359/599

dredge up repressed memories from child-
hood. For instance, in one of her experi-
ments she had subjects watch a pretend
crime and then select the culprit out of a
lineup. The police told the subjects the per-
petrator was one of the people standing be-
fore them, but it was a trick. None of them
were the real suspect, yet 78 percent of the
people still identified one of the innocent
people as the person who they saw commit-
ting the crime. Memory just doesn’t work
like that, Loftus says, but despite this, many
of our institutions and societal norms persist
as though it does.
There are many explanations as to why
this is happening, but the effect is well estab-
lished and predictable. Scientists generally
agree memories aren’t recorded like videos
or stored like data on a hard drive. They are
constructed and assembled on the spot as if
with Legos from a bucket in your brain.
Neurologist Oliver Sacks wrote in The Island
360/599

of the Colorblind about a patient who be-
came colorblind after a brain injury. Not only
could he not see certain colors, he couldn’t
imagine them or remember them. Memories
of cars and dresses and carnivals were sud-
denly drained, washed down. Even though
this patient’s memories were first imprinted
when he could see color, they now could be
conjured up only with the faculties of his cur-
rent imagination. Each time you build a
memory, you make it from scratch, and if
much time has passed you stand a good
chance of getting the details wrong. With a
little influence, you might get big ones
wrong.
In 2001, Henry L. Roediger III, Michelle L.
Meade, and Erik T. Bergman at Washington
University had students list ten items they
would expect to see in a typical kitchen, tool-
box, bathroom, and other common areas in
most homes. Think about it yourself. What
ten items would you expect to find in a
361/599

modern kitchen? This idea, this imaginary
place, is a schema. You have schemas for just
about everything—pirates, football, micro-
scopes—images and related ideas that orbit
the archetypes for objects, scenarios, rooms,
and so on. Those archetypes form over time
as you see examples in life or in stories from
other people. You also have schemas for
places you’ve never been, like the bottom of
the ocean or ancient Rome.
For instance, when you imagine the an-
cient Romans, do you see chariots and
marble statues with bone-white columns
stretching overhead? You probably do, be-
cause this is how ancient Rome is always de-
picted in movies and television. Would it
surprise you to know those columns and
sculptures were painted with a rainbow of
colors that would be gaudy by today’s aes-
thetic standards? They were. Your schema is
fast, but inaccurate. Schemas function as
heuristics; the less you have to think about
362/599

these concepts the faster you can process
thoughts that involve them. When a schema
leads to a stereotype, a prejudice, or a cognit-
ive bias, you trade an acceptable level of in-
accuracy for more speed.
Back to the experiment. After the psycho-
logists had the students list items they’d ex-
pect to find in various household locations,
they brought in actors posing as a new batch
of students and paired them up with the stu-
dents who’d just made their lists. Together,
the subjects and the confederates looked at
slides depicting the familiar locations and
were asked to pay close attention to what
they saw so they could remember it later on.
To clear their mental palates, the subjects
did some math problems before moving on
to the last part of the experiment. The stu-
dents then returned with their partners and
together recalled out loud what they re-
membered in the scenes, but the confeder-
ates included items that weren’t in the
363/599

pictures. The kitchen scene, for example,
didn’t feature a toaster or oven mitts, but
both were falsely recalled by the actors. After
the ruse, the subjects were handed a sheet of
paper and asked to list all the things they
could remember.
As you’ve deduced by now, the subjects
were easily implanted with false memories
for items they expected to be in the scenes.
They listed items that were never shown but
had been suggested by their partners. Their
schemas for kitchens already included toast-
ers and oven mitts, so when the actors said
they saw those things, it was no problem for
their minds to go ahead and add them to the
memory. If their partners had instead said
they remembered seeing a toilet bowl in the
kitchen, it would have been harder to accept.
In
1932,
psychologist
Charles
Bartlett
presented a folktale from American Indian
culture to subjects and then asked them to
retell the story back to him every few months
364/599

for a year. Over time, the story become less
like the original and more like a story that
sounded as though it came from the culture
of the person recalling it.
In the original story, two men from Egulac
are hunting seals along a river when they
hear what they believe are war cries. They
hide until a canoe with five men approaches.
The men ask them to join them in a battle.
One man agrees; the other goes home. After
this, the story gets confusing because in the
battle someone hears someone else say the
men are ghosts. The man who traveled with
the warriors is hit, but it isn’t clear what hits
him or who. When he gets home, he tells his
people what happened, saying he fought with
ghosts. In the morning, something black
comes out of his mouth, and he dies.
The story is not only strange, but written
in an unusual way that makes it difficult to
understand. Over time, the subjects re-
shaped it to make sense to them. Their
365/599

versions became shorter, more linear, and
many details were left out that didn’t make
sense in the first place. The ghosts became
the enemy, or became the allies, but usually
became a central feature of the tale. Many
people interpreted them to be the undead,
even though in the tale the word “ghost”
identifies the name of the clan. The dying
man is tended to. The seal hunters become
fishermen. The river becomes a sea. The
black substance becomes his soul escaping or
a blood clot. After a year or so, the stories
started to include new characters, totems,
and ideas never present in the original, like
the journey as a pilgrimage, or the death as a
sacrifice.
Memory is imperfect, but also constantly
changing. Not only do you filter your past
through your present, but your memory is
easily infected by social contagion. You in-
corporate the memories of others into your
own head all the time. Studies suggest your
366/599

memory
is
permeable,
malleable,
and
evolving. It isn’t fixed and permanent, but
more like a dream that pulls in information
about what you are thinking about during
the day and adds new details to the narrat-
ive. If you suppose it could have happened,
you are far less likely to question yourself as
to whether it did.
The shocking part of these studies is how
easily memory gets tainted, how only a few
iterations of an idea can rewrite your autobi-
ography. Even stranger is how as memories
change, your confidence in them grows
stronger. Considering the relentless bom-
bardment to your thoughts and emotions
coming from friends, family, and all media:
How much of what you recall is accurate?
How much of the patchwork is yours alone?
What
about
the
stories
handed
down
through time or across a dinner table; what
is the ratio of fiction to fact? Considering the
misinformation effect not only requires you
367/599

to be skeptical of eyewitness testimony and
your own history, but it also means you can
be more forgiving when someone is certain
of something that is later revealed to be em-
bellished or even complete fiction.
Consider the previous exercise when you
falsely saw curtains in the list of things
around a window. It took almost no effort to
implant the memory because you were the
one doing the implanting. Recognize the
control you have over—wait, was it curtains?
368/599

33
Conformity
THE MISCONCEPTION: You are a
strong individual who doesn’t con-
form unless forced to.
THE TRUTH: It takes little more than
an authority figure or social pressure
to get you to obey, because conform-
ity is a survival instinct.
On April 4, 2004, a man calling himself Of-
ficer Scott called a McDonald’s in Mount
Washington, Kentucky. He told the assistant
manager,
Donna
Jean
Summers,
who
answered the phone, there had been a report
of theft and that Louise Ogborn was the
suspect.

Ogborn, eighteen, worked at the McDon-
ald’s in question, and the man on the other
line told Donna Jean Summers to take her
into the restaurant’s office, lock the door,
and strip her naked while another assistant
manager watched. He then asked her to de-
scribe the naked teenager to him. This went
on for more than an hour, until Summers
told Officer Scott she had to return to the
counter and continue her duties. He asked
her if her fiancé could take over, and so she
called him to the store. He arrived shortly
after, took the phone, and then started fol-
lowing instructions. Officer Scott told him to
tell Ogborn to dance, do jumping jacks, and
stand on furniture in the room. He did. She
did. Then, Officer Scott’s requests became
more sexual. He told Summer’s fiancé to
make Ogborn sit in his lap and kiss him so he
could smell her breath. When she resisted,
Officer Scott told him to spank her naked
bottom, which he did. More than three hours
370/599

into the ordeal, Officer Scott eventually con-
vinced Summers’s fiancé to force Ogborn to
perform oral sex while he listened. He then
asked for another man to take over, and
when a maintenance worker was called in to
take the phone, he asked what was going on.
He was shocked and skeptical. Officer Scott
hung up.
The call was one of more than seventy
made over the course of four years by one
man pretending to be a police officer. He
called fast-food restaurants in thirty-two
states and convinced people to shame them-
selves and others, sometimes in private,
sometimes in front of customers. With each
call he claimed to be working with the parent
corporation,
and
sometimes
he
said
he
worked for the bosses of the individual fran-
chises. He always claimed a crime had been
committed. Often, he said investigators and
other police officers were on their way. The
employees
dutifully
did
as
he
asked,
371/599

disrobing, posing, and embarrassing them-
selves for his amusement. Police eventually
captured David Stewart, a Florida prison se-
curity guard who had in his possession a call-
ing card that was traced back to several fast-
food restaurants, including one that had
been hoaxed. Stewart went to court in 2006
but was acquitted. The jury said there wasn’t
enough evidence to convict him. There were
no more hoax phone calls after the trial.
What could have made so many people fol-
low the commands of a person they had nev-
er met and from who they had no proof of his
being a police officer?
If I were to hand you a card with a single
line on it, and then hand you another card
with an identical line drawn near two others,
one longer and one shorter, do you think you
could match up the original to the copy?
Could you tell which line in a group of three
was the same length as the one on the first
card?
372/599

You could. Just about anyone would be
able to match up lines of equal length in just
a few seconds. Now, what if you were part of
a group trying to come to a consensus, and
the majority of the people said a line that
was clearly shorter than the original was the
one that matched? How would you react?
In 1951, psychologist Solomon Asch used
to perform an experiment where he would
get a group of people together and show
them cards like the ones described above. He
would then ask the group the same sort of
questions. Without coercion, about 2 percent
of people answered incorrectly. In the next
run of the experiment, Asch added actors to
the group who all agreed to incorrectly an-
swer his questions. If he asked which line
was the same, or longer, or shorter, or
whatever, they would force one hapless sub-
ject to be alone in disagreement.
You probably think you would go against
the grain and shake your head in disbelief.
373/599

You think you might say to yourself, “How
could these people be so stupid?” Well, I hate
to break it to you, but the research says you
would eventually break. In Asch’s experi-
ments, 75 percent of the subjects caved in on
at least one question. They looked at the
lines, knew the answer everyone else was
agreeing to was wrong, and went with it any-
way. Not only did they conform without be-
ing pressured, but when questioned later
they seemed oblivious to their own conform-
ity. When the experimenter told them they
had made an error, they came up with ex-
cuses as to why they made mistakes instead
of blaming the others. Intelligent people just
like you caved in, went with the group, and
then seemed confused as to why.
Asch messed around with the conditions of
the experiment, trying it with varying num-
bers of actors and unwitting subjects. He
found one or two people had little effect, but
three or more was all he needed to get a
374/599

small percentage of people to start conform-
ing. The percentage of people who con-
formed grew proportionally with the number
of people who joined in consensus against
them. Once the entire group other than the
subject was replaced with actors, only 25
percent of his subjects answered every ques-
tion correctly.
Most people, especially those in Western
cultures, like to see themselves as individu-
als, as people who march to a different beat.
You are probably the same sort of person.
You value your individuality and see yourself
as a nonconformist with unique taste, but
ask yourself: How far does this nonconform-
ity go? Do you live in an igloo made of boar
tusks in the Arizona desert while refusing to
drink the public water supply? Do you speak
a language you and your sister created as
children and lick strangers on the face dur-
ing the closing credits of dollar-theater mat-
inees? When other people applaud, do you
375/599

clap your feet together and boo? To truly re-
fuse to conform to the norms of your culture
and the laws of the land would be a daunting
exercise in futility. You may not agree with
the zeitgeist, but you know conformity is part
of the game of life. Chances are, you pick
your battles and let a lot of things slide. If
you travel to a foreign country, you look to
others as guides on how to behave. When
you visit someone else’s home, you do as that
person does. In a college classroom you sit
quietly and take notes. If you join a gym or
start a new job, the first thing you do is look
for clues as to how to behave. You shave your
legs or your face. You wear deodorant. You
conform.
As psychologist Noam Shpancer explains
on his blog, “We are often not even aware
when we are conforming. It is our home
base, our default mode.” Shpancer says you
conform because social acceptance is built
into your brain. To thrive, you know you
376/599

need allies. You get a better picture of the
world when you can receive information
from multiple sources. You need friends be-
cause outcasts are cut off from valuable re-
sources. So when you are around others, you
look for cues as to how to behave, and you
use the information offered by your peers to
make better decisions. When everyone you
know tells you about an awesome app for
your phone or a book you should read, it
sways you. If all of your friends tell you to
avoid a certain part of town or a brand of
cheese, you take their advice. Conformity is a
survival mechanism.
The most famous conformity experiment
was performed by Stanley Milgram in 1963.
He had people sit in a room and take com-
mands from a scientist in a lab coat. He told
them they would be teaching word pairs to
another subject in the next room, and each
time their partner got an answer wrong they
were to give them an electric shock. A control
377/599

panel on a complicated-looking contraption
clearly indicated the power of the shock.
Switches along a single row were labeled
with increasing voltages and a description.
At the low end it read “slight shock.” In the
middle
the
switch
was
labeled
“intense
shock.” At the end of the scale the switch
read “XXX,” which implied death. The man
in the lab coat would prompt the subject
pressing the buttons to shock the partner in
the next room. With each shock, screams
emanated from next door. After the screams,
the scientist in the lab coat asked the subject
to increase the voltage. The screams would
get louder, and eventually subjects could
hear the guy in the other room pleading for
his life and asking the psychologist to end
the experiment. Most subjects asked if they
could stop. They didn’t want to shock the
poor man in the next room, but the scientist
would urge them to continue, telling them
not to worry. The scientist said things like
378/599

“You have no other choice; you must go on”
or “The experiment requires that you contin-
ue.” To everyone’s surprise, 65 percent of
people could be prompted to go all the way
to right below the “XXX.” In reality, there
were no shocks, and the other person was
just an actor pretending to be in pain. Mil-
gram’s experiment has been repeated many
times with many variations. The percentage
of people who go all the way can be dropped
to zero just by removing the authority figure,
or it can be raised into the 90 percentile
range by having someone else give the test
while the subject has only to deliver the
shocks. Again, with Milgram’s experiment
there was no reward or punishment in-
volved—just simple conformity.
Milgram showed when you can see your
actions as part of just following orders, espe-
cially from an authority figure, there is a 65
percent chance you will go to the brink of
murder. Add the risk of punishment, or your
379/599

own harm, and chances of conformity in-
crease. Milgram’s work was a response to the
Holocaust. He wondered if an entire nation
could have its moral compass smashed, or if
conformity and obedience to authority were
more likely the root of so much compliance
to commit unspeakable evil. Milgram con-
cluded his subjects, and probably millions of
others, saw themselves as instruments in-
stead of people. When they became exten-
sions of the person doing the terrible act,
their own will was put aside where it could
remain clean of sin. Conformity, therefore,
can be manufactured when the person look-
ing for compliance convinces others they are
tools instead of human beings.
The restaurant employees hoaxed by Of-
ficer Scott would later say this was what
happened to them. Officer Scott’s demands
started small and bumped up incrementally,
just like Milgram’s shocks. By the time it was
uncomfortable, the situation had grown in
380/599

power. They feared retribution if they didn’t
follow new orders, and once they had crossed
the line into territory their morality couldn’t
condone, they phased out of their own per-
sonality and into the role of an instrument of
the law.
Be aware: Your desire to conform is strong
and unconscious. Sometimes, like at a family
dinner, the desire to keep everyone happy
and to adhere to social conventions is a good
thing. It keeps you close and connected to
the norms that make it easier to work togeth-
er in the modern world. But also beware of
the other side—the dark places that conform-
ity can lead to. Never be afraid to question
authority when your actions could harm
yourself or others. Even in simple situations,
like the next time you see a line of people
waiting to get into a classroom or a movie or
a restaurant, feel free to break norms—go
check the door and look inside.
381/599

34
Extinction Burst
THE MISCONCEPTION: If you stop
engaging in a bad habit, the habit
will gradually diminish until it disap-
pears from your life.
THE TRUTH: Any time you quit
something cold turkey, your brain
will make a last-ditch effort to return
you to your habit.
You’ve been there.
You get serious about losing weight and
start to watch every calorie. You read labels,
stock up on fruits and vegetables, hit the
gym. Everything is going fine. You feel great.
You feel like a champion. You think, “This is

easy.” One day you give in to temptation and
eat some candy, or a doughnut, or a cheese-
burger. Maybe you buy a bag of chips. You
order the fettuccine alfredo. That afternoon,
you decide not only will you eat whatever
you want, but to celebrate the occasion you
will eat a pint of ice cream. The diet ends in a
catastrophic binge.
What the hell? How did your smooth
transition from comfort food to human
Dumpster happen? You just experienced an
extinction burst.
Once you become accustomed to reward,
you get really upset when you can’t have it.
Food, of course, is a powerful reward. It
keeps you alive. Your brain didn’t evolve in
an environment where there was an abund-
ance of food, so whenever you find a high-
calorie, high-fat, high-sodium source, your
natural inclination is to eat a lot of it and
then go back to it over and over again. If you
383/599

take away a reward like that, your brain
throws a tantrum.
Extinction bursts are a component of ex-
tinction, one of the principles of condition-
ing. Conditioning is among the most basic
factors shaping the way any organism—in-
cluding you—reacts to the world. If you get
rewarded by your actions, you are more
likely to continue them. If punished, you are
more likely to stop. Over time, you begin to
predict reward and punishment by linking
longer and longer series of events to their
eventual outcomes.
If you want some chicken nuggets, you
know you can’t just snap your fingers and
have them appear. You must engage in a
long sequence of actions—acquire language,
acquire
money,
acquire
a
car,
acquire
clothes, acquire fuel, learn to drive, learn to
use money, learn where nuggets are sold,
drive to the nuggets, use language, exchange
money, etc. This string of behaviors could be
384/599

sliced up into smaller and smaller compon-
ents if we wanted to really dig down into the
conditioning you have endured in order to be
able to get nuggets in your mouth. Just driv-
ing the car from point A to point B is a com-
plex performance that becomes automatic
after hundreds of hours of practice. Millions
of tiny behaviors, each one a single step in a
process, add up to a single operation you
have learned will pay off in reward. Think of
rats in a maze, learning a complicated series
of steps—turn left two times, turn right once,
turn left, right, left, get cheese. Even mi-
croorganisms can be conditioned to react to
stimuli and predict outcomes.
For a while in psychology, conditioning
was the cat’s pajamas. In the 1960s and ’70s,
Burrhus Frederic Skinner became a scientist
celebrity by scaring the shit out of America
with an invention called the operant condi-
tioning chamber—the Skinner Box. The box
is an enclosure with a combination of levers,
385/599

food dispensers, an electric floor, lights, and
loudspeakers. Scientists place animals in the
box and either reward them or punish them
to either encourage or discourage their beha-
vior. Rats, for example, can be taught to push
a lever when a green light appears to get a
food pellet. Skinner demonstrated how he
could teach a pigeon to spin in circles at his
command by offering food only when it
turned in one direction. Gradually, he with-
held the food until the pigeon had turned a
little farther and farther, until he had it going
round and round. He could even get the pi-
geon
to
distinguish
between
the
words
“peck” and “turn” and get the pigeon to per-
form the corresponding behavior just by
showing it a sign. Yes, in a sense, he taught a
bird to read.
Skinner discovered you could get pigeons
and rats to do complicated tasks by slowly
building up chains of behaviors through
handing out pellets of food. For example, if
386/599

you want to teach a squirrel to water ski, you
just need to start small and work your way
up. Other researchers added punishment to
the routines and discovered it too could be
used like the pellets to encourage and dis-
courage behavior. Skinner became convinced
conditioning was the root of all behavior,
and he didn’t believe rational thinking had
anything to do with your personal life. He
considered introspection to be a “collateral
product” of conditioning.
Some psychologists and philosophers still
hold to the idea you are nothing but a soph-
isticated automaton, like a spider or a fish.
You have no freedom, no free will. Your
brain is made of atoms and molecules that
must obey the laws of physics and chemistry,
so some say your mind is thereby locked into
service
to
the
rules
of
the
universe.
Everything you have thought, felt, and done
in your life was the natural mathematical af-
termath of the Big Bang. To this wing of
387/599

psychology, you are the same as an insect,
just with a more complex nervous system re-
sponding to stimuli with a wider array of
denser behavioral routines that only appear
to give rise to consciousness. You may take
comfort in knowing this is a hotly contested
idea, one that goes back to the Greek philo-
sophers who imagined the unconscious as
wild horses pulling a chariot helmed by your
upper-level reasoning. Whether or not you
have free will, conditioning is real, and its
impact can’t be ignored.
There are two kinds of conditioning—clas-
sical and operant. In classical conditioning,
something that normally doesn’t have any
influence becomes a trigger for a response. If
you are taking a shower and someone flushes
the toilet, which then causes the water to be-
come a scalding torrent, you become condi-
tioned to recoil in terror the next time you
hear the toilet flush while lathering up.
That’s
classical
conditioning.
Something
388/599

neutral—the
toilet
flushing—becomes
charged with meaning and expectation. You
have no control over it. You recoil from the
water without ever thinking, “I should recoil
from this water else I get scalded.” If you
have ever been sick after eating or drinking
something you love, you will avoid it in the
future. The smell of it, or even the thought of
it, can make you ill. For me, it’s tequila. Ugh,
gross. Classical conditioning keeps you alive.
You learn quickly to avoid that which may
harm you and seek out that which makes you
happy, just like an amoeba.
The sort of complex behavior Skinner pro-
duced in animals was the result of operant
conditioning. Operant conditioning changes
your
desires.
Your
inclinations
become
greater through reinforcement, or diminish
through punishment. You go to work, you get
paid. You turn on the air-conditioning and
stop sweating. You don’t run the red light,
you don’t get a ticket. You pay the rent, you
389/599

don’t get evicted. It’s all operant condition-
ing, punishment and reward.
This finally brings us back to the third
factor—extinction. When you expect a re-
ward or a punishment and nothing happens,
your conditioned response starts to fade
away. If you stop feeding your cat, he will
stop hanging around the food bowl and
meowing. His behavior will go extinct. If you
were to keep going to work and not get paid,
eventually you would stop. This is when the
extinction burst happens, right as the beha-
vior
is
breathing
its
final
breath.
You
wouldn’t just not go to work anymore. You
would probably storm into the boss’s office
and demand an explanation. If you got
nowhere
after
gesticulating
wildly
and
screaming, you might scoop your arm across
his desk and leave in handcuffs.
Just before you give up on a long-practiced
routine, you freak out. It’s a final desperate
attempt by the oldest parts of your brain to
390/599

keep getting rewarded. You lock your keys in
your
apartment,
but
your
roommate
is
asleep. You ring the doorbell and knock, but
your roommate doesn’t come. You ring the
doorbell over and over and over. You start
pounding on the door. If your computer
freezes up, you don’t just walk away, you
start clicking all over the place and maybe go
so far as to bang your fists on the keyboard.
If a child doesn’t get any candy at the check-
out line, he or she may throw a giant tantrum
because in the past such behavior has gotten
candy. These are all extinction bursts—a
temporary increase in an old behavior, a plea
from the recesses of your psyche.
So back to that diet. You eliminate a re-
ward from your life: awesome and delicious
high-calorie foods. Right as you are ready to
give the reward up forever, an extinction
burst threatens to demolish your willpower.
You become like a two-year-old in a connip-
tion fit, and like the child, if you give in to
391/599

the
demands,
the
behavior
will
be
strengthened. Compulsive overeating is a
frenzied state of mind, food addiction under
pressure until it bursts.
To give up overeating, or smoking, or
gambling, or World of Warcraft, or any bad
habit that was formed through conditioning,
you must be prepared to weather the secret
weapon of your unconscious—the extinction
burst. Become your own Supernanny, your
own Dog Whisperer. Look for alternative re-
wards and positive reinforcement. Set goals,
and when you achieve them, shower yourself
with garlands of your choosing. Don’t freak
out when it turns out to be difficult. Habits
form because you are not so smart, and they
cease under the same conditions.
392/599

35
Social Loafing
THE MISCONCEPTION: When you
are joined by others in a task, you
work
harder
and
become
more
accomplished.
THE TRUTH: Once part of a group,
you tend to put in less effort because
you know your work will be pooled
together with others’.
When you want to accomplish something
big, something that will require a lot of time
and effort like a start-up business or a short
film, your instincts might tell you the more
people you can afford to hire the better the
work will be and the faster you will reach

your goals. The truth though is when you
join the efforts of others toward a common
goal, everyone has a tendency to loaf more
than if each was working alone. If you know
you aren’t being judged as an individual,
your instinct is to fade into the background.
To prove this, psychologist Alan Ingham
ruined tug-of-war forever. In 1974, he had
people put on a blindfold and grab a rope.
The rope was attached to a rather medieval-
looking contraption that simulated the res-
istance of an opposing team. The subjects
were told many other people were also hold-
ing the rope on their side, and he measured
their effort. Then, he told them they would
be pulling alone, and again he measured.
They were alone both times, but when they
thought they were in a group, they pulled 18
percent less strenuously on average.
This version of social loafing is sometimes
called the Ringelmann effect after French en-
gineer
Maximilien
Ringelmann,
who
394/599

discovered in 1913 that if he had people get
together in groups to pull on a strain gauge,
their combined efforts would tally up to be
less than the sum of their individual strength
measurements on the same instrument. To-
gether, Ingham and Ringelmann’s work in-
troduced social loafing to psychology: You
put in less effort when in a group than you
would if working alone on the same project.
When the lead singer at the concert asks
you to scream as loud as you can, and then
he asks again, going, “I can’t hear you! You
can do better than that!” have you ever no-
ticed that the second time is always louder?
Why wasn’t everyone yelling at the top of
their lungs the first time? Some really cool
scientists actually tested this in 1979. Bibb
Latane, Kipling Williams, and Stephen Har-
kins at Ohio State University had people
shout as loud as they could in a group and
then alone, or vice-versa. Sure enough, the
overall loudness of a small group of people
395/599

was less than any one of them by themselves.
You can even chart this on a graph. The more
people you add, the less effort any one per-
son does. It arches away like a perfect ski
slope. You do this all the time, but you don’t
do it on purpose—well, except when you just
mouth the words to the song everyone else is
singing. In all of these experiments, the trick
was to keep people from realizing what was
going on. As long as you think you are part of
a group, you unconsciously put in less effort.
No one realizes it, and no one admits to it.
This behavior is more likely to show up
when the task at hand is simple. With com-
plex tasks, it is usually easy to tell who isn’t
pulling their weight. Once you know your
laziness can be seen, you try harder. You do
this because of another behavior called eval-
uation apprehension, which is just a fancy
way of saying you care more when you know
you are being singled out. Your anxiety levels
396/599

decrease when you know your effort will be
pooled with others’. You relax. You coast.
Sports scientists over the years have in-
formed coaches of this behavior, so now
most major teams isolate each player when
they’re trying to evaluate them, going so far
as to film them individually with a different
camera so the player won’t fall prey to social
loafing. This phenomenon has been observed
in every possible situation involving group
effort. Communal farms always produce less
than individually owned farms. Factories
where people do repetitive tasks with no su-
pervision
are
less
productive
than
ones
where each person has an individual quota to
reach.
Be aware, most organizations know all
about social loafing these days; somewhere
up the chain a psychologist has ratted you
out. So it’s likely, especially if you work for a
corporation, that your output is being mon-
itored in some way and you are being told
397/599

about it so you’ll work harder. They know
when it comes to group effort, you are not so
smart.
398/599

36
The Illusion of Transparency
THE MISCONCEPTION: When your
emotions run high, people can look at
you and tell what you are thinking
and feeling.
THE TRUTH: Your subjective experi-
ence is not observable, and you over-
estimate how much you telegraph
your inner thoughts and emotions.
You stand in front of your public speaking
class with your notes centered on the lectern,
your stomach performing gymnastics. You
sat through all the other speeches, tapping
the floor, transferring nervous energy into
the tiles through a restless foot, periodically

wiping your sweaty hands off on your pants.
Each time the speaker concluded and the
class applauded, you clapped along with
everyone else, and as it subsided you realized
how loud your heart was thumping when a
fresh silence settled. Finally, the instructor
called your name, and your eyes cranked
open. You felt as if you had eaten a spoonful
of sawdust as you walked up to the black-
board, planting each foot carefully so as not
to stumble. As you begin to speak the lines
you’ve rehearsed, you search the faces of
your classmates.
“Why is he smiling? What is she scrib-
bling? Is that a frown?”
“Oh no,” you think, “they can see how
nervous I am.
“I must look like an idiot. I’m bombing,
aren’t I? This is horrible. Please let a meteor
hit this classroom before I have to say anoth-
er word.”
400/599

“I’m sorry,” you say to the audience. “Let
me start over.”
Now it’s even worse. What kind of moron
apologizes in the middle of a speech? Your
voice quavers. Flop sweat gathers behind
your neck. You become certain your skin
must be glowing red and everyone in the
room is holding back laughter. Except, they
aren’t. They are just bored. Your anxiety is
peaking, and it feels like waves of emotional
energy must be radiating from your head in
some sort of despair halo, but there is noth-
ing to see on the outside other than your fa-
cial expressions and flushed skin. To get in-
formation out of one head and into another,
it has to be transmitted through some sort of
communication.
Faces,
sounds,
gestures,
words like the ones you are reading now—we
must depend on these clunky tools because
no matter how strong an emotion or how
powerful an idea, it never seems as intense
or potent to the world outside your mind as
401/599

it does to the one within. This is the illusion
of transparency.
You know what you are feeling and think-
ing, and you tend to believe those thoughts
and emotions are leaking out of your pores,
visible to the world, perceivable to the out-
side. You overestimate how obvious what
you truly think must be and fail to recognize
that other people are in their own little
bubble, thinking the same thing about their
inner worlds. When you try to imagine what
other people are thinking, you have no
choice but to start from inside your noggin.
In there, among your inescapable self, you
think your thoughts and feelings must be
evident. Sure, when people are paying atten-
tion, they can read you to an extent, but you
grossly overestimate how much so.
You can test the illusion of transparency
using a method created by Elizabeth Newton.
Pick a song everyone knows, like your na-
tional anthem, and have someone else sit
402/599

across from you. Now tap out the song with
your fingertips. After a verse or two, ask the
other person what you were tapping. In your
mind, you can hear every note, every instru-
ment. In their mind, they can hear your fin-
gers tapping. Pause here and try it out. I’ll
wait.
OK. I’m going to assume you’ve been tap-
ping. How did you do? Did they figure out
what you were trying to play? Probably not.
In Newton’s study, the tappers predicted the
listeners would be able to guess the tune half
of
the
time,
but
the
listeners
correctly
guessed about 3 percent of the songs.
The huge discrepancy between what you
think people will understand and what they
really do has probably led to all sorts of mis-
takes in text messages and e-mails. If you are
like me, you often have to back up and re-
state your case, or answer questions about
your tone, or reword everything and try
sending it again.
403/599

On the Internet, people often include “/s”
at the end of a statement to indicate sarcasm
(it’s a programming joke, essentially mean-
ing “conclude sarcasm”). It was so hard to
communicate tone online we had to create a
new punctuation mark. Getting an idea out
of one head and into another is difficult, and
much can be lost in the information transfer.
An insight that slams into you like an ava-
lanche won’t have the same impact coming
out of your mouth or fingertips.
In 1998, Thomas Gilovich, Victoria Med-
vec, and Kenneth Savitsky published their
research on the illusion of transparency.
They reasoned your subjective experience, or
phenomenology, was so potent you would
have a hard time seeing beyond it when you
were in a heightened emotional state. Their
hypothesis was based on the spotlight ef-
fect—the belief everyone is looking right at
you, judging your actions and appearance,
when in reality you disappear into the
404/599

background most of the time. Gilovich, Med-
vec, and Savitsky figured the effect was so
powerful it made you feel as if the imaginary
spotlight
could
penetrate
your
gestures,
words, and expressions and reveal your
private world as well. They had Cornell stu-
dents divide into groups. An audience would
listen as individuals read questions from in-
dex cards and then answered them out loud.
They either lied or told the truth based on
what the card said to do on a label only they
could see. Audience members were told they
would get prizes based on how many liars
they detected. Liars would say something
like “I have met David Letterman.” They
then had to guess how many people could
tell they had lied, while the audience tried to
figure out who out of the five were fibbing.
The results? Half of the liars thought they
had
been
caught,
but
only
a
quarter
were—they
strongly
overestimated
their
transparency. In subsequent experiments the
405/599

variables were shuffled around and the lies
presented in other ways; the results were
nearly identical.
Studies in the 1980s showed you are con-
fident in your ability to see through liars, yet
you are actually terrible at it. On the other
side, you think your own lies will be easy to
detect.
Gilovich,
Medvec,
and
Savitsky
moved on to another experiment. They sat
students down in front of a video camera and
a row of fifteen cups filled with red liquid.
They asked to students to hide their expres-
sions as they tasted the beverages, because
five of the drinks were going to be rat nasty.
They then had ten people watch the tape and
asked the students who did the tasting to es-
timate how many of the observers would be
able
to
tell
when
they
had
imbibed
something gross. About a third of the observ-
ers could tell when people were disgusted, or
at least they said they could and guessed
well. The people doing the tasting predicted
406/599

about half would be able to see through their
attempts to hide revulsion. The illusion of
transparency jacked up the powers of obser-
vation they imagined in their judges.
Pushing ahead, the researchers tried an-
other experiment based on the research of
Miller and McFarland on the bystander ef-
fect (the more people who witness an emer-
gency, the less likely any one person will leap
into
action).
Once
again,
their
research
showed when people were in a situation in
which they felt concerned and alarmed, they
assumed it was written all over their faces,
when in reality it wasn’t. So no one acted. In
turn, they thought if other people were freak-
ing out, they would be able to see it. In 2003,
Kenneth Savitsky and Thomas Gilovich con-
ducted a study to determine if they could
short-circuit the illusion of transparency.
They had people give public speeches on the
spot and then rate how nervous they thought
they looked to their audience. Sure enough,
407/599

they said they looked like a wreck, but the
onlookers didn’t notice it. Still, in this exper-
iment some people got stuck in a feedback
loop. They thought they appeared nervous,
so they started to try and compensate, and
then they thought the compensation was no-
ticeable and tried to cover that up, which
they then felt was more obvious, and so on,
until they’d worked themselves up into a
state where they were obviously freaking
out. The researchers decided to run the ex-
periment again, but this time they explained
the illusion of transparency to some of the
subjects, telling them they might feel like
everyone could see them losing it, but they
probably couldn’t. This time, the feedback
loop was broken. Those told about the illu-
sion felt less stressed, gave better speeches,
and the audiences said they were more
composed.
When your emotions take over, when your
own mental state becomes the focus of your
408/599

attention, your ability to gauge what other
people are experiencing gets muted. If you
are trying to see yourself through their eyes,
you will fail. Knowing this, you can plan for
the effect and overcome it.
When you get near the person you have a
crush on and feel the war drums in your gut,
don’t freak out. You don’t look as nervous as
you feel. When you stand in front of an audi-
ence or get interviewed on camera, there
might be a thunderstorm of anxiety in your
brain, but it can’t get out; you look far more
composed than you believe. Smile. When
your mother-in-law cooks a meal better fit
for a dog bowl, she can’t hear your brain
stem begging you to spit it out.
If
you
are
trying
to
communicate
something complex, if you have vast know-
ledge of a subject and someone else does not,
realize it is going to be difficult to get it
across the gulf between your brain and
theirs. The explanation process may become
409/599

thorny, but don’t take it out on the other per-
son. Just because that person can’t see inside
your mind doesn’t mean he or she is not so
smart. You don’t suddenly become telepathic
when you are angry, anxious, or alarmed.
Keep calm and carry on.
410/599

37
Learned Helplessness
THE MISCONCEPTION: If you are in
a bad situation, you will do whatever
you can do to escape it.
THE TRUTH: If you feel like you
aren’t in control of your destiny, you
will give up and accept whatever
situation you are in.
In 1965, a psychologist named Martin Selig-
man started shocking dogs.
He was trying to expand on the research of
Pavlov—the guy who could make dogs saliv-
ate when they heard a bell ring. Seligman
wanted to head in the other direction, and
when he rang his bell, instead of providing

food, he zapped the dogs with electricity. To
keep them still, he restrained them in a har-
ness during the experiment. After they were
conditioned, he put these dogs in a big box
with a little fence dividing it into two halves.
He figured if the dog rang the bell, it would
hop over the fence to escape, but it didn’t. It
just sat there and braced itself. They decided
to try shocking the dog after the bell. The dog
still just sat there and took it. When they put
a dog in the box that had never been shocked
before or had previously been allowed to es-
cape and tried to zap it—it jumped the fence.
You are just like these dogs.
If, over the course of your life, you have
experienced crushing defeat or pummeling
abuse or loss of control, you convince your-
self over time that there is no escape, and if
escape is offered, you will not act—you be-
come a nihilist who trusts futility above
optimism.
412/599

Studies of the clinically depressed show
that they often give in to defeat and stop try-
ing. The average person will look for external
forces to blame when he or she fails the
midterm. People will say the professor is an
asshole, or they didn’t get enough sleep. But
depressed people will often blame them-
selves and assume they are stupid. Seligman
called this your explanatory style. You see
events affecting your life along three gradi-
ents: personal, permanent, and pervasive. If
you blame yourself or blame forces beyond
your control, it hurts more. If you believe the
situation
will
never
change,
sadness
is
stronger than if you believe tomorrow things
will be better. If you think your problems af-
fect every element of your existence instead
of just a specific element of your life, once
again, you feel far worse. Pessimism sits on
one side of the gradient and optimism on the
other.
The
more
pessimistic
your
413/599

explanatory style, the easier it is to slip into
learned helplessness.
Do you vote?
If not, is it because you think it doesn’t
matter because things never change, or
politicians are evil on both sides, or one vote
in several million doesn’t count? Yeah, that’s
learned helplessness.
When battered women, or hostages, or ab-
used children, or longtime prisoners refuse
to escape, they don’t because they have ac-
cepted the futility of trying. What does it
matter? Those who do get out of bad situ-
ations often have a hard time committing to
anything that may lead to failure. Any exten-
ded period of negative emotions can lead to
you giving in to despair and accepting your
fate. If you remain alone for a long time, you
will decide loneliness is a fact of life and pass
up opportunities to hang out with people.
The loss of control in any situation can lead
to this state.
414/599

In another study by Seligman, he grafted
cancer cells into rats so they would develop
fatal tumors. The rats were then given
routine electric shocks, but some had an op-
portunity to escape by pressing a lever.
Another group received no shocks at all. One
month later, 63 percent of the rats who could
escape rejected their tumors. By comparison,
54 percent of the group who were not
shocked rejected theirs. The survival rate of
the group forced to bear the shocks was only
23 percent. Rats suffering from cancer will
die
faster
if
placed
in
an
inescapable
situation.
A study in 1976 by Ellen Langer and
Judith Rodin showed in nursing homes
where conformity and passivity are encour-
aged and every whim is attended to, the
health and well-being of the patients declines
rapidly. If, instead, the people in these
homes are given responsibilities and choices,
they
remain
healthy
and
active.
This
415/599

research
was
repeated
in
prisons.
Sure
enough, just letting prisoners move furniture
and control the television kept them from
developing health problems and staging re-
volts. In homeless shelters where people
can’t pick out their own beds or choose what
to eat, the residents are less likely to try and
get a job or find an apartment. When you are
able to succeed at easy tasks, hard tasks feel
possible to accomplish. When you are unable
to succeed at small tasks, everything seems
harder.
Psychologist Charisse Nixon at Penn State
Erie shows her students how learned help-
lessness works by having them complete
word unscrambling tests. She asks her stu-
dents to rearrange the letters in words so
they create new words. She asks her class to
do
this
one
word
at
a
time:
“whirl,”
“slapstick,” “cinerama.” Try it yourself, but
don’t move to the next word until you finish
the first. If you were in Nixon’s classroom, as
416/599

you were working on the first word she
would ask for everyone who was already fin-
ished to raise their hands, and then you
would look up and see half the class was
ready to move on. Nixon then tells everyone
to go to the next word, and once again every-
one but you and a few others raises a hand.
Again, she repeats this for the third word,
and again half the class gets it quickly while
the rest sits dumbfounded. The trick in her
informal study is that half the class gets the
words above, and the other half gets: “bat,”
“lemon,” “cinerama.” “Bat” is easily turned
into “tab,” and “lemon” becomes “melon”
just as easily. So when the half with the easy
words gets to “cinerama,” they find it simple
to unscramble it into American. If you acted
like most people, you would feel weird and
inadequate as the hands went in the air while
you looked at “whirl” and turned it over in
your head searching for another word to
make from the letters. “If this is so easy,
417/599

what is wrong with me?” Then comes “slap-
stick,” and now you feel even dumber, as half
your peers seem to have no problem figuring
it out. Now, with learned helplessness in full
effect, you see “cinerama” differently from
the now confident others with the easy word
tasks. Even though it shouldn’t be too tough,
learned helplessness tells you to give up. In
Nixon’s classes, this is what usually happens.
The half with the impossible words gives in
by the third word.
The leading theory as to how such a
strange behavior would evolve is that it
springs from all organisms’ desire to con-
serve resources. If you can’t escape a source
of stress, it leads to more stress, and this
positive feedback loop eventually triggers an
automatic shutdown. At its most extreme,
you think if you keep struggling you might
die. If you stop, there is a chance the bad
thing will go away.
418/599

Every day you feel like you can’t control
the forces affecting your fate—your job, the
government, your addiction, your depres-
sion, your money. So you stage micro-re-
volts. You customize your ring tone, you
paint your room, you collect stamps. You
choose.
Choices, even small ones, can hold back
the crushing weight of helplessness, but you
can’t stop there. You must fight back your
behavior and learn to fail with pride. Failing
often is the only way to ever get the things
you want out of life. Besides death, your des-
tiny is not inescapable.
You are not so smart, but you are smarter
than dogs and rats. Don’t give in yet.
419/599

38
Embodied Cognition
THE MISCONCEPTION: Your opin-
ions of people and events are based
on objective evaluation.
THE TRUTH: You translate your
physical world into words, and then
believe those words.
Imagine this scene.
You brush the snow off your shoulders as
you step into a home where a fire crackles in
the corner. You slip on a sweater, wrap your
hands around a cup of steaming cider, and
sit back in a comfortable chair across from
the fireplace. Sound cozy?

As strange as this is going to sound, people
think in metaphors—words like “warm” and
“cold,” “fast” and “slow,” “bright” and “dark,”
“hard” and “soft.” These words mean two
things. “Cold” can be a physical sensation
but also a mood, demeanor, or style. “Dark”
can describe a shade of color, or the way a
song sounds. “Hard” can be a type of bar-
gaining technique or the resistance of a chair
to your back.
The
scene
above
is
warm—physically
warm—and as a result, all of your interac-
tions and observations in such a setting will
be interpreted as being emotionally warm.
Warm sensations bring up word associations
that include warmth, and those thoughts
prime you to behave in a way that could be
metaphorically described as warm.
In 2008, Lawrence Williams and John
Bargh conducted a study where they had
people meet strangers. One group held a cup
of warm coffee, and the other group held
421/599

iced coffee. Later, when asked to rate the
stranger’s personality, the people who held
the warm coffee said they found the stranger
to be nice, generous, and caring. The other
group said the same person was difficult,
standoffish, hard to talk to. In another round
of research subjects held either a heating pad
or a cold pack and then were asked to look at
various products and judge their overall
quality. Once they had done this, the experi-
menters told them they could choose a gift to
keep for participating or they could give the
gift to someone else. Those who held the
heating pad chose to give away their reward
54 percent of the time, but only 25 percent of
the cold pack group shared. The groups had
turned their physical sensations into words,
and then used those words as metaphors to
explain their perceptions or predict their
own actions.
There’s a lot of research showcasing this
phenomenon. You see people with bright
422/599

clothes as being friendly and smart—bright.
You see people who speak slowly as being
less intelligent—slow. Whatever metaphors
your culture uses will change the way you
feel about the world around you, should it
match up with those words. The sensation of
touch is also a powerful form of this phe-
nomenon—the way things feel to your skin
can translate to how they feel to your heart.
In a 2010 study conducted by Josh Acker-
man, Christopher C. Nocera, and their asso-
ciates, subjects pretended to conduct job in-
terviews. They took their interviewing job
more seriously and saw résumés as being
more impressive if those résumés were at-
tached to heavy clipboards. Resumes at-
tached to light clipboards were regarded as
being from less-qualified applicants. The
weight and heaviness of the participants’
physical sensation translated not only into
the weight and heft of their duty but the im-
port of what they read. In another of the
423/599

researchers’ studies people pretending to buy
a car who sat in hard-backed chairs haggled
more and expected better bargains than did
those who sat in cushioned ones. The chair
was hard, so they drove a hard bargain.
In experiments where people sat in a cold
room and watched videos of chess games,
they later described the video in empirical
terms. If they instead were seated in a warm
room, they describe the video with emotions
and anecdotes. The next time you watch a
movie, notice how great filmmakers put
words in your mind so you will interpret the
following scenes with the emotions they
want you to feel. If the angle is askew, you
then see the characters or the situation as
being off-kilter. If the room is empty and si-
lent, you then see the characters as distant
and lonely.
Settings prime you to see the world a cer-
tain way, and all it takes to see things differ-
ently is a change of temperature, or the
424/599

sturdiness of a surface. Texture matters. The
way something feels to your touch begins a
series of associations in your brain. Your
thoughts change based on the words you
conjure. You should be aware, advertisers
and retailers are already jumping on this
bandwagon. The field of neuromarketing is
keen to test embodied cognition and has
been buzzing about its potential since Bar-
gh’s research began circulating the Internet.
If you start to see products with shapes and
surfaces designed to begin a long chain of
thoughts and feelings, this research is prob-
ably the source.
The next time the doctor puts an ice-cold
stethoscope on your chest, remember you
are not so smart before you assume the MD
is hard to get along with. Likewise, if
someone asks you out for a cup of coffee, re-
member the cup in your hands can change
the way your heart responds to that person’s
smile.
425/599

39
The Anchoring Effect
THE MISCONCEPTION: You ration-
ally analyze all factors before making
a choice or determining value.
THE TRUTH: Your first perception
lingers in your mind, affecting later
perceptions and decisions.
You walk into a clothing store and see what
is probably the most badass leather jacket
you’ve ever seen. You try it on, look in the
mirror, and decide you must have it. While
wearing this item, you imagine onlookers
will clutch their chests and gasp every time
you walk into a room or cross a street. You
lift the sleeve to check the price—$1,000.

“Well, that’s that,” you think. You have
started to head back to the hanger when a
salesperson stops you.
“You like it?”
“I love it, but it’s just too much.”
“No, that jacket is on sale right now for
$400.”
It’s expensive, and you don’t need it really,
but $600 off the price seems like a great deal
for a coat that will increase your cool by a
factor of eleven. You put it on your card, un-
aware you’ve been tricked by the oldest retail
con in the business.
One of my first jobs was selling leather
coats, and I depended on the anchoring ef-
fect to earn commission. Each time, I figured
it was obvious to customers the company I
worked for marked up the prices to unreal-
istic extremes. Yet, over and over, when
people heard the sale price, they smiled and
wrestled with their better judgment.
427/599

The prices you expect to pay, where did
those expectations originate?
Answer this: Is the population of Uzbek-
istan greater or fewer than 12 million?
Go ahead and guess.
OK, another question, how many people
do you think live in Uzbekistan?
Come up with a figure and keep it in your
head. We’ll come back to this in a few
paragraphs.
In 1974, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahne-
man conducted a study and asked people to
estimate how many African countries were
part of the United Nations, but first they
spun a wheel of fortune. The wheel was
painted with numbers from zero to one hun-
dred, but rigged to always land on ten or
sixty-five. When the arrow stopped spinning,
they asked people in the experiment to say if
they believed the percentage of countries was
higher or lower than the number on the
wheel. They then asked people to estimate
428/599

what they thought the actual percentage of
nations was. They found people who landed
on ten in the first half of the experiment
guessed around 25 percent of Africa was part
of the UN. Those who landed on sixty-five
said around 45 percent.
The participants had been locked in place
by the anchoring effect.
The trick here is no one really knew what
the answer was. They had to guess, yet it
didn’t feel like a guess. As far as they knew,
the wheel was a random number generator,
but they still worked off of that number.
Back to Uzbekistan. The populations of
Central Asian states probably aren’t numbers
you have memorized. You need some sort of
cue, a point of reference. You searched your
mental assets for something of value con-
cerning Uzbekistan—the terrain, the lan-
guage, Borat—but the population figures
aren’t in your head. What is in your head is
the figure I gave you, 12 million, and it’s
429/599

right there up front. When you have nothing
else to go on, you fixate on the information at
hand.
The population of Uzbekistan is about 28
million people. How far away was your an-
swer? If you are like most people, you as-
sumed something much lower. You probably
thought it was more than 12 million but less
than 28 million.
You depend on anchoring every day to
predict the outcome of events, to estimate
how much time something will take or how
much money something will cost. When you
need to choose between options, or estimate
a value, you need footing to stand on. How
much should you be paying for cable? How
much should your electricity bill be each
month? What is a good price for rent in this
neighborhood? You need an anchor from
which to compare, and when someone is try-
ing to sell you something, that salesperson is
more
than
happy
to
provide
one.
The
430/599

problem is, even when you know this, you
can’t ignore it.
When shopping for a car, you know it isn’t
a completely honest transaction. The real
price the dealer can charge you and still
make a profit is surely lower than what the
dealer is asking for on the window sticker,
yet the anchor price is still going to affect
your decision. As you look over the vehicle,
you don’t consider how many factories the
company owns, how many employees they
pay. You don’t pore over engineering dia-
grams or profit reports. You don’t consider
the price of iron or the expensive invest-
ments the manufacturer is making in safety
testing. The price you are willing to pay has
little to do with these considerations because
they are as far from you at the point of pur-
chase as the population of Uzbekistan. Even
if you’ve done some research online, you
don’t know for sure exactly what the car is
worth or what the dealer paid for it. The
431/599

focus instead is the manufacturer’s suggested
retail price, and no matter how unrealistic it
is, you can’t help but be tethered to it. Any
discussion of price has to start at that
anchor.
The anchoring effect can also slip in unan-
nounced. Drazen Prelec and Dan Ariely con-
ducted an experiment at MIT in 2006 where
they had students bid on items in a bizarre
auction. The researchers would hold up a
bottle of wine, or a textbook, or a cordless
trackball, and then describe in detail how
awesome it was. Then each student had to
write down the last two digits of their social
security number as if it was the price of the
item. If the last two digits were 11, then the
bottle of wine was priced at $11. If the two
numbers were 88, the cordless trackball was
$88. After they wrote down the pretend
price, they bid. Sure enough, the anchoring
effect scrambled their ability to judge the
value of the items. People with high social
432/599

security numbers paid up to 346 percent
more than those with low numbers. People
with numbers from 80 to 99 paid on average
$26 for the trackball, while those with 00 to
19 paid around $9. The source of the number
was irrelevant. Any number would have
worked as the anchor.
The auction experimenters conducted an-
other study in which they asked people to
listen to annoying sounds for money. The re-
searchers initially offered either 90 cents or
10 cents for a blast of awful electronic
screaming, and then they asked the subjects
how much would be the lowest possible price
they would need to be paid to listen to the
sound again. People who were offered 10
cents said it would take about 33 cents to
continue. People offered 90 said it would
take 73.
The researchers repeated the experiment
in other ways, but no matter how they
messed with the sounds or the payouts,
433/599

those who were first offered a low payment
consistently agreed to lower amounts than
those used to better wages. People who got
more money at first were unwilling to accept
lower payments later.
If you move up to a nice car or a big house,
a nice computer or an expensive smart-
phone, you become anchored and find it dif-
ficult to move back down later, even if you
should. Those who buy expensive purses
know they are being hornswoggled, at least
at some level, yet the anchoring effect still
reaches into their bank account. Does an
$800 Louis Vuitton purse function better
than a $25 handbag from Wal-Mart? No, not
even if it was hand-made from giraffe leather
and stitched by real, magical leprechauns.
It’s just a purse. But the anchor is set. Louis
Vuitton bags are expensive, and that in itself
has social value. People still buy them and
are happy with their purchase. If Wal-Mart
offered a purse at $800, it would never leave
434/599

the shelf. The price would be so far from the
anchors already set by the store it would
seem like a bad deal.
Like most psychological phenomena, an-
choring can be used to manipulate people to
do good. The best example is a 1975 study by
Catalan, Lewis, Vincent, and Wheeler, where
they asked a group of students to volunteer
as camp counselors two hours per week for
two years. They all said no. The researchers
followed up by asking if they would volun-
teer to supervise a single two-hour trip. Half
said yes. Without first being asked for the
two-year
commitment,
only
17
percent
agreed.
Remember this study when you are in a
negotiation—make your initial request far
too high. You have to start somewhere, and
your initial decision or calculation greatly in-
fluences all the choices that follow, cascading
out, each tethered to the anchors set before.
Many of the choices you make every day are
435/599

reruns of past decisions; as if traveling chan-
nels dug into a dirt road by a wagon train of
selections, you follow the path created by
your former self. External anchors, like
prices before a sale or ridiculous requests,
are obvious and can be avoided. Internal,
self-generated anchors, are not so easy to by-
pass. You visit the same circuit of Web sites
every day, eat basically the same few break-
fasts. When it comes time to buy new cat
food or take your car in for repairs, you have
old favorites. Come election time, you pretty
much already know who will and will not get
your vote. These choices, so predictable—ask
yourself what drives them. Are old anchors
controlling your current decisions?
When you are parting with your money,
know the person on the other side of the deal
thinks you are not so smart and is depending
on the anchoring effect when telling you how
much you are about to save.
436/599

40
Attention
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
You
see
everything going on before your eyes,
taking in all the information like a
camera.
THE TRUTH: You are aware only of
a small amount of the total informa-
tion your eyes take in, and even less
is processed by your conscious mind
and remembered.
Think of the last time you were in conversa-
tion at a crowded party or in a nightclub. The
guy in the corner doing the running man, the
girl dropping it like it’s hot, the pulse of low-
budget
techno—it
all
fades
into
the

background as you strain to hear the other
person’s voice and picture the trip to Ireland
he or she is describing. The room is still loud,
but inside your head, things have changed.
When you focus your attention on one thing,
everything else blurs into the periphery.
In science fiction movies like Minority Re-
port and Strange Days people’s memories
are played back for others, and they are usu-
ally depicted as short films. The way the
camera captures the action is the way the
memories are played back, but this isn’t how
you see and remember the scenes in your
life. You tune out sounds all the time at
work, in a city, watching television, turning
down the volume on what you aren’t inter-
ested in—but you don’t notice it as much
when you do it visually. When you single out
one voice among many, the rest of what is
happening is not only getting turned down;
most of it is also slipping through your mind
without clinging to memory. You accept this
438/599

easily when it comes to sound, but the same
thing happens with the information coming
through your eyeballs. The things you pay at-
tention to create your moment-to-moment
perception of reality. Everything else is lost
or blurred.
Not only do you see only what you’re fo-
cused on, over time you can become so ac-
customed to seeing familiar environments,
everything
blends
into
the
background.
Where are those damn keys at? You left them
right here, didn’t you? Oh, man. You’re run-
ning late. How can you lose your keys in your
own house? No doubt, you’ve lost your
purse, wallet, phone—something—and then
found it sitting in plain sight. You go on a
scavenger hunt among your own possessions
wondering why your IQ has dropped thirty
points.
Psychologists call missing information in
plain sight inattentional blindness. You be-
lieve with confidence your eyes capture
439/599

everything before them and your memories
are recorded versions of those captured im-
ages. The truth, though, is you see only a
small portion of your environment at any
one moment. Your attention is like a spot-
light, and only the illuminated portions of
the world appear in your perception.
Psychologists Daniel Simons and Chris-
topher Chabris demonstrated this in 1999.
They had students divide into two teams and
pass a basketball back and forth. Half wore
white shirts, and the others wore black. Si-
mons and Chabris recorded a video of the ac-
tion and then showed it to subjects in the
lab. Before the video began, they asked
people to count while watching it how many
times the ball was passed from one person to
another. If you want to try it yourself, they
put the video online at www.theinvisiblegor-
illa.com. You should check it out right now
before reading on if you don’t want me to
spoil the experiment for you. Most people
440/599

had no problem getting the answer as they
stared intensely, hardly blinking. The re-
searchers then asked the subjects if they no-
ticed anything unusual during the action.
Most people said they didn’t. What the sub-
jects failed to notice was a woman in a gorilla
suit who walked into the middle of the play-
ers and waved at the camera before casually
strolling out of frame. When people were
asked what they could recall, they could de-
scribe the background, the appearance of the
players, the intensity of the action, but about
half missed the gorilla.
Simons and Chabris showed tunnel vision
is a fact of life—it is your default setting. In
their research, they point out how easy it is
to miss people you recognize in a movie
theater as you scan for a seat, or how often
you fail to notice when someone gets a new
haircut. Your perception is built out of what
you attend to. In the gorilla experiment,
people are more likely to see the bizarre
441/599

intruder if they are just allowed to watch the
video without expectations, but it doesn’t
guarantee they will see it. Your vision nar-
rows to a keyhole view of the world when you
are focused, but it doesn’t widen to take in
everything when you are relaxed. You are
usually ignoring the periphery or thinking
about something else. When you end up in
the closet wondering why you walked in
there, you stand there and blink like a sleep-
walker who just awoke because in many
ways, this is what you are when the spell of
your attention breaks.
The problem with inattentional blindness
is not that it happens so often, it’s that you
don’t believe it happens. Instead believe you
see the whole world in front of you. In any
event where eyewitnesses or close inspection
are key, your tendency to believe you have
perfect perception and recall leads to mis-
takes in judgment of your own mind and the
minds of others. Human eyes aren’t video
442/599

cameras, and the memories formed aren’t
videos.
The fraternal twin of inattentional blind-
ness is change blindness. The brain can’t
keep up with the total amount of information
coming in from your eyes, and so your exper-
ience from moment to moment is edited for
simplicity. With change blindness, you don’t
notice when things around you are altered to
be drastically different than they were a mo-
ment ago. Reality, as you experience it, is a
virtual experience generated by the brain
based on the inputs coming in from your
senses. You don’t get a raw feed from those
inputs; instead, you get an edited version.
In another experiment by Simons and Ch-
abris, subjects had to approach a man and
sign a consent form before taking part in
what they thought was the actual experi-
ment. The man stood behind a tall desk, like
a registration desk at a hotel, and once they
signed, the man behind the desk ducked
443/599

under it to put away the form. Another man
then stood up and handed them a packet of
information.
Two-thirds
of
the
subjects
didn’t realize it was a different person. They
had no problem recalling other aspects of the
room and the interaction, but the actual
identity of the person was just an impres-
sion, a shorthand. Their brains registered it
was a young, Caucasian male, and that’s it.
No more attention was paid to the person be-
hind the desk, so the memory was no clearer.
The fact that he changed into a new person
raised no alarms.
In other experiments, Simons and Daniel
T. Levin showed a conversation at a dinner
table between actresses filmed in two separ-
ate shots. In one shot subjects saw one act-
ress, and then the shot changed to show the
other actress when she spoke. Between the
shots, nine different aspects of the scene
were changed. The color of the plates went
from white to red, food items appeared and
444/599

disappeared, and even the clothes changed
as the camera cut from one perspective to
the other. When subjects were asked if they
noticed, most didn’t remember any changes.
When the experimenters asked the subjects
to specifically look for differences, on aver-
age only two of the nine changes were
caught. When they ran the experiment again,
but this time had one actor hear a phone ring
and then a second actor appear in the follow-
ing shot and answer it, only 33 percent of the
people watching the video noticed the actor
had been switched.
Magicians build careers around perceptual
blindness. It takes just a smidgen of misdir-
ection to conceal a change in your visual
field. You believe when something unexpec-
ted happens the security guard in your brain
will spit out his coffee and call the boss, but
there is no security guard and there is no
boss. Magicians know your brain isn’t a pass-
ive
receiver
of
images
from
your
eyes.
445/599

Instead, you choose what to perceive. While
driving and talking on a cell phone, how
much of your world do you miss? The re-
search findings suggest you could have your
eyes wide open, but fail to see the car, the
bike, or the deer about to cross your path.
In the late 1970s Richard Haines at NASA
was testing heads-up displays on commercial
airliners. His research showed how the unex-
pected doesn’t jump out at you, not even
when you are in a situation where your
senses are on alert. A heads-up display is a
semitransparent glowing series of images
that appear as if they float between the pilot
and the windshield of the cockpit. The dis-
play
was
meant
to
keep
pilots
looking
through the windshield at all times instead of
diverting their attention to the control panels
below. Haines tested the display in a flight
simulator where he had pilots practice land-
ing with its assistance. He found when it was
turned on, the pilots took longer to react to
446/599

the sight of another plane on the runway,
and some even missed it completely. The pi-
lots were paying so much attention to the
new technology, they missed something that
before would have been hard to miss. The
technology designed to help them actually
hurt them. The more your attention is en-
gaged, the less you expect something out of
the ordinary and the less prone you are to
see it even when lives could be at stake.
One strange twist on this research comes
from Richard Nisbett and Hanna-Faye Chua
at the University of Michigan. In 2005, they
showed people who grew up in Western cul-
tures and people from East Asian cultures
photos with one object as the focus of the ac-
tion surrounded by interesting backgrounds.
When they tracked their eye movements,
they discovered the Western observers ten-
ded to ignore the background and fixate on
the focal object, while the Asian subjects
took in everything. If the image was a jet
447/599

flying over mountains, Western eyes more
quickly darted to the airplane and then spent
more time examining it. A similar experi-
ment
at
the
University
of
Alberta
had
Westerners and Japanese subjects watch car-
toons with one character in the foreground
and four in the background. The study
showed that the Japanese subjects spent 15
percent of their time looking at the back-
ground characters, while the Westerners
spent 5 percent of theirs. The research into
cultural cognition is new, but these studies
suggest that Western culture is less con-
cerned with context and more concerned
with the center of attention, which means it
is possible Westerners are more susceptible
to both change blindness and inattentional
blindness.
The world outside your head and the world
inside it are not identical. The information
flowing into consciousness from your senses
is not only limited by your attention, but also
448/599

edited before it arrives. Once there, it mixes
like paint with all the other thoughts and
perceptions swirling inside your cranium.
The way you feel, the culture you grew up in,
the task at hand, the chaos of technology and
society—it all creates a granular, busy visual
world. Only a slice of it arrives in your mind.
Despite this, the great circus of human activ-
ity and invention goes on. You choose what
to see more than you realize, and then you
form beliefs without taking into account your
selective vision. You can’t do much about it
other than to choose wisely when it is im-
portant. Don’t put faith in your senses when
you wear a hands-free headset in the car or
lose yourself in a book in a public place. The
unexpected isn’t guaranteed to jar you out of
your daydream.
449/599

41
Self-Handicapping
THE MISCONCEPTION: In all you
do, you strive for success.
THE TRUTH: You often create condi-
tions for failure ahead of time to pro-
tect your ego.
Chances are you know someone who seems
to be in a perpetual state of illness. Maybe
it’s you, but let’s assume it isn’t. This person,
the hypochondriac, is always complaining
about a cold or a fever, a sick stomach or an
aching back. For those who habitually see
themselves as unwell, there are a number of
benefits. A true hypochondriac absorbs em-
pathy like a flower does sunshine, but the

real reward comes when life gets too hard.
When a project or an obligation seems like
too much to handle, a hypochondriac can
conveniently become sick and avoid the risk
of failing.
Like most aberrant behaviors, hypochon-
dria is just an extreme version of something
everyone
thinks
and
feels
occasionally.
Everyone gets depressed, just like everyone
gets obsessed with cleaning their surround-
ings occasionally. Major depressive and ob-
sessive compulsive disorders take those nor-
mal tendencies and amplify them into un-
manageable variants. You share with hypo-
chondriacs the tendency to unconsciously
contrive excuses ahead of time.
From time to time a project will come
along that seems so big and challenging you
start to question your ability to succeed. It
could be as epic as writing a book or direct-
ing a major motion picture, or it could be
something more pedestrian like passing a
451/599

final exam or delivering an important speech
to your corporate boss. Naturally, some
doubts will float through your mind whenev-
er failure is possible. Sometimes, when the
fear of failure is strong, you use a technique
psychologists
call
self-handicapping
to
change the course of your future emotional
state. Self-handicapping is a reality negoti-
ation, an unconscious manipulation, of both
your perceptions and those of others, that
you use to protect your ego. Like its cousins
sour grapes, in which you pretend you don’t
want what you can’t have, and sweet lemons,
in which you convince yourself something
unpleasant is actually not so bad, self-handi-
capping is what psychologists call an anticip-
atory rationalization. Self-handicapping be-
haviors are investments in a future reality in
which
you
can
blame
your
failure
on
something other than your ability.
As with many of the topics in this book,
this behavior is all about keeping your all-
452/599

important self-esteem strong and resilient. If
you can always blame your failures on ex-
ternal forces, instead of internal ones, well,
who’s to say you really fail?
Self-handicapping was studied by psycho-
logists Steven Berglas and Edward E. Jones
in 1978. In their research, they had students
take difficult tests and then told them they
had made perfect scores on them, no matter
how they had actually performed. They hy-
pothesized these students, who now had
boosted self-images, would choose to protect
their egos if given the opportunity. When
they then gave them the chance to take what
they were told was either a performance-in-
hibiting or a performance-enhancing drug
before a second exam, the majority took the
inhibiting drug. The drug was fake, but the
behavior was real. Berglas and Jones later
said their research showed when you are suc-
cessful but don’t know why, you wonder in-
side if you are truly capable of success. The
453/599

stakes on future tests of ability are raised,
but so are the fears of failure. Instead of
making excuses after the fact that feel like
lies, you create conditions ahead of time so
the excuses can be real.
You might wear inappropriate clothes to a
job interview, or pick a terrible character in
Mario Kart, or stay up all night drinking be-
fore work—you are very resourceful when it
comes to setting yourself up to fail. If you
succeed, you can say you did so despite ter-
rible odds. If you fall short, you can blame
the events leading up to the failure instead of
your own incompetence or inadequacy.
Adam Alter and Joseph Forgas at the
University of New South Wales discovered in
2006 that your mood is a powerful predictor
of when you will self-handicap, but not in the
way you think. They had people take tests of
their verbal abilities and divided them into
two groups. One was told they did very well,
and the other was told they didn’t. What
454/599

participants actually scored didn’t matter be-
cause the experimenters were just interested
in boosting or deflating their egos. After
priming one of the groups to have a positive
self-image, they then showed them videos
putting them in either a good mood or a bad
one. One film was a British comedy, the oth-
er a documentary about cancer. After this,
the subjects were told they would be taking
another test, but first they were given the
choice of two different tea drinks, one that
would make them sleepy or one that would
give them a jolt of alertness. This was the
crucial moment in the study. Would people
who were likely to self-handicap be even
more likely to follow through with it if they
were sad? Actually, no. The people in a good
mood were much more likely to self-handi-
cap. Those who watched the comedy and did
well on the first test chose the calming tea 65
percent of the time. Those who did well and
watched the depressing documentary chose
455/599

the calming tea 34 percent of the time. To
bolster their findings, they ran the experi-
ment in several ways, eliminating and adding
variables to be sure the subjects were truly
self-handicapping. In the end, Alter and For-
gas concluded the happier you are, the more
likely you will be to seek out ways to delude
yourself into maintaining your rosy outlook
on life and your own abilities. Sad people, it
seems, are more honest with themselves.
Your
sense
of
self,
your
identity,
is
something you are always tending. When
you see your performance in the outside
world as an integral part of your personality,
you are more likely to self-handicap. Psycho-
logist Phillip Zombardo told The New York
Times in 1984, “Some people stake their
whole identity on their acts. They take the at-
titude that ‘if you criticize anything I do, you
criticize me.’ Their egocentricity means they
can’t risk a failure because it’s a devastating
blow to their ego.”
456/599

In this and many other studies, men tend
to be much more likely to self-handicap than
women. The reasons are unclear. Perhaps
men feel more pressure from society to be
seen as competent, or maybe men are more
likely to associate external task success with
an internal sense of worth. The reasons are
as yet unknown, but the tendency is clear.
Men use self-handicapping more than wo-
men to assuage their fears of failure.
Whenever you venture into uncharted wa-
ters with failure as a distinct possibility, your
anxiety will be lowered every time you see a
new way to blame possible failure on forces
beyond your control. The next time you face
a challenge, remember you are not so smart,
and start preparing for it now.
457/599

42
Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
THE MISCONCEPTION: Predictions
about your future are subject to
forces beyond your control.
THE TRUTH: Just believing a future
event will happen can cause it to hap-
pen if the event depends on human
behavior.
The self-fulfilling prophecy is a concept that
goes far back into the history of storytelling
and narrative fiction in just about all human
cultures, but it isn’t fiction.
Research shows you are highly susceptible
to this phenomenon because you are always
trying to predict the behavior of others. The

future is the result of actions, and actions are
the result of behavior, and behavior is the
result of prediction. This is called the Tho-
mas Theorem. The sociologist W. I. Thomas
postulated in 1928, “If men define situations
as real, they are real in their consequences.”
Thomas noticed when people are trying to
predict future events, they make a lot of as-
sumptions about the present. If those as-
sumptions are powerful enough, the result-
ing actions will lead to the predicted future.
The easiest example of this is the rumor of
a shortage. If you believe there will be a
shortage of toothpaste, you will go and try to
buy some before the stores run out—just like
everyone else. Sure enough, the shortage
occurs.
The sociologist Robert K. Merton coined
the term “self-fulfilling prophecy” in 1968.
By his estimation, the initial phase is always
a false interpretation of an ongoing situation.
The
behavior
that
follows
assumes
the
459/599

situation is real, and when enough people act
as if something is real it can sometimes make
it so. What was once false becomes true, and
in hindsight it seems as if it always was.
Self-fulfilling prophecies gain their power
from social definitions of reality, and most of
your life is defined socially, not logically. A
perception depending on logic, like the num-
ber of albums sold by Foghat, can be meas-
ured. The perception of how good Foghat is,
and whether or not they should play the half-
time show at the Super Bowl, is socially de-
termined. If the perceptions of others trans-
late into actions, policies, and beliefs, the
perceptions become reality simply because
so much of life is ruled by behavior. Is
bottled water better for you than tap water?
Is a Snuggie better than a regular blanket?
Are leisure suits the ultimate fashion state-
ment? Is Inception , like, the best movie ever
made? Without scientific analysis, ideas like
these can go from true to false to maybe and
460/599

back again because they are socially defined.
They depend on subjective feelings and a va-
cillating consensus of beliefs. The social hive
mind of the moment creates a reality all its
own that is separate from the reality of
things like lunar eclipses and the radius of a
circle. You swim in a sea of social ideas and
mental constructs shared by a culture both
ancient and popular. When these ideas be-
come beliefs, and then those beliefs become
actions, the logical and measurable side of
reality changes to match.
Psychologists Claude Steele and Joshua
Aronson conducted a study in 1995 where
they had white and black Americans take the
Graduate Record Examination. The GRE is a
standardized test used by many colleges to
determine whether or not to accept graduate
students. It is a comprehensive and difficult
test and the source of much anxiety every
year in the halls of academia. Steel and Aron-
son told half of their subjects they were
461/599

testing for intelligence, which they hypothes-
ized would add an extra level of stress the
other half wouldn’t feel. When they got back
the results, the white students performed
about the same whether or not they were
told it was a test of how smart they were. The
black students, though, primed by the ste-
reotype threat, performed worse in the group
who believed the test would reveal their true
intelligence. According to Steel and Aronson,
the social stigma of being an African-Americ-
an messed with their minds. Attempting to
fight their stereotype, they had unwelcome
thoughts walking around and making noise
in their brains while they solved word prob-
lems and figured fractions. The white stu-
dents, free from these fears, had more mind
space in which to work. This same sort of ex-
periment had been repeated with gender, na-
tionality, and all sorts of conditions. Psycho-
logists call it the stereotype threat. When you
fear you will confirm a negative stereotype, it
462/599

can become a self-fulfilling prophecy not be-
cause the stereotype is true, but because you
can’t stop worrying that you could become
an example proving it.
This self-fulfilling prophecy, being only a
matter of perception, can be easily sublim-
ated. Another study by Steele measured the
math abilities of men versus women. When
the questions were easy, the women and the
men performed the same. When they were
difficult, the women’s scores plummeted
lower than did those of their male peers.
When they ran the tests again with new par-
ticipants, but this time before handing out
the problems told the subjects that men and
women tended to perform equally on the ex-
am, the scores leveled out. The women per-
formed just as well as did the men. The
power of the stereotype—women are bad at
math—was nullified.
In social psychology, a version of the self-
fulfilling prophecy called labeling theory
463/599

shows how when someone believes you are a
certain kind of person, you tend to live up to
those expectations. If your teacher thinks
you are smart, the teacher treats you like a
smart person. You get extra attention and re-
spect. You react with more effort, more
drive, and the positive feedback loop leads to
the fulfillment of your label. In a 1978 exper-
iment by William Crano and Phyllis Mellon,
a set of random students were chosen from
an elementary class. The teachers were told
these random students had been shown to be
possible child geniuses based on an IQ test.
The test, of course, didn’t exist, and the res-
ults were imaginary. Sure enough, those stu-
dents performed better on homework and
exams thanks to more attention from the
teachers who believed the prophecy.
Think of the stock market. When people
predict it will fail, they stop investing and
start selling. Others hear about the selling,
and they sell. People start to try and predict
464/599

the future, assume everyone is going to sell,
and they sell too. Once the media starts re-
porting, stocks plummet.
Research shows if you believe someone is
going to be an asshole, you will act hostile,
thus causing them to act like an asshole. This
same research shows if people think their
partner doesn’t love them, they will interpret
small slights as big hurts—and this will then
lead to a feeling of rejection that causes the
partner to distance him- or herself. The feed-
back loop will build and build until the
prophecy is fulfilled.
In an experiment performed by Steven
Sherman in 1980, two sets of people were
asked over the phone to donate three hours
of time to a cancer drive. One group was
simply asked if they would do it. They said
yes. Four percent showed up. The other
group was asked if they thought they would
show up if they were to be asked. Most said
they would show up. Almost all of them did.
465/599

The second group had made an assumption
about their own personality, and once they
had painted a portrait of what kind of person
they were, they had to conform to the idea or
risk cognitive dissonance.
When it comes to belief, you are not so
smart, and the things you think are true will
become reality if given enough time to fester.
If you want a better job, a better marriage, a
better teacher, a better friend—you have to
act as if the thing you want out of the other
person is already headed your way. It doesn’t
guarantee you’ll see a change, but it’s better
than nothing. The point is this: A negative
outlook will lead to negative predictions, and
you will start to unconsciously manipulate
your
environment
to
deliver
those
predictions.
Don’t go buying The Secret just yet. No,
you can’t just want something to be true and
have it become so, but you can avoid the
466/599

opposite
scenario,
which
might
be
just
enough to improve your life.
467/599

43
The Moment
THE MISCONCEPTION: You are one
person, and your happiness is based
on being content with your life.
THE
TRUTH:
You
are
multiple
selves, and happiness is based on sat-
isfying all of them.
Have you ever been so sick you spent a week
in bed? What do you remember from that
period of time? Mostly nothing, right? All
throughout your life great big patches of ex-
perience are tossed aside and forgotten. You
turn around sometimes
and think, “It’s
March already!?” or “I’ve been working here
for five years!?”

To understand the difference between ex-
perience and memory, you first need to un-
derstand a little bit about self. Your sense of
self is just that—a sense. The person you
imagine yourself to be is a story you tell to
yourself and to others differently depending
on the situation, and the story changes over
time. For now, it is useful to imagine there
are two selves active at any given time in
your head—the current self and the remem-
bering self.
The current self is the one experiencing
life in real time. It is the person you are in
the three or so seconds your sensory memory
lasts, and the thirty or so seconds after that
in which your short-term memory is juggling
all your senses and thoughts. You taste the
ice cream and it is good. Then, you remem-
ber you tasted the ice cream. Then, in five
years, you have no memory of tasting it at
all. Sometimes, rarely, something else hap-
pens that prompts you to move the memory
469/599

into long-term storage. Think back now to all
the times you have tasted ice cream. How
many true memories do you have that aren’t
just dreamlike wisps? How many stories can
you tell about tasting ice cream? The remem-
bering self is made up of all those memories
that have passed into long-term storage.
When you replay your life in your mind,
you can’t go back to all the things you have
ever experienced. Only the things that went
from experience to short-term memory to
long-term memory are available to fully re-
member. Going to get ice cream is not about
building awesome memories. It’s about be-
ing happy for a few minutes. It’s about grati-
fication. The happiness derived from such an
experience is fleeting.
The psychologist Daniel Kahneman has
much to say on this topic. He says the self
that makes decisions in your life is usually
the remembering one. It drags your current
self around in pursuit of new memories,
470/599

anticipating them based on old memories.
The current self has little control over your
future. It can control only a few actions, like
moving your hand away from a hot stove or
putting one foot in front of the other. Occa-
sionally, it prompts you to eat a cheesebur-
ger, or watch a horror movie, or play a video
game. The current self is happy when experi-
encing things. It likes to be in the flow.
It is the remembering self that has made
all the big decisions. It is happy when you
can sit back and reflect on your life up to this
point and feel content. It is happy when you
tell people stories about the things you have
seen and done. Kahneman proposes this
thought experiment: Imagine you are pre-
paring to go on a two-week vacation. At the
end of this vacation, you will drink a potion
that will erase all the memories from those
two weeks.
How will this affect your decisions? Know-
ing you won’t remember any of it, what will
471/599

you spend your time doing during those two
weeks? That weird feeling you are having
thinking about this is the conflict between
your experiencing self and your remember-
ing self. The experiencing self can easily
choose what to do. Sex, skiing, restaurants,
concerts, parties—all of these things are
about being happy during the event. The re-
membering self is not so sure. It would
rather go to Ireland and look at castles or
drive from New York to Los Angeles just to
see what happens.
Kahneman’s research suggests there are
two channels through which you decide
whether or not you are happy. The current
self is happy when experiencing nice things.
The remembering self is happy when you
look back on your life and pull up plenty of
positive memories. As Kahneman points out,
a two-week vacation may yield only a hand-
ful of lifelong memories. You will pull those
memories out every once and a while and use
472/599

them to be happy. There is a serious imbal-
ance between the time you spend creating
these memories and the time you spend en-
joying them later.
The current self doesn’t like sitting in a cu-
bicle. It feels caged. It could be doing
something
fun.
The
remembering
self
doesn’t like not having the opportunity to
build new memories, so it is willing to grind
away to earn money for food and shelter and
delay gratification.
Life for you and many others is full of con-
flict between these two selves over how best
to be happy. Kahneman’s research shows
that happiness can’t be all one or all the oth-
er. You have to be happy in the flow of time
while simultaneously creating memories you
can look back on later.
To be happy now and content later, you
can’t be focused only on reaching goals, be-
cause once you reach them, the experience
ends. To truly be happy, you must satisfy
473/599

both of your selves. Go get the ice cream, but
do so in a meaningful way that creates a
long-term memory. Grind away to have
money for later, but do so in a way that gen-
erates happiness as you work.
474/599

44
Consistency Bias
THE MISCONCEPTION: You know
how your opinions have changed
over time.
THE TRUTH: Unless you consciously
keep tabs on your progress, you as-
sume the way you feel now is the way
you have always felt.
Imagine yourself in high school. What kind
of person were you?
Some obvious things come to mind—your
awful haircut, those stupid shirts, the ques-
tionable taste in music. You sure were a
dork.

If you were into a subculture, it is probably
even more painful to see your old self. Were
you an emo kid, a flannel-clad grunge fan, or
did you trade Star Trek novels in your chess
club? Whatever you were into at the time, it
is likely you aren’t so into it now. You’ve
probably learned how to tame your hair,
which clothes are silly, and what music is
truly good to you. You’ve figured out your
personal politics, your taste in movies, what
real friendship is all about. It’s as easy to see
the differences in who you were then as it
would be with two photographs taken now
and then. Some differences, though, are hard
to see. Scientists have shown you are not so
smart when it comes to comparing your cur-
rent mental world to the one you lived in
years ago.
The psychologist Hazel Markus at the
University of Michigan says when you re-
ceive new information that threatens your
self-image, you react quickly to reaffirm your
476/599

identity. The self is something psychologists
have known from the beginning to be both
consistent and changing. At any given mo-
ment, you guard your convictions and intro-
spective conclusions, but the self you guard
can shift from one social situation to the
next. As the psychologist William James said
in 1910, there are for any individual “as
many different social selves as there are dis-
tinct groups of persons about whose opinion
he cares.” Right now, all those selves are like
the many surfaces of a prism; turn it one way
or the other, and a different you is reflected
back to the world. The consistency bias
makes you think this prism has always been
the same size and shape it is now, but it
hasn’t.
In 1986, Markus published a paper that
showed how malleable the self was and how
oblivious to change you really are. The paper
covered two decades of research. Back in
1965, Markus and his colleagues collected
477/599

political opinions from a group of high
school seniors and their parents. He then re-
turned to the same people in 1973 and again
in 1982 to see how their opinions might have
changed. The questions ranged from the leg-
alization of drugs to the rights of prisoners
and the validity of war. As you might expect,
the younger people’s attitudes changed a lot
more between 1965 and 1973 than did their
parents’, and overall those young attitudes
became more conservative over the course of
seventeen years. Markus showed how when
you are young you are more open to chan-
ging your opinions. Your partisanship has
yet to solidify into a personal philosophy.
After gaining enough life experience, you be-
gin to settle into a view of the world and es-
tablish your moral outlook. It seems like
common sense, but when he asked the
people in the study what they used to believe,
only about 30 percent could accurately recall
their old answers. Instead, they tended to say
478/599

they used to have the same political ideas
they currently subscribed to. If, for instance,
they believed the death penalty was a legit-
imate punishment, they thought they had al-
ways believed this, even when they had said
the opposite as a teenager.
This same sort of experiment was conduc-
ted in 1998 by Elaine Scharfe at Trent
University and Kim Bartholomew at Simon
Fraser University, except they asked people
to rate how happy they were in their rela-
tionships. Some of the subjects were dating,
some were living together, and others were
married. The questions ranged from how of-
ten the other person got on their nerves to
how long they expected the relationship to
last. They asked again eight months later,
then asked the participants to recall their
previous answers. Those whose relationships
had stayed the same tended to remember
their previous responses, but those whose re-
lationships had gotten either better or worse
479/599

did not see the past as clearly; 78 percent of
the women and 87 percent of the men inac-
curately recalled how they used to feel. Most
of the people in the study had a good recol-
lection of their original feelings, but for those
who didn’t, consistency bias altered their
memories to make it seem as though they
had always been as happy, or sad, as they
now were.
In an experiment by George Goethals and
Richard Reckman at Williams College in
1972, students were asked how they felt
about racially segregated bussing. After re-
cording their answers, they were led in a dis-
cussion of the issue a few weeks later by an
actor who tried to change their minds. If they
were pro-integration, the actor tried to get
them to see the downsides. If they were anti-
integration, the actor pointed out the harm.
As in the other studies, when they were then
asked their opinions from the original ques-
tionnaire, neither group responded correctly.
480/599

They had been swayed, but they thought they
had always held their new position.
One of the stranger facets of consistency
bias is how it can be evoked on the spot. If
you are primed to believe you are an honest
person, you will then act as if you are.
In 2008, Dan Ariely, Nina Mazar, and On
Amir at MIT had Harvard Business School
students answer as many math problems as
they could in five minutes. Afterward, one
student would be randomly chosen in a lot-
tery and win $10 for every correct answer.
Before the test began, half of the students lis-
ted ten books they remembered reading in
high school, and the other half listed as many
of the Ten Commandments from the Bible
they could recall. In both groups, half of the
students were given an opportunity to grade
themselves and cheat by simply telling the
researchers how many answers they got
right, while the other half had to actually
turn in their papers. In the group that listed
481/599

books, the total scores were 33 percent high-
er than the average, which indicated that
they had cheated. In the group that listed the
Ten Commandments, the scores were less
than average; no one cheated. Half of the
students had been primed to think about
honesty, and since we all want to believe we
are honest, the resulting behavior was an at-
tempt at consistency.
You experience this sort of instant consist-
ency bias all the time. If you sign a pledge to
be honest and trustworthy, you tend to fol-
low through. If you agree ahead of time to do
something you later don’t feel like doing, you
do it anyway so you don’t feel inconsistent or
appear so to others. In any situation where
you are primed to think of yourself in a cer-
tain way, you will be more likely to engage in
behavior that proves you are. In 1978, Robert
B. Cialdinia, John T. Cacioppo, Rodney Bas-
sett, and John A. Miller at Arizona State con-
ducted an study where they asked people if
482/599

they would be willing to take part in an ex-
periment for a good cause, and about half
said they would. After they agreed, they were
then told the experiment would begin at 7
A.M. Ninety-five percent of the people still
showed up. When the researchers did the ex-
periment again but told the people up front
when they had to arrive, 24 percent agreed to
take part. The people in the first experiment
weren’t psyched about coming in so early,
but because they had said they would be will-
ing to participate, they felt forced into mak-
ing their behavior consistent, even though
there were no repercussions to do otherwise.
You have no desire to be a hypocrite.
Consistency bias is part of your overall de-
sire to reduce the discomfort of cognitive dis-
sonance, the emotions you feel when noti-
cing that you are of two minds on one issue.
When you say one thing and do another, the
ickiness of feeling hypocritical must be dealt
with or else you find it difficult to proceed.
483/599

You need to feel that you can predict your
own behavior, and so you rewrite your own
history sometimes so you can seem depend-
able to yourself. If your life story includes
self-improvement, and you find meaning in
change, you suppress consistency bias. At
other times you simply desire certain parts of
your autobiography to have unfolded in a
pleasing way and can’t imagine having once
been the sort of person you would argue
with. If you are madly in love now, but once
had your doubts, you simply delete the past
and replace it with one less inconsistent with
your present state. Older people tend to look
at younger people as naive, and sometimes
become amused when they see in them the
same ignorance with which they once dealt.
Sometimes they try to reason with the ignor-
ance, as if to suggest it could be overcome
with mere wisdom. This is consistency bias
at work: believing if you knew then what you
know now, things would be different. But
484/599

people naturally change over time. Consist-
ency bias is the failure to admit it.
485/599

45
The Representativeness Heuristic
THE MISCONCEPTION: Knowing a
person’s history makes it easier to de-
termine what sort of person they are.
THE TRUTH: You jump to conclu-
sions based on how representative a
person seems to be of a preconceived
character type.
Your friend goes out on a date and tells you
the other person was spontaneous, unpre-
dictable, funny, and maybe a little danger-
ous. Your friend thinks she is in love. When
you ask what this date does for a living, your
friend says he is a podiatrist. Would this sur-
prise you? Probably so, but why? What do

you really know about foot doctors anyway?
Are they the kind of people who would go
skydiving one weekend and gamble on an il-
legal cockfight the next? Does this seem like
the kind of thing a foot specialist would do,
or do you see the foot specialist relaxing with
a cluster of cats while perusing photo albums
of exotic toenail fungi?
Unless you have spent time as a secretary
of state, chances are you don’t know a lot
about people who are different from you. For
everyone else you haul around prejudices,
some benign, some less so. It helps you think
faster, to build models of the unknown in a
way that allows you to make decisions effort-
lessly. Without filters, the world around you
is chaos. Over time you develop shortcuts to
cognition. Categories are a great way to make
sense of things. When it comes to strangers,
your first instinct is to fit them into arche-
types to quickly determine their value or
487/599

threat. These constructs are called the rep-
resentativeness heuristic.
Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky pub-
lished a paper in 1973 that ferreted out the
representative heuristic from the cluster of
cognitive biases squirming in your mind. The
following example is a mishmash of their re-
search and others into the behavior:
Donald is a very intelligent college
student
and
does
well
in
all
his
classes, but he lacks creativity. He is
extraordinarily tidy and feels com-
pelled to bring order to every aspect of
his life. When he writes, it lacks emo-
tion and is filled with science fiction
references. He doesn’t like people but
has high moral standards.
In their study, subjects read a paragraph
like the one above and were told the descrip-
tion came from one of a set of interviews
with thirty engineers and seventy lawyers.
Now, pretend you are in this study and
488/599

answer the following question: Is it more
likely Donald is an engineer or a lawyer?
This is where the representativeness heur-
istic sends you down the wrong path. If you
are like most people, you think Donald is
probably an engineer. He certainly matches
the general vision you see when thinking of
one. You completely ignore the fact there is a
70 percent chance he is a lawyer because, out
of one hundred people, they interviewed only
thirty engineers. Kahneman and Tversky say
you make predictions with representative-
ness—the degree to which new information
matches the existing information you have in
your head. Sometimes, this information in
your head is just a caricature of the actual
thing. You think of a sheik, and you see a
man in white robes and sandals. You think of
a cowboy, and you see a hat, chaps, lasso,
and gunbelt. You see an engineer and a law-
yer, and the image above matches the engin-
eer better. You toss aside the numbers. Your
489/599

mental models aren’t accurate, nor do they
usually need to be. They just need to pop
right
into
your
mind
automatically
and
without effort. If your ancestors heard a rust-
ling in the bushes, they were better off as-
suming something bad and hungry was
headed their way. If you need medical atten-
tion, you would be correct to assume the big
red
cross
above
the
sign
that
reads
EMERGENCY indicates the right building to
head toward, even though you can’t be sure it
isn’t abandoned or some elaborate amuse-
ment park ride. Kahneman and Tversky’s re-
search suggests that intuition ignores statist-
ics. Intuition is bad at math.
Try again with this description:
Tom is a twice-divorced man who
spends most of his free time playing
golf. He enjoys fine suits and drives
an expensive luxury car. He is quick to
argue and has to win or he becomes
furious. He went to college for longer
490/599

than he wanted to and tries to make
up for it by socializing as much as he
can.
Now, pretend in this study they inter-
viewed seventy engineers and thirty lawyers.
Knowing how the representativeness heurist-
ic works, is it more likely Tom is an engineer
or a lawyer? That’s right. It is more likely,
statistically, that he is an engineer, no matter
how well the description matches your heur-
istic model for lawyers.
The representativeness heuristic helps fuel
several other cognitive missteps, like the
conjunction fallacy. Here is another example
from Kahneman and Tversky’s research:
Linda is a thirty-one-year-old woman
who is single. She is considered out-
spoken and very bright. She majored
in philosophy in college. As a student,
she was deeply concerned with dis-
crimination and social issues. She
491/599

participated
in
several
demonstrations.
Is it more likely Linda is a bank teller or
that she is a bank teller and is active in the
feminist movement? Most people who read
the above description pick the second an-
swer, although it is statistically more likely
she is a bank teller. There are more bank tell-
ers in the world than bank tellers who are
feminists, no matter what sort of background
they may have.
The conjunction fallacy builds on your rep-
resentativeness heuristic. The more things
you hear about which match your mental
models, the more likely they seem. In the ex-
ample above, you can match both bank tell-
ers and feminists with the description, so it
seems twice as likely. Statistically though, it
goes in the other direction. You don’t natur-
ally
think
in
statistical,
logical,
rational
terms. You first go to your emotional core
and think of people in terms of narratives
492/599

and characters that match your preconceived
notions of the sort of people you have been
exposed to in the past or have imagined
thanks to cultural osmosis.
Kahneman and Tversky proved this by try-
ing the same sort of experiment on profes-
sional futurists—people who forecast the
likelihood of future events. In 1982 they
asked 115 forecasters to predict which of two
options was more likely to happen in the
next year. They divided them into two
groups, and asked one to estimate the
chances of the United States and the Soviet
Union suspending all relations. The other
group estimated the odds Russia would in-
vade Poland in addition to suspending dip-
lomacy with the U.S. The second group said
that their scenario, with twice the number of
events, was more likely to happen. Their rep-
resentativeness reserves had been tapped
twice, which made it seem more possible
than the single event.
493/599

Representativeness heuristics are useful,
but also dangerous. They can help you avoid
danger and seek help, but they can also lead
to generalizations and prejudices. When you
expect people to be a certain way because
they seem to represent your notions of the
sort of people in that category, you are not so
smart.
494/599

46
Expectation
THE MISCONCEPTION: Wine is a
complicated elixir, full of subtle fla-
vors only an expert can truly distin-
guish, and experienced tasters are
impervious to deception.
THE TRUTH: Wine experts and con-
sumers can be fooled by altering their
expectations.
You scan the aisles in the liquor store looking
for a good wine. It’s a little overwhelm-
ing—all those weird bottle shapes with illus-
trations
of
castles
and
vineyards
and
kangaroos. And all those varieties? Riesling,
Shiraz, Cabernet—this is serious business.

You look to your left and see bottles for
around $12; to your right you see bottles for
$60. You think back to all the times you’ve
seen people tasting wine in movies, holding
it up to the light and commenting on tannins
and barrels and soil quality—the most ex-
pensive wine has to be the better one, right?
Well, you are not so smart. But don’t
fret—neither are all those connoisseurs who
swish fermented grape juice around and spit
it back out.
Wine tasting is a big deal to a lot of people.
It can even be a professional career. It goes
back thousands of years, but the modern ver-
sion, with all the terminology like “notes,”
“tears,” “integration,” and “connectedness,”
goes back a few hundred. Wine tasters will
mention all sorts of things they can taste in a
fine wine, as if they were a human spectro-
graph with the ability to sense the molecular
makeup of their beverage. Research shows,
496/599

however, this perception can be hijacked,
fooled, and might just be completely wrong.
In 2001, Frederic Brochet conducted two
experiments at the University of Bordeaux.
In one experiment, he got fifty-four oeno-
logy (the study of wine tasting and wine
making) undergraduates together and had
them taste one glass of red wine and one
glass of white wine. He had them describe
each wine in as much detail as their expertise
would allow. What he didn’t tell them was
both were the same wine. He just dyed the
white one red. In the other experiment, he
asked the experts to rate two different bottles
of red wine. One was very expensive, the oth-
er was cheap. Again, he tricked them. This
time he had put the cheap wine in both
bottles. So what were the results?
The tasters in the first experiment, the one
with the dyed wine, described the sorts of
berries and grapes and tannins they could
detect in the red wine just as if it really was
497/599

red. Every single one, all fifty-four, could not
tell it was white. In the second experiment,
the one with the switched labels, the subjects
went on and on about the cheap wine in the
expensive bottle. They called it “complex”
and “rounded.” They called the same wine in
the cheap bottle “weak” and “flat.”
Another experiment, at Caltech, pitted five
bottles of wine against one another. They
ranged in price from $5 to $90. Similarly,
the experimenters put cheap wine in the ex-
pensive bottles—but this time they put the
tasters in a brain scanner. While they tasted
the wine, the same parts of the brain would
light up in the machine every time, but with
the wine the tasters thought was expensive,
one particular region of the brain became
more active. Another study had tasters rate
cheese eaten with two different wines. One
wine they were told was from California, the
other from North Dakota. The same wine
was in both bottles. The tasters rated the
498/599

cheese they ate with the California wine as
being better quality, and they ate more of it.
So is the fancy world of wine tasting all
pretentious bunk? Not exactly. The wine
tasters in the experiments above were being
influenced by the nasty beast of expectation.
A wine expert’s objectivity and powers of
taste under normal circumstance might be
amazing, but Brochet’s manipulations of the
environment misled his subjects enough to
dampen their acumen. An expert’s own ex-
pectation can act like Kryptonite on the ex-
pert’s superpowers. Expectation, as it turns
out, is just as important as raw sensation.
The buildup to an experience can completely
change how you interpret the information
reaching your brain from your otherwise ob-
jective senses. In psychology, true objectivity
is pretty much considered to be impossible.
Memories, emotions, conditioning, and all
sorts of other mental flotsam taint every new
experience you gain. In addition to all this,
499/599

your expectations powerfully influence the
final vote in your head over what you believe
to be reality. So when tasting a wine, or
watching a movie, or going on a date, or
listening to a new stereo through $300 audio
cables—some of what you experience comes
from within and some comes from without.
Expensive wine is like anything else that is
expensive: The expectation it will taste better
actually makes it taste better.
In one Dutch study, participants were put
in a room with posters proclaiming the awe-
someness of high-definition and were told
they would be watching a new high-defini-
tion program. Afterward, the subjects said
they found the sharper, more colorful televi-
sion to be a superior experience to standard
programming. What they didn’t know was
they
were
actually
watching
a
standard
definition image. The expectation of seeing a
better-quality image led them to believe they
had. Recent research shows about 18 percent
500/599

of people who own high-definition televi-
sions are still watching standard definition
programming on the set, but they think they
are getting a better picture.
In the early eighties, Pepsi ran a marketing
campaign where they touted the success of
their product over Coca-Cola in blind taste
tests. They called this “The Pepsi Challenge.”
Psychologists had already determined you
choose your favorite products often not by
their inherent value, but because the market-
ing campaigns and logos and such have cast
a spell over you called brand awareness. You
start to identify yourself with one marketing
campaign
over
another.
That’s
what
happened in all the taste tests up until the
Pepsi Challenge. People liked Coca-Cola’s
advertising
more
than
Pepsi’s,
so
even
though they tasted pretty much the same,
when they saw that bright red can with a
white ribbon people chose Coke. So for the
Pepsi Challenge, they removed the logos. At
501/599

first, the researchers thought they should put
some sort of label on the glasses. So they
went with M and Q. People said they liked
Pepsi, labeled M, better than Coke, labeled
Q. Irritated by this, Coca-Cola did their own
study and put Coke in both glasses. Again, M
won the contest. It turned out it wasn’t the
soda; people just liked the letter M better
than the letter Q.
You look for cues from our environment
whenever you find things you like. These
cues help you to get back to the good stuff by
recognizing what got you the reward last
time. For the testers, the two products tasted
pretty much the same. So, forced to make a
choice, they moved to another set of cues to
make their decision—which letter was more
pleasant. Apparently, M is better than Q, and
in other research people tend to pick A in-
stead of B and 1 instead of 2. Branding works
the same way. Vodka, for instance, has no
flavor. So advertisers can’t sell you on how
502/599

great it tastes. Instead, they hijack your nat-
ural affinity for visual shortcuts by pummel-
ing your brain with advertising. When you
are standing in front of all those vodka
bottles in the liquor store, the brands hope
their marketing campaign has built enough
expectation in your consciousness to lead
you to their product.
In blind taste tests, longtime smokers can’t
tell their brand from any of the competitors
and wine connoisseurs have a hard time
telling $200 bottles from $20 ones. When
presented with microwaved food from the
frozen food section in the setting of a fine
restaurant, most people never notice. Taste
is subjective, which is another way of saying
you are not so smart when it comes to choos-
ing one product over another. All things be-
ing equal—you refer back to the advertising
or the packaging or conformity with your
friends
and
family.
Presentation
is
everything.
503/599

Restaurants depend on this. Actually, just
about
every
retailer
depends
on
this.
Presentation, price, good marketing, great
service—it all leads to an expectation of qual-
ity. The actual experience at the end of all
this is less important. As long as it isn’t total
crap, your experience will match up with
your expectations. A series of bad reviews
will make the movie worse, and a heap of
positive buzz can sway you in the other dir-
ection. You rarely watch films in a social va-
cuum with no input at all from critics and
peers and advertisements. Your expectations
are the horse, and your experience is the
cart. You get this backward all the time be-
cause you are not so smart.
504/599

47
The Illusion of Control
THE MISCONCEPTION: You know
how much control you have over
your surroundings.
THE TRUTH: You often believe you
have control over outcomes that are
either random or are too complex to
predict.
If you were to flip a coin and have it come up
heads five times in a row, you would have a
strong feeling deep in your gut the next toss
would land on tails because it needed to. You
think it must balance out.
This is called the gambler’s fallacy, or the
Monte Carlo fallacy after a casino roulette

game there in 1913 where black came up
twenty-six times in a row. As you can ima-
gine, the betting on red got out of hand as
black came up over and over again, fifteen,
sixteen, seventeen times. It was unbeliev-
able, and in the minds of the gamblers the
odds became astronomical that black would
come up again; red just had to be next. Order
must be restored. The excitement, the clam-
oring, and the noise as the ball bearing
bounced across the numbers and colors was
a great fit of delusion, because the odds nev-
er changed. It was just as likely to come up
black, as it had twenty-six times before.
In gambling, whether it be on a slot ma-
chine, a roulette table, or in a game of cards,
you have the tendency to see yourself as be-
ing lucky or unlucky, on a streak or in a rut.
You say things like “The cards are about to
turn.” You see a change of dealers as a posit-
ive sign, or you notice when people get up
from the table and change the rotation of the
506/599

deal. You get two out of three cherries and
decide to go for another spin; you bet on red
after black comes up ten times in a row, be-
cause you think red is due.
You might even have your own system de-
vised to maximize your chances. You never
sit in the outer seats in blackjack. You play
only slot machines with real handles, or you
blow on the dice before tossing them down
the craps table. None of this, of course, has
any real effect on the odds. The odds are
fixed, but sometimes you think you can beat
them, because you are not so smart.
When you watch someone play a slot ma-
chine for twenty minutes and then walk
away, you might rush and take over because
it seems as if the one-armed bandit is ready
to pay off after so many losses, but it isn’t.
This is the gambler’s fallacy, assuming the
odds change based on the history of the out-
comes so far. Sure, over a long enough peri-
od of time the odds will return to normal, but
507/599

in the short run there is no way to outsmart
random chance. If you flip a coin five hun-
dred times, you’ll come across runs of heads
and tails, some very long, on your way to an
overall split of something close to 50 per-
cent. If you just flip five times, the chances
are better you’ll streak. This is how casinos
always win; when you are winning, you find
it difficult to walk away. The longer you play,
however, the more the odds balance out, but
you never know when a streak will begin or
end.
Your ancestors lived long enough to meet a
partner and have children one after the oth-
er, generation upon generation, for millions
of years because they were great at pattern
recognition. Predators, prey, friends, and
foes all stood out from the background be-
cause your kin could see signals amid noise.
Thanks to them, you’ve inherited the same
powers, but you can’t turn them off. Your
brain is always looking for patterns and
508/599

sending little squirts of happy throughout
your body when it finds them, but like faces
in clouds, you often see patterns where none
exist.
If you roll a die and it lands on one, and
then roll again and get a two, and again and
see a three, there is no force in the universe
that is pushing the odds of a four out of the
realm of random chance. But wouldn’t it feel
like it had to be? That’s pattern recognition
messing with your judgment. Each roll of a
die is statistically independent of the next
roll. Despite this, a study by James Henslin
in 1967 showed people tend to throw harder
when they need high numbers in a game of
craps and toss gently when they want low
ones. Since you briefly control the action,
you start to feel like the control extends bey-
ond just the toss, into the randomness that
results.
Have you ever crossed your fingers while
watching someone shoot for a free throw in
509/599

basketball? Have you ever wished someone
would get hurt, and then they did? In 2006,
Emily Pronin and Sylvia Rodriguez at Prin-
ceton, along with Daniel Wegner and Kim-
berly McCarthy at Harvard, decided to see if
they could study this behavior in the lab.
They had college students agree to parti-
cipate in a study on psychosomatic symp-
toms, those that arise from merely thinking
about being sick. This wasn’t really the goal
of the study though. They actually wanted to
see if under the right conditions normal
people would believe their own thoughts
could harm or help others.
Students were told they would be particip-
ating with a partner who was also a student,
but the partner was really an actor. In one
group, the actor was ten minutes late and
wore a shirt that said STUPID PEOPLE
SHOULDN’T BREED. He then proceeded to
act rude and obnoxious to the experimenter
and chewed gum with his mouth open. In the
510/599

second group, the actor was pleasant and
agreeable. The actors and the students pulled
slips of paper out of a hat after reading about
voodoo for a while. Both slips read “witch
doctor,” but the students were told that one
slip read “victim.” The actors then pretended
to get the victim slips.
After all of this, the students were handed
a voodoo doll and told to think of the other
person as they stuck pins into it. Soon the
actor started to complain of a headache. As
you probably guessed by now, the people
who were made to hate the actor more often
reported they believed they had caused his
pain than did the group who met with a po-
lite confederate. Most people were skeptical,
but the skepticism was diminished in the
group who had been influenced to harbor
negative thoughts about the actor. They saw
an effect, and given all the possibilities, they
saw their own thoughts as a possible cause.
511/599

The experimenters had people watch an
athlete shoot basketballs into a basket in a
second round of this study. The shooter was
blindfolded with a trick blindfold he could
secretly see through. In one group the re-
searchers asked subjects to visualize the
shooter making the shot for ten seconds be-
fore each time he launched the ball, and in
the other group they asked the spectators to
visualize the shooter lifting weights. They
went so far as to have the player practice for
a minute before they began and miss most of
the shots.
The shooter tried to consistently make six
out of eight tries, which he usually did. It was
an astonishing feat for a person wearing a
blindfold, and the two groups saw it differ-
ently. When questioned later, most people
were skeptical, but those who had visualized
the shooter making the basket were nearly
twice as likely to say they believed they
helped. As with any good magic trick, people
512/599

wanted to believe that something other-
worldly or telepathic might be afoot.
The researchers concluded most people
engage in magical thinking to some degree,
assuming their thoughts can influence things
outside of their control. The people in the ex-
periments knew they were in a study, so they
likely were more skeptical than usual. This
skepticism can dissolve away in the right
conditions. If you are an avid sports fan, you
can’t help but think your mental cheerlead-
ing has some sort of positive effect on the
game play. You take some credit when your
team wins. You think you didn’t cheer hard
enough if they lose. This illusion of control is
pervasive enough to show up when teachers
take credit for the success of their students
or people in war zones start to accumulate
lucky charms or engage in rituals they think
will keep them alive. You ask people to send
well wishes and positive thoughts when
someone is sick.
513/599

In 1975, Ellen Langer conducted a series of
studies in which she had people engage in
games of chance both with and without some
control over how the games were played. In a
card game she had people play against both
nervous and confident actors, and although
the outcome was random, the subjects bet
more when they believed their opponents
were weak. She had people either pick their
own lottery numbers or have them assigned.
Those who picked their own numbers asked
for more money than those who did not
when she tried to buy back the tickets. She
also had people flip coins and predict if they
would land on heads or tails, but her team
manipulated the outcomes. Some subjects
were made to believe they guessed correctly
fifteen times in row at the beginning, some
fifteen times in a row at the end, and a third
group fifteen times spread out over all thirty
tosses. Those who thought they did well at
the beginning said they felt like they could
514/599

practice to improve their performance on fu-
ture runs. Those who thought they guessed
poorly at the beginning or saw their fifteen
correct guesses as being random were less
confident. The number of correct guesses
were the same in all three groups, but the
people who experienced streaks early on be-
lieved they had some sort of control. They
thought they could beat the odds.
Langer concluded the deciding factors
were the cues in the games that made the
participants feel as if some skill was in-
volved. Seeing patterns, becoming more fa-
miliar with the games, having options as to
how to play—all contributed to the illusion of
control. As obvious as it should have been,
the subjects tended to see randomness as
something they could outwit. This is why you
are far more likely to participate in games of
chance when there are some customizable
features. Allowing you to choose your own
lottery numbers or pick the numbers to bet
515/599

on in roulette affects how you see the results.
You assume the cold hand of fate becomes a
tad less potent if you have some say in how
you tempt it.
Flipping a coin or winning at poker are rel-
atively simple in comparison to giant mon-
sters of randomness like stock markets and
wars, corporate mergers and family vaca-
tions, yet no matter how complex a situation
can be, there will be people who assume they
can predict and control it. Those who hold
power become delusional about how far the
power extends.
In 2008, Nathaneal Fast and Deborah
Gruenfeld at Stanford University conducted
experiments designed to reveal how the illu-
sion of control is created. They knew previ-
ous studies had shown those with high so-
cioeconomic status or who came from cul-
tures where power and influence were highly
regarded were more likely to think they were
better at predicting the future. People even
516/599

fear death less when they have a college de-
gree. What if, they asked, you were just
asked to think about being powerful?
They divided subjects into three groups.
One group wrote an essay about a time in
their life in which they remembered being a
leader. Another group wrote about a time
when they were a follower. The third group
served as a control and wrote about going to
the supermarket. After the essays were fin-
ished, the groups played a game where they
had to guess the roll of a pair of dice. If they
guessed correctly, they would get $5. The
catch was this: Choose yourself or another
person to roll.
Sure enough, the illusion of control had
been properly primed in the group that
wrote about being leaders. A full 100 percent
of them asked to roll the dice. In the subor-
dinate group, 58 percent asked for control of
the roll. The control group fell in between,
with 69 percent asking to try their luck
517/599

instead of handing the dice over to someone
else. Of course the dice didn’t care who
tossed them. You start to assume you are im-
bued with gifts others do not possess if you
find yourself at the helm of a great and
powerful ship. You make plans and decisions
assuming randomness and chaos are for
chumps. The illusion of control is a peculiar
thing because it often leads to high self-es-
teem and a belief your destiny is yours for
the making more than it really is. This over-
optimistic view can translate into actual ac-
tion, rolling with the punches and moving
ahead no matter what. Often, this attitude
helps lead to success. Eventually, though,
most people get punched in the stomach by
life. Sometimes, the gut-punch doesn’t come
until after a long chain of wins, until you’ve
accumulated enough power to do some seri-
ous damage. This is when wars go awry,
stock markets crash, and political scandals
spill out into the media. Power breeds
518/599

certainty, and certainty has no clout against
the unpredictable, whether you are playing
poker or running a country.
Psychologists point out these findings do
not suggest you should throw up your hands
and give up. Those who are not grounded in
reality, oddly enough, often achieve a lot in
life simply because they believe they can and
try harder than others. If you focus too long
on your lack of power, you can slip into a
state of learned helplessness that will whirl
you into a negative feedback loop of depres-
sion. Some control is necessary or else you
give up altogether. Langer proved this when
studying nursing homes where some patients
were allowed to arrange their furniture and
water plants—they lived longer than those
who had had those tasks performed by
others.
Knowing about the illusion of control
shouldn’t discourage you from attempting to
carve a space for yourself out of whatever
519/599

field you want to tackle. After all, doing
nothing guarantees no results. But as you do
so, remember most of the future is unfore-
seeable. Learn to coexist with chaos. Factor it
into your plans. Accept that failure is always
a possibility, even if you are one of the good
guys; those who believe failure is not an op-
tion never plan for it. Some things are pre-
dictable and manageable, but the farther
away in time an event occurs, the less power
you have over it. The farther away from your
body and the more people involved, the less
agency you wield. Like a billion rolls of a tril-
lion dice, the factors at play are too complex,
too random to truly manage. You can no
more predict the course of your life than you
could the shape of a cloud. So seek to control
the small things, the things that matter, and
let them pile up into a heap of happiness. In
the bigger picture, control is an illusion
anyway.
520/599

48
The Fundamental Attribution
Error
THE
MISCONCEPTION:
Other
people’s behavior is the reflection of
their personality.
THE TRUTH: Other people’s behavi-
or is more the result of the situation
than their disposition.
You go to a restaurant and your server brings
back something you didn’t order. When you
send it back, it takes forever for them to re-
turn with the correct dish. They forget to fill
your glass and seem unable to remember
what you are drinking when they do check on
you. What sort of tip do you leave?

I waited tables for three years while in col-
lege, and I can tell you. If the kitchen got a
table’s order wrong, I knew my tip was
ruined. It wasn’t my fault, but people con-
sistently punished me as if it was. If the food
was cold, or burned, or rare when it should
have been well done, the diners would com-
municate their dissatisfaction by leaving
nothing or, worse than nothing, a single coin.
Some people are polite right up until the mo-
ment of truth when they cast their monetary
vote of nonconfidence. Others get violently
angry and while still chewing will demand to
see a manager. Waiting tables fosters a pecu-
liar sort of acrimony among waiters and
waitresses. I never met a server who didn’t
know when a bad tip was coming. No one
was ever taught a lesson from being short-
changed. Over those three years, I knew the
service had more to do with the situation
than my own disposition. I could dampen
the fallout from the circumstances outside
522/599

my control by being nice and funny, or strik-
ing up a conversation when I felt it was ap-
propriate, but the customers still blamed me
when something went wrong.
So have you ever left a bad tip to show
your exasperation?
When you are at a restaurant, you have a
hard time seeing through to the personality
of the server. You place blame and assume
you are dealing with a slacker. Sometimes
you are right, but often you are committing
the fundamental attribution error.
Have you ever watched a quiz show like
The Weakest Link or Jeopardy and thought,
however briefly, that the host was super-
smart? Perhaps there are a handful of musi-
cians, or authors, or professors in your life
you’ve placed on a pedestal. You imagine
how difficult it would be to hold your own in
conversation with these people, as you ima-
gine their towering intellect would crush you
as you resorted to prattling on about pasta
523/599

recipes and your collection of ornate spoons.
When you don’t know much about a person,
when you haven’t had a chance to get to
know him or her, you have a tendency to
turn the person into a character. You lean on
archetypes and stereotypes culled from ex-
perience and fantasy. Even though you know
better, you still do it.
You put on and take off social masks all
the time. You are a different person with
your friends than you are with your family or
your boss. Somehow, you forget that your
friends, family, and boss are doing the same.
You perpetrate the fundamental attribu-
tion error just about every time you read a
news story. For instance, every once in a
while, someone snaps and goes on a killing
spree at the post office. Going back to 1983,
there has been a shooting near or in a U.S.
post office about every two years. Often, the
killer is a disgruntled employee. Sometimes
they still work for the United States Postal
524/599

Service, sometimes they are recently fired.
There’s even a phrase for the phenomenon:
“going postal.” This is part of the collective
unconscious
of
America
at
this
point.
Movies, books, television shows, and even
pop music continue to refer to postal work-
ers going on rampages, as recently as 2010.
The concept of going postal will remain part
of English slang for decades.
Many explanations have been offered for
the phenomenon, ranging from stress at the
workplace
to
a
frustrating
bureaucratic
grievance process and the copycat effect. The
truth, however, is people are always snap-
ping and going on shooting sprees in the
modern United States. There are lists avail-
able online of three hundred or more incid-
ents, and you can Google the term “shooting
rampage” any time of the year and be guar-
anteed a mass murder will appear from with-
in the last few weeks. Oddly enough, the
homicide rate at post offices is actually lower
525/599

than in retail, but that’s probably because
people in retail are more likely to be killed in
a robbery. At any rate, the reason you are fa-
miliar with the idea of a lone postal worker
killing all his coworkers is that the national
media tends to cover these incidents no mat-
ter where they occur.
When you hear about a shooting like those
at the post office or in a school or at an air-
port, what is the first thing you assume about
the killer? The most comforting thought is
that the murderer was crazy. He or she was
nuts, and one day something just came over
that person. In its own dark way, this is com-
forting. You don’t want to think potential
killers are all around you, or you yourself
could lose it in such a grand and total way.
Yet, most of the time, the people who snap
don’t wake up one day with murder on the
brain. The rage builds for years. They are
usually frustrated and angry because of
grievances at work. They build an identity
526/599

around their jobs and think they’ve lost
everything when they get fired. They often
suffer from a sense of anomie and isolation
and believe they can go out in a blaze of
glory. Many feel as if they’ve been tormented
and shamed for too long and want to settle a
score. To them, life has become a relentless,
depressing assault and they are powerless.
The situation, in their minds, is driving them
mad.
You see killers on a rampage as lunatics,
but coworkers and family rarely agree. They
say the job and the stress drove them to
madness. Friends say if it wasn’t for the job,
things would have been different. For you,
on the outside, it is easier to blame the per-
sonality of the murderer as if that person was
bound to kill one day no matter what. As dis-
tressing as it may be, it is another way the
fundamental attribution error drives you to
jump to conclusions. You see the person, and
527/599

ignore his or her surroundings, and then cast
blame on only the individual.
If it could happen to anyone, it could hap-
pen to you. It’s an unpleasant thought to
imagine evil could be more the result of a
series of terrible events and social pressures
than the working of a deviant mind. Knowing
this is so does in no way excuse those who
harm others, but nevertheless it seems to be
true. If this rattles you a bit, don’t worry, it
means you are still sane.
In your school there were geeks and nerds,
jocks and princesses. There was a class clown
and a slacker, a misanthropic poet and an
energetic politician striving for grades. You
love stories. Movies and books with a cast of
characters make sense to you because in life
you tend to turn everyone into a character
whose behavior is predictable. The mind
struggles to make sense of the world. You are
always aware of the minds of others and are
528/599

always searching for an explanation as to
why people are behaving the way they do.
Psychologists know most behavior is the
result of a tug-of-war between external and
internal
forces.
People
aren’t
characters
without nuance who can be easily predicted.
You seem like a different person at work
than at home, a different character at a party
than you are when you’re with your family.
On paper, this seems like common sense, but
you easily forget about the power of the set-
ting when judging others. Instead of saying,
“Jack is uncomfortable around people he
doesn’t know, thus when I see him in public
places he tends to avoid crowds,” you say,
“Jack is shy.” It’s a shortcut, an easier way to
navigate the social world. Your brain loves to
take shortcuts. It is easy to ignore the power
of the situation. Seeing people through the
lens of their situation is one of the founda-
tions of social psychology, where it is re-
ferred to as attribution theory.
529/599

If someone walks up to you in a bar and
offers to buy you a drink, the first thoughts
in your mind won’t be an analysis of the per-
son’s face or the temperature in the room.
Your first thoughts will be assumptions as to
the person’s intent. Is this an attempt at se-
duction? Is this an act of kindness? Is this
person a threat? To what, you ask, can this
person’s behavior be attributed? You can’t be
sure of the answer, so it shifts and bounces
from one possibility to the next.
When you see a behavior, like a child
screaming in a supermarket while the seem-
ingly oblivious parents continue to shop, you
take
a
mental
shortcut
and
conclude
something about the story of their lives.
Even though you know you don’t have
enough information to understand, your
conclusion still feels satisfying. Your attribu-
tion, the cause you believe to have preceded
the effect, could be right on the money.
Often, though, you are not so smart.
530/599

A study in 1992 by Constantine Sedikides
and Craig Anderson had Americans explain
why they thought other U.S. citizens would
want to defect to the former Soviet Union.
Most people rushed to judge, with 80 per-
cent saying the defectors were probably con-
fused or traitorous. They imagined them as
characters
whose
personalities
predicted
their actions. America, after all, is the land of
the free and the home of the brave. It is
where these subjects grew up and enjoyed
life. When the researchers then asked why a
Russian might defect to the States, 90 per-
cent said the Russian was probably fleeing
horrible living conditions or looking for a
better way of life. From an American state of
mind, the Russians weren’t motivated by
their personalities, but by their environment.
Instead of turning them into traitors, which
would be deeply unsettling since they were
coming
to
the
subject’s
home
country,
531/599

Americans had to place the blame for their
behavior on something external.
According to psychologist Harold Kelly,
when you conjure an attribution for someone
else’s actions, you consider consistency. If
one of your friends gets into a fight with
someone you know, you first look to see if
their behavior is consistent with their past
behaviors. If they are always getting into
fights over petty disagreements, you place
the blame on their personality. If they are
usually calm, you place the blame on the
situation. Usually, this shorthand works, and
in our evolutionary past it was easy to check
for consistency among the people one saw
every day. In the modern world, you can’t
check for consistency with your waitress or
the people on the subway. You can’t tell if the
person on the shooting rampage was being
consistent, or if the person who just cut you
off in traffic is always an asshole. When you
532/599

can’t
check
for
consistency,
you
blame
people’s behavior on their personality.
One of the first studies to uncover the
machinations of the fundamental attribution
error was conducted in 1967 by Edward
Jones and Victor Harris at Duke University.
They had students read speech transcripts of
debaters both in support of and in opposi-
tion to the political
ideologies
of Fidel
Castro. (Today they might have used Osama
bin Laden.) The students correctly attributed
the speechwriter’s ideas as influenced by the
speechwriter’s internal feelings when told
the person who gave the speech had chosen
his own position. If, for instance, the de-
baters said they disagreed with Castro, the
students said they believed them. When the
students were told the debater had no choice
in the matter and was assigned the position
as either pro- or anti-Castro, the students
didn’t buy it. If the debater was assigned a
pro-Castro position and then gave a pro-
533/599

Castro speech, the students reading that
speech told the researchers they thought the
debater really believed what he or she was
saying. The situation’s influence didn’t play
into their assumptions; instead they saw all
the debaters’ words as springing from their
character.
Variations of this experiment are still be-
ing conducted today. Each new twist of the
variables leads to the same mistakes. In
1997, Peter Ditto had men meet with an act-
ress working for the experimenters. She and
the men would have short one-on-one con-
versations and then she gave a written report
of her impressions. When Ditto told the men
she had been instructed to give a negative re-
port, the men said she was just following or-
ders. When told she had been asked to give a
positive report, the men said although they
knew she was just doing her job, they felt
that she really did like them.
534/599

You commit the fundamental attribution
error by believing other people’s actions bur-
geon from the sort of people they are and
have nothing to do with the setting. When a
man believes the stripper really likes him, or
when the boss thinks all his employees love
to hear his stories about fishing in Costa
Rica,
that’s
the
fundamental
attribution
error.
It’s hard to grasp just how powerful a situ-
ation can be, how much it can influence the
behavior of you and people you think you
know pretty well. In 1971, Philip Zimbardo
conducted
an
experiment
at
Stanford
University that would rattle him to his core
and change psychology forever. Zimbardo
was
interested
in
the
roles
you
play
throughout your life, the characters you cre-
ate and then pretend to be depending on the
situation. He thought perhaps the brutality
displayed in war and in prisons had less to
535/599

do with evil than it did with unconscious
role-playing.
He had twenty-four male students flip
coins to see who would be prisoners and who
would be guards in a pretend prison set up
on campus. Those who were randomly selec-
ted to be prisoners wore prison smocks with
numbers on the back and ankle chains.
Guards wore full uniforms with mirrored
shades and wielded wooden batons. The
guards were told to refer to the prisoners
only by their numbers but never physically
harm them. Zimbardo had the local police
arrest the mock prisoners at their homes and
undergo searches in front of their neighbors.
They then went through a simulated booking
at the police station, complete with mug
shots and fingerprints. After the prisoners
had waited blindfolded in a real cell, the po-
lice then took them to campus, where they
were strip-searched and deloused in the fake
jail.
After
all
this,
the
experiment
was
536/599

supposed to take two weeks. Participants
would pretend to be guards and prisoners
while psychologists videotaped them and
took notes. It ended after six days.
There was a riot on the second day. One
person had to be released on the third day
after suffering so much emotional distress
the researchers couldn’t bear to keep him
confined. What went wrong?
Zimbardo made sure his participants were
middle-class college students with no history
of violence or substance abuse. He told the
guards to maintain order but didn’t give spe-
cific instructions as to how to go about it. At
first, both guards and prisoners didn’t take
the
experiment
seriously.
They
goofed
around a bit and were slow to warm to the
role-playing, but Zimbardo had the guards
regularly wake up the prisoners with whistles
and then count them, forcing the prisoners
to recite their numbers one at time. Over
time, the guards became more aggressive
537/599

during these counts, more abusive, and
cruel. If a prisoner broke a rule, the guards
would force that person to do push-ups or
place the prisoner in a closet as if it were sol-
itary confinement. On the morning of the
second day, the prisoners felt like they had
endured enough and barricaded their cells
with mattresses while yelling back at the pre-
tend guards. In turn, the guards grabbed a
fire extinguisher and doused the prisoners
through the bars so they could force their
way into the cells. They then stripped the
prisoners naked, took away their beds, and
began to insult and berate them. To prevent
further insurrections, they allowed certain
prisoners to wear clothes and sleep on beds if
they maintained good, obedient behavior.
They also were allowed better food and the
indulgences of a toothbrush and toothpaste.
After a few hours, the guards took all the
privileges away from the compliant prisoners
and had them switch places with the defiant
538/599

ones in an attempt to scramble their minds
and destroy any alliances they might have
formed by creating doubt in their minds as
to who was secretly cooperating with the
guards. Before long, the guards were forcing
the prisoners to relieve themselves in a buck-
et and forcing them to simulate sodomy on
one another.
Zimbardo became overwhelmed by the
power of the situation just as much as the
students had. He started imagining himself
as a warden, and when he heard rumors of a
possible escape plan being hatched by the
prisoners, he tried unsuccessfully to move
his experiment into a real jail. Once he saw
footage of the guards becoming physically vi-
olent when they thought the psychologists
weren’t looking, he realized that the situation
was getting out of hand. When one of his
graduate students visited for the first time
and recoiled in horror at the conditions the
prisoners were living in, Zimbardo finally
539/599

saw through her eyes that things had gone
too far. On the sixth day, they ended the ex-
periment. The prisoners rejoiced; the guards
complained.
In the interviews that followed, the stu-
dents who role-played as prisoners said they
felt as if they had lost their identity, and that
the experiment had been replaced by a real
prison. They questioned their own sanity.
They forgot they could leave if they only re-
quested for the experiment to end. The
guards said they were only following orders.
Remember, all of these people were just
average, middle-class college students the
week prior. Nothing they or anyone else
knew about them suggested they were cap-
able of such malice or conformity. It all took
place in a row of offices in a building on a
college campus, and everyone knew this, but
the situation, the external forces, were so
powerful that the participants changed into
monsters and victims in just one day.
540/599

Decades later, Zimbardo would reject the
U.S. government’s claims about the sadism
displayed at the Abu Ghraib prison as being
the result of the behavior of a few bad apples.
The government was committing the funda-
mental attribution error, ignoring the power
of the situation, turning the perpetrators into
easy-to-dismiss
characters.
Although
he
doesn’t absolve those who tortured and hu-
miliated Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib, Zim-
bardo suggests whenever people are put into
a situation like the one he created in his ex-
periment, the same results will unfold, as
they did in 2004 in the Baghdad Correction-
al Facility and as they have in other prisons
throughout history. People are not good at
heart, Zimbardo says, but because their en-
vironment encourages it. Anyone, he be-
lieves, is capable of becoming a monster if
given the power and opportunity.
When you interpret your loved one’s cold-
ness as his or her indifference to your wants
541/599

and needs instead of as a reaction to stress at
work or problems ricocheting in your loved
one’s own heart, you’ve committed the fun-
damental attribution error. When you vote
for someone because that person seems
likable and approachable, and ignore how
much of their persona is contrived for the
sake of votes, it’s the same error at work. You
commit it again when you assay friendliness
as sexual interest, or poverty as the result of
laziness. When you look for a cause for an-
other person’s actions, you find it. Rarely,
though, do you first consider how powerful
the situation is. You blame the person, not
the environment and the influence of the
person’s peers. You do this because you
would like to believe your own behavior
comes strictly from within. You know this
isn’t true though. You shift from introvert to
extrovert, from brainiac to simpleton, from
charismatic to impish—depending on where
you find yourself and who is watching.
542/599

The fundamental attribution error leads to
labels and assumptions about who people
are, but remember first impressions are
mostly incorrect. Those impressions will
linger until you get to know people and un-
derstand their situation and the circum-
stances in which their behavior is generated.
Knowing this doesn’t mean you must forgive
evil, but perhaps it can help prevent it.
543/599

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A super-tight hug goes out to Erin Malone,
who found my blog and believed it should
exist in physical form. Through her confid-
ence and hard work it now does. Thank you
so much.
Thanks too to Patrick Mulligan, who “got
it” early on and then slashed and questioned
the original manuscript until it made sense.
I’m fortunate to have had such a plugged-in
editor.
Boundless thanks go out to my wife,
Amanda, who read this book as it came to-
gether and kept it from going off the rails
many times.
In many ways this book and the blog from
which it sprang started in a psychology class
I took seven years after graduating from high
school.

After getting married, my wife and I sold
all our possessions and traveled to Germany
for no other reason than to see what would
happen. We had both gone to a tiny school in
a small town in Mississippi, and we both
worked the sort of jobs that went along with
those foundations—waiting tables, construc-
tion, selling coats. Escaping into a strange
adventure made a lot of sense at the time. As
tramps abroad, we were shocked at not only
how naive we were, but how uneducated. We
swore to each other when we got back to the
States we would get college degrees.
One of our first college experiences was an
incredibly
challenging
and
life-changing
course—Introduction to Psychology, taught
by one extraordinary teacher, Jean Edwards.
Edwards’s
class
wasn’t
like
the
other
courses. Nothing about it was remedial. She
came every day with a laptop and a projector
and used videos, photos, animations, and
diagrams to detail the intricacies of how the
545/599

mind worked. The textbook was an after-
thought, a supplement. In her class, she used
presentations
labored
over
for
years
to
boggle our minds and shake us out of our de-
lusions. She made us stand up and perform,
she put us in and out of groups, she pointed
at our faces and made us talk. When the tests
landed on our desks, there was no memoriz-
ation, there were no word banks. Every ques-
tion was a puzzle that required a deep under-
standing of the material to unfurl and solve.
Once we went on to a full university, my wife
and I were astonished to find no course ever
compared to hers.
In one class, she asked us to imagine a
man who woke up every day and wrapped
his entire body in newspaper before putting
on his clothes. He worked hard, provided for
his family, and hurt no one. At the end of the
day, he would discreetly remove his wrap-
pings before going to bed. She then asked,
“Is this person crazy?” For an hour, the class
546/599

argued about it. Most people’s knee-jerk re-
action was “Yeah, obviously.” She nursed the
conversation, pointing out our ignorance,
asking us to examine our own quirks and
neurotic habits. By the end of the class the
students
had
reached
a consensus:
The
newspaper man was as deluded as the rest of
us, and therefore not crazy.
Every class with Edwards was revelatory,
not just because of the overwhelming num-
ber of eye-opening facts and epiphanies, but
also because she showed people like me and
my wife there were kindred spirits out there.
She had no problem losing an hour of her
day to an after-class conversation, and she
was always ready to subvert the norms and
expectations of her pupils and peers. She
made it safe and respectable to be different,
and she provided her students with a role
model they didn’t know was an option before
meeting her. She was a smart, successful,
professional
woman
who
questioned
547/599

everything and dared you to join her. This
book, and the blog that led to it, started in
that class.
So, I thank you, Jean Edwards.
You
changed my life and tilted my view of the
world permanently.
548/599

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Introduction
Nyhan, B., & Reifler, J. (2010). When correc-
tions fail: the persistence of political misper-
ceptions. Political Behavior 32(2), 303–330.
Munro, G. D., & Ditto, P. H. (1997, June).
Biased assimilation, attitude polarization,
and affect in reactions to stereotype-relevant
scientific information. Personality and So-
cial Psychology Bulletin 23(6), 636–653.
Munro, G. (2010). The scientific impotence
excuse: discounting belief-threatening sci-
entific abstracts. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology 40(3), 579–600.

Priming
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999, July).
The unbearable automaticity of being. Amer-
ican Psychologist 54(7), 462–479.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996).
Automaticity of social behavior: direct effects
of trait construct and stereotype activation
on action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 71(2), 230–244.
Bargh, J. A., & Wyer, R. S. (1997). The auto-
maticity of everyday life. London: Psycho-
logy Press.
Carey, B. (2007, July 31). Who’s minding the
mind? New York Times.
Friedman, R., & Elliot, A. J. (2008, Novem-
ber). Exploring the influence of sports drink
exposure on physical endurance, Original
Research Article. Psychology of Sport and
Exercise 9(6), 749–759.
Kay, A. C., Wheeler, S. C., Bargh, J. A., &
Ross,
L.
(2004).
Material
priming:
The
550/599

influence of mundane physical objects on
situational construal and competitive beha-
vioral choice. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 95, 83–96.
Zhong, C., & Liljenquist, K. (2006). Washing
away your sins: threatened morality and
physical
cleansing.
Science
313(5792),
1451–1452.
Confabulation
Fiala, B., & Nichols, S. (2009). Confabula-
tion, confidence, and introspection. Behavi-
oral and Brain Sciences 32(2), 144–145.
Hirstein, W. (2005). Brain fiction: Self-de-
ception and the riddle of confabulation.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Joseph, R. (1986). Confabulation and delu-
sional denial: Frontal lobe and lateralized in-
fluences. Journal of Clinical Psychology 42,
845–860.
551/599

Mandler, G. (1985). Cognitive psychology:
An essay in cognitive science. Hillsdale,
N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977, May).
Telling more than we can know: Verbal re-
ports on mental processes. Psychological
Review 84(3), 231–259.
Pantel, J. (2006, March). Brain fiction: Self-
deception and the riddle of confabulation:
Review. American Journal of Psychiatry
163, 559.
Ramachandran, V. S. (2009, January 10).
Self-awareness: The last frontier. Retrieved
December
2010
from
http://integral-op-
tions.blogspot.com/2009/01/vs-
ramachandran-self-awareness-last.html.
Sapolsky, R. (1995, November 1). Ego bound-
aries, or the fit of my father’s shirt: A neuros-
cientist racks his brains to find where one
person ends and another begins. Discover.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
552/599

http://discovermagazine.com/1995/nov/
egoboundariesort586.
Zaidel, E., Zaidel, D. W., & Bogen, J. E.
(n.d.). The split brain. Retrieved December
2010 from http://www.its.caltech.edu/~jbo-
gen/text/ref130.htm.
Confirmation Bias
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Meng, J. (2009,
June). Looking the other way: Selective ex-
posure to attitude-consistent and counter at-
titudinal political information. Communica-
tion Research 36(3), 426–448.
Krebs, V. (2008). New Political Patterns.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.orgnet.com/divided.html.
Krebs, V. (2000, March). Working in the
connected world: Book network. IHRIM
Journal, 87–90.
553/599

LaMarre, H. L., Landreville, K. D., & Beam,
M. A. (2009, April). The irony of satire:
Political ideology and the motivation to see
what you want to see in The Colbert Report.
The International Journal of Press/Politics
14(2), 212–231.
Marks, M. J., & Fraley, R. C. (2006, Janu-
ary).
Confirmation
bias
and
the
sexual
double standard. Sex Roles 54(1/2), 19–26.
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A
ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises.
Review
of
General
Psychology
2(2),
175–220.
Owad, T. (2006, January 4). Data mining
101: Finding subversives with Amazon wish
lists. Retrieved December 2010 from ht-
tp://www.applefritter.com/bannedbooks.
Owings, J. (2009, February 24). Confirma-
tion bias and the internet. Retrieved Decem-
ber
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.justinowings.com/b/index.php/
me/confirmation-bias-and-the-internet.
554/599

Pratchett, T. (2000). The truth: A novel of
Discworld. New York: HarperCollins.
Snyder, M., & Cantor, N. (1998). Under-
standing personality and social behavior: A
functionalist strategy. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T.
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.). The handbook of
social psychology: Vol. 1. (4th ed., pp.
635–679). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Hindsight Bias
Teigen, K. H. (1986). Old truths or fresh in-
sights? A study of students’ evaluations of
proverbs. British Journal of Social Psycho-
logy 25(43–50), 18.
Vedantam, S. (2006, October 2). Iraq war
naysayers may have hindsight bias. Wash-
ington Post. Retrieved December 2010 from
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2006/10/01/
AR2006100100784.html.
555/599

The Texas Sharpshooter
Fallacy
Abumrad,
J.,
&
Krulwich,
R.
(2009).
Stochasticity.
Radiolab
Podcast
6(1).
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.radiolab.org/2009/jun/15/.
Altered Dimensions. (2005). The prophecies
of Nostradamus. Retrieved December 2010
from
http://www.spartechsoftware.com/di-
mensions/mystical/nostradamus.htm.
Forer, B. R. (1949). The fallacy of personal
validation: A classroom demonstration of
gullibility. Journal of Abnormal Psycholog,
44, 118–121.
Gawande, A. (1999, February 8). The cancer-
cluster myth. New Yorker, p. 34.
Griffiths,
T.,
&
Tenenbaum,
J.
(2006,
September).
Statistics
and
the
Bayesian
mind. Significance, 3(3), 130–133.
Kurtus, R. (2006 November 24). Similarities
between the assassinations of Kennedy and
556/599

Lincoln. Retrieved December 2010 from ht-
tp://www.school-for-champions.com/his-
tory/lincolnjfk.htm.
Novella, S. (2009, December 21). Autism
prevalence.
Neurologica
Blog.
Retrieved
December 2010 from http://theness.com/
neurologicablog/?p=1374.
Robertson, M. (1898). Futility: Or the wreck
of the Titan. Retrieved December 2010 from
http://www.daggy.name/cop/effluvia/twott-
t.htm.
Shermer, M. (1998, January). The truth is
out there and Ray Hyman wants to find it:
An interview with a co-founder of Modern
Skepticism.
Skeptic
Magazine.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.theeway.com/skepticc/
archives03.html.
557/599

Procrastination
Ariely, D., & Wertenbroch, K. (2002, May).
Procrastination,
deadlines,
and
performance:
Self-control
by
precommit-
ment. Psychological Science 13(3), 219–224.
Bloch, M., Cox, A., McGinty, J. C., & Quealy,
K. (2010, January 8). A peek into Netflix
queues. New York Times.
Milkman, K. L., Rogers, T., & Bazerman, M.
H. (2010, March). I’ll have the ice cream
soon and the vegetables later: A study of on-
line grocery purchases and order lead time.
Marketing Letters 21(1), 17–35.
Milkman, K. L., Rogers, T., & Bazerman, M.
H. (2009, June). Highbrow films gather
dust: Time-inconsistent preferences and on-
line
DVD
rentals.
Management
Science
55(6), 1047–1059.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G., & Kalyanaraman,
S. (1999, December). Mixing virtue and vice:
Combining the immediacy effect and the
558/599

diversification heuristic. Journal of Behavi-
oral Decision Making 12(4), 257.
Normalcy Bias
Azevedo, T. M., Volchan, E., Imbiriba, L. A.,
Rodrigues, E. C., Oliveira, J. M., Oliveira, L.
F., Lutterbach, L. G., & Vargas, C. D. (2005,
May). A freezing-like posture to pictures of
mutilation.
Psychophysiology
42(3),
255–260.
Barthelmess, S. (1988, March/April). Com-
ing to grips with panic. Flight Safety Found-
ation: Cabin Crew Safety 23(2), 1–4.
Klingsch, W. (2010). Pedestrian and evacu-
ation dynamics 2008. Springer.
Leach, J. (2004, June). Why people “freeze”
in an emergency: Temporal and cognitive
constraints on survival responses. Aviation,
Space, and Environmental Medicine 75(6),
539–542.
559/599

Leach, J. (2005). Cognitive paralysis in an
emergency: The role of the supervisory at-
tentional system. Aviation, Space, and En-
vironmental Medicine 76(2), 134–136.
Mikami, S., & Ikeda, K. (1985). Human re-
sponse to disasters. International Journal of
Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 107–132.
Ripley, A. (2005, April 25). How to get out
alive. Time. Retrieved December 2010 from
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/art-
icle/0,9171,1053663-6,00.html.
Ripley, A. (2009). The unthinkable: Who
survives when disaster strikes—and why?
New York: Three Rivers Press.
Schmidt, C. (Producer). (2006, October 17).
The deadliest plane crash. (Nova). Boston:
WGBH Educational Foundation.
Svenvold, M. (2006). Big weather: Chasing
tornadoes in the heart of America. New
York: Macmillan.
560/599

Introspection
Haigh, E. A. P., & Fresco, D. M. (n.d.). Rela-
tionship of depressive rumination and dis-
traction to subsequent depressive symptoms
following successful antidepressant medica-
tion
therapy
for
depression.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.personal.kent.edu/~dfresco/
Fresco_Papers/AABT_05_Rum_Haigh.pdf.
Wilson T. D., Dunn D. S., Kraft D., & Lisle D.
J. (1989). Introspection, attitude change, and
attitude-behavior consistency: The disrupt-
ive effects of explaining why we feel the way
we do. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 22, 287–343.
Wilson, T. D., & Schooler, J. W. (1991,
February). Thinking too much: Introspection
can reduce the quality of preferences and de-
cisions. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 60, 181–192.
561/599

The Availability Heuristic
Glassner, B. (1999). The Culture of Fear.
New York: Basic Books. Stephens, R. D. (Ex-
ecutive Director). (2010, July 14). The Na-
tional School Safety Center’s Report on
School Associated Violent Deaths. Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.schoolsafety.us/media-resources/
school-associated-violent-deaths.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Avail-
ability: a heuristic for judging frequency and
probability.
Cognitive
Psychology
5,
207–232.
The Bystander Effect
Darley, J. M., & Batson, C. D. (1973). From
Jerusalem to Jericho: A study of situational
and
dispositional
variables
in
helping
562/599

behavior. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 27(1), 100–108.
Darley, J. M. & Latane, B. (1968). Bystander
intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of re-
sponsibility. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 8, 377–383.
Gansberg, M. (1964, March 27). Thirty-eight
who saw murder didn’t call the police. New
York Times.
Latane, B., & Darley, J. (1969). Bystander
“Apathy.” American Scientist 57, 244–268.
Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A. (2007,
September). The Kitty Genovese murder and
the social psychology of helping: the parable
of the 38 witnesses. American Psychologist
62(6), 555–562.
Shotland, R. L., & Straw M. K. (1976) Bys-
tander response to an assault: When a man
attacks a woman. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 35, 990–999.
563/599

The Dunning-Kruger Effect
Burson, K. A., Larrick, R. P., & Klayman J.
(2006, January). Skilled or unskilled, but
still unaware of it: how perceptions of diffi-
culty drive miscalibration in relative compar-
isons. Journal of Personality and Social
Psycholog, 90(1), 60–77.
Kruger, J., & David D. (1999). Unskilled and
unaware of it: How difficulties in recognizing
one’s own incompetence lead to inflated self-
assessments. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 77(6), 1121–1134.
Apophenia
Littlewood, J. E., & Bollobás, B. (1986). Lit-
tlewood’s Miscellany. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
564/599

Brand Loyalty
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K.
S., Montague, L. M., & Montague, P. R.
(2004, October 14). Neural correlates of be-
havioral preference for culturally familiar
drinks. Neuron 44(2), 379–387.
The Argument from
Authority
Acharya, H. J. (2004, March). The rise and
fall of the frontal lobotomy. Proceedings of
the 13h Annual History of Medicine Days,
32–41.
Goodman, B., & Maggio, J. (Producers).
(2008). The Lobotomist (American Experi-
ence). Brooklyn, NY: Ark Media. Retrieved
December 2010 from http://www.pbs.org/
565/599

wgbh/americanexperience/films/
lobotomist/.
The Just-World Fallacy
Andre, C., & Velasquez, M. (1990, Spring).
The just world theory. Issues in Ethics 3(2).
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.scu.edu/ethics/publications/iie/
v3n2/justworld.html.
BBC News. (2010, February 15). Women say
some
rape
victims
should
take
blame—survey. Retrieved December 2010
from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/
8515592.stm.
Campbell, R., & Raja, S. (1999). Secondary
victimization of rape victims: insights from
mental health professionals who treat surviv-
ors of violence. Violence and Victims 14(3),
261–75.
566/599

Hafer, C. L., & Bègue L. (2005). Experiment-
al research on just-world theory: problems,
developments, and future challenges. Psy-
chological Bulletin 131(1), 128–167.
Haidt, J. (2010, October 16). What the tea
partiers really want. Wall Street Journal.
Retrieved December 2010 from http://on-
line.wsj.com/article/
SB10001424052748703673604575550243700
Janoff-Bulman R., Timko, C., & Carli, L. L.
(1985, March). Cognitive biases in blaming
the victim. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 21(2), 161–177.
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just
world: A fundamental delusion. New York:
Plenum Press.
Miller, F. D., Smith, E. R., Ferree, M. M., &
Taylor, S. E. (1976, December). Predicting
perceptions of victimization. Journal of Ap-
plied Social Psychology 6(4), 352–359.
Neal, J. (1998, Spring). Belief in a just world
for the self as it relates to depression, stress,
567/599

and psychological well-being. Living in a So-
cial World: Psy 324: Advanced Social Psy-
chology. Retrieved December 2010 from ht-
tp://www.units.muohio.edu/psybersite/just-
world/selfmh.shtml.
Springer
Science+Business
Media
(2010,
November 11). Swedish teens say individual
traits are the main reasons for bullying.
ScienceDaily.
Retrieved
December
2010
from http://www
.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/11/
101111101404.htm. Thornberg, R., & Knut-
sen, M. A. (2010). Teenagers’ explanations of
bullying. Child and Youth Care Forum. DOI
10.1007/s10566-010 -9129-z.
The Public Goods Game
Ariely, D. (2008). Predictably irrational:
The hidden forces that shape our decisions.
New York: Harper.
568/599

Davis, D. D., & Holt, C. A. (1992). Experi-
mental economics. Princeton, N.J.: Prin-
ceton University Press.
Hardin, G. (1998, May 1). Extensions of “The
Tragedy
of
the
Commons.”
Science
280(5364), 682–683.
The Ultimatum Game
Crockett, M. J., Clark, L., Tabibnia, G.,
Lieberman, M. D., & Robbins, T. W. (2008,
June). Serotonin modulates behavioral reac-
tions to unfairness. Science 320(5884), 1739.
Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., & Schwarze, B.
(1982, December). An experimental analysis
of ultimatum bargaining. Journal of Eco-
nomic
Behavior
and
Organization
3(4),
367–388.
Forsythe R., Horowitz, J., Savin, N. E., &
Sefton,
M.
(1994).
Fairness
in
simple
569/599

bargaining experiments. Games and Eco-
nomic Behavior 6, 347–369.
McMillan, S. (2007, November 19). Monkeys
have
sense
of
fairness.
Emory
Wheel.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.emorywheel.com/de-
tail.php?n=24747.
Cult Indoctrination
Myers, D. G. (2005). Social psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Groupthink
Fox News (2004) “Group Think” led to
WMD assessment. Retrieved December 2010
from
http://www.foxnews.com/story/
0,2933,125123,00.html.
570/599

Janis, I. L. (1972) Victims of groupthink. Bo-
ston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Meyers, D. G. (2005) Social psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Weiten, W. (2002) Psychology: Themes and
Variations. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Supernormal Releasers
Associated Press. (2006). Food servings are
bigger than 20 years ago, but most un-
aware,
study
says.
Retrieved
December
2010 from http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/
16076842/ns/health-diet_and_nutrition/.
Buss, D. M. (1994). The evolution of desire:
strategies of human mating. New York:
BasicBooks.
Johnson, K. L., & Tassinary, L. G. (2005,
November 1). Perceiving sex directly and in-
directly: Meaning in motion and morpho-
logy. Psychological Science 16(11), 890–897.
571/599

Singh, D. (2002, December). Female mate
value at a glance: relationship of waist-to-hip
ratio to health, fecundity and attractiveness.
Neuroendocrinology Letters 23(Suppl 4),
81–91.
The Affect Heuristic
Abumrad, J., & Krulwich, R. (2008). Choice.
Radiolab Podcast 5(1). Retrieved December
2010 from http://www.radiolab.org/2008/
nov/17/.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., &
Damasio, A. R. (1997, February). Deciding
advantageously before knowing advantage-
ous strategy. Science 275(5304), 1293–1295.
Denes-Raj, V., & Epstein, S. (1994). Conflict
between intuitive and rational processing:
When people behave against their better
judgment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 66(5), 819–829.
572/599

Funicane, M. L., Alhakami, A., Slovic, P., &
Johnson, S. M. (2000, January/March). The
affect heuristic in judgments of risks and be-
nefits. Journal of Behavioral Decision Mak-
ing 13(1), 1–17.
Timarr. (2010, May 26). Risk, Stone Age eco-
nomics and the affect heuristic. The Psy-Fi
Blog. Retrieved December 2010 from ht-
tp://www.psyfitec.com/2010/05/risk-stone-
age-economics-and-affect.html.
Wallis, J. D. (2006). Evaluating apples and
oranges. Nature Neuroscience 9, 596–598.
Weinschenk, S. (2009). Neuro web design:
What makes them click? Berkeley, CA: New
Riders.
Winkielman, P., Zajonc, R. B., & Schwarz, N.
(1997). Subliminal affective priming attribu-
tional interventions. Cognition and Emotion
11(4), 433–465.
573/599

Dunbar’s Number
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992, June). Neocortex size
as a constraint on group size in primates.
Journal
of
Human
Evolution
22(6),
469–493.
Dunbar, R. (1998). Grooming, gossip, and
the evolution of language. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press.
Gladwell,
M.
(2000).
The
tipping
point—how little things can make a big dif-
ference. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Selling Out
Heath, J., & Potter, A. (2005). The rebel sell:
Why
the
culture
can’t
be
jammed.
Chichester, Quebec, CA: Capstone.
574/599

Self-Serving Bias
Hoorens, V. (1993). Self-enhancement and
superiority
biases
in
social
comparison.
European Review of Social Psychology 4(1),
113–139.
Kruger, J. (1999, August). Lake Wobegon be
gone! The “below-average effect” and the
egocentric
nature
of
comparative
ability
judgments. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 77(2), 221–232.
Meyers, D. G. (2005). Social Psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill. Wilson, A. E., &
Ross, M. (2001, April). From chump to
champ: people’s appraisals of their earlier
and present selves. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 80(4), 572–584.
575/599

The Spotlight Effect
Gilovich, T., Kruger, J., & Medvec, V. H.
(2002). The spotlight effect revisited: Over-
estimating the manifest variability of our ac-
tions and appearance. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology 38(1), 93–99.
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K.
(2000). The spotlight effect in social judg-
ment: An egocentric bias in estimates of the
salience of one’s own actions and appear-
ance. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 78(2), 211–222.
The Third Person Effect
Bryant P., Salwen, M. B., & Dupagne M.
(2000). The third-person effect: A meta-ana-
lysis of the perceptual hypothesis. Mass
Communication and Society 3(1), 57–85.
576/599

Johansson, B. (2005). The third-person ef-
fect. Only a media perception? Nordicom
Review 26(1), 81–94.
Perloff, R. M. (1993). Third-person effect re-
search 1983–1992: A review and synthesis.
International Journal of Public Opinion Re-
search 5(2), 167–184.
Catharsis
Baumeister, R. F., Bushman, B. J., & Feen-
stra, J. S. (2008). Social psychology and hu-
man nature. Belmont, CA: Thomson Higher
Education.
Berkowitz, L. (1977). Advances in experi-
mental social psychology, Vol. 10. New
York: Academic Press.
Bushman, B. J. (2002, June). Does venting
anger feed or extinguish the flame? Cath-
arsis, rumination, distraction, anger, and
577/599

aggressive responding. Personality and So-
cial Psychology Bulletin 28(6), 724–731.
Bushman, B. J., Stack, A. D., & Baumeister,
R. F. (1999). Catharsis, aggression, and per-
suasive influence: Self-fulfilling or self-de-
feating prophecies? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 76(3), 367–376.
Carey, B. (2009, February 3). The muddled
track of all those tears. New York Times, p.
D1.
Landers, R. N. (2010, May 19). Playing viol-
ent video games for a release that never
comes.
Thoughts
of
a
Neo-Academic.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://neoacademic.com/2010/05/19/playing-
violent-video-games-for-a-release-that-
never-comes/.
578/599

The Misinformation Effect
Bartlett, Sir F. C. (1967). Remembering: a
study in experimental and social psycho-
logy. London: Cambridge University Press.
Berkowitz, S. R., Laney, C., Morris, E. K.,
Garry, M., & Loftus, E. F. (2008). Pluto be-
having badly: False beliefs and their con-
sequences. American Journal of Psychology
121(4), 643–660.
Bernstein, D. M., Laney, C., Morris, E. K., &
Loftus, E. F. (2005). False memories about
food can lead to food avoidance. Social Cog-
nition 23(1), 11–34.
Heaps, C. H., & Nash, M. (2001). Comparing
recollective experience in true and false auto-
biographical memories. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition 27(4), 920–930.
Loftus, E. F. (2003, November). Make-be-
lieve
memories.
American
Psychologist
58(11), 867–873.
579/599

Loftus, E. F. (2001, September). The advert-
isers
are
coming
for
your
childhood.
Independent.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
http://www.independent.co.uk/opin-
ion/commentators/elizabeth-loftus—the-
advertisers-are-coming-for-your-child-
hood-668019 .html.
Loftus, E. F., & Ketcham, K. (1996). The
myth of repressed memory: False memories
and allegations of sexual abuse. New York:
St. Martin’s Griffin.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Recon-
struction of automobile destruction: An ex-
ample of the interaction between language
and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior 13, 585–589.
Roediger, H. L. III, Meade, M. L., & Berg-
man,
E.
T.
(2001).
Social
contagion
of
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
8(2), 365–371.
Saletan, W. (2010, June 4). The Memory
Doctor: The future of false memories. Slate.
580/599

Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.slate.com/id/2256089/.
Conformity
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence
and conformity: A minority of one against a
unanimous majority. Psychological Mono-
graphs 70(416).
Latane, B., & Darley, J. (1969). Bystander
“apathy.” American Scientist 57, 244–268.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of
obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology 67, 371–378.
Wolfson, A. (2005, October 9). A hoax most
cruel. Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY).
You are a conformist (that is, you are hu-
man). Recognize that conformity is inevit-
able and avoid its pitfalls. (2010, December
5). Psychology Today. Retrieved December
2010
from
581/599

http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/
insight-therapy/201012/you-are-conformist-
is-you-are-human.
Extinction Burst
Behavior: Skinner’s Utopia: Panacea, or Path
to
Hell?
(1971,
September
20).
Time.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/
0,9171,909994,00.html.
Social Loafing
Ingham, A.G., Levinger, G., Graves, J., &
Peckham, V. (1974). The Ringelmann Effect:
Studies of group size and group perform-
ance. Journal of Experimental Social Psy-
chology 10, 371–384.
582/599

Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social
loafing: A meta-analytic review and theoret-
ical integration. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 65, 681–706.
Latane, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979,
June). Many hands make light the work: The
causes and consequences of social loafing.
Journal of Personality and Social Psycho-
logy 37, 822–832.
Myers, D. G. (2005). Social psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
The Illusion of Transparency
Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., & Savitsky, K.
(1998). The illusion of transparency: Biased
assessments of others’ ability to read one’s
emotional states. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 75(2), 332–346.
Savitsky, K., & Gilovich, T. (2003, March
25). The illusion of transparency and the
583/599

alleviation of speech anxiety. Journal of Ex-
perimental Social Psychology 39, 618–625.
Learned Helplessness
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E., & Teas-
dale, J. D. (1978, February). Learned help-
lessness in humans: Critique and reformula-
tion. Journal of Abnormal Psychology 87(1),
49–74.
Langer, E. & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of
choice and enhanced personal responsibility
for the aged: A field experiment in an institu-
tional setting. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 34, 191–198.
Magnusson, D., & Ohman, A. (1987). Psy-
chopathology: An interactional perspective.
New York: Academic Press.
Myers, D. G. (2005). Social psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
584/599

Seligman, M. E. P. & Maier, S. F. (1967).
Failure to escape traumatic shock. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 74, 1–9.
Servan-Schreiber, D. (2008). Anticancer: a
new way of life. New York: Viking.
Embodied Cognition
Ackerman, J. M., Nocera, C. C., & Bargh, J.
A. (2010, June 25). Incidental haptic sensa-
tions influence social judgments and de-
cisions. Science 328(5986), 1712–1715.
Lawrence, E. W., & Bargh, J. A. (2008, Octo-
ber). Experiencing physical warmth pro-
motes
interpersonal
warmth.
Science
322(5901), 606–607.
585/599

The Anchoring Effect
African
nations
in
the
U.N.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:UN_Mem-
ber_Countries_World.svg.
Ariely, D., Loewenstein, G., & Prelec, D.
(2006). Tom Sawyer and the construction of
value. Journal of Economic Behavior & Or-
ganization 60, 1–10.
Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K.,
Catalan, J., Wheeler, D., & Darby, B. L.
(1975). Reciprocal concessions procedure for
inducing compliance: The door-in the face
technique. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 31(2), 206–215.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A.
(1982). Judgment under uncertainty: heur-
istics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
586/599

Attention
Chabris, C., & Simons, D. (2010). The invis-
ible gorilla: and other ways our intuitions
deceive us. New York: Crown.
Chua, H. F., Boland, J. E., & Nisbett, R. E.
(2005). Cultural variation in eye movements
during scene perception. Proceedings of the
National
Academy
of
Sciences
35,
12629–12633.
Levin, D. T., & Simons, D. J. (1997). Failure
to detect changes to attended objects in mo-
tion
pictures.
Psychonomic
Bulletin
and
Review 4, 501–506.
Masuda, T., Akase, M., & Radford, M. H. B.
(2008). Cultural differences in patterns of
eye-movement: Comparing context sensitiv-
ity between the Japanese and Westerners.
Journal of Personality and Social Psycho-
logy 94(3), 365–381.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Goril-
las in our midst: sustained inattentional
587/599

blindness for dynamic events. Perception
28(9), 1059–1074.
Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T. (1998). Failure
to detect changes to people during a real-
world interaction. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review 5, 644–649.
Self-Handicapping
Alter, A. L., & Forgas, J. P. (2007). On being
happy but fearing failure: The effects of
mood
on
self-handicapping
strategies.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
43, 947–954.
Berglas, S., & Jones, E.E. (1978). Drug choice
as a self-handicapping strategy in response
to noncontingent success. Journal of Per-
sonality
and
Social
Psychology
36
(4),
405–417.
588/599

Carey, B. (2009). Some protect the ego by
working on their excuses early. New York
Times.
Goleman, D. (1984). Excuses: New theory
defines their role in life. New York Times.
Kay, A. C., Jimenez, M.C., & Jost, J. T.
(2002). Sour Grapes, Sweet Lemons, and the
Anticipatory Rationalization of the Status
Quo. Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin 28(9), 1300–1312.
Kolditz, T. A., & Arkin, R. M. (1982). An im-
pression management interpretation of the
self-handicapping strategy. Journal of Per-
sonality
and
Social
Psychology
43,
492–502.
Smith, T. W., Snyder, C. R., & Perkins, S. C.
(1983). The self-serving function of hypo-
chondriacal complaints: Physical symptoms
as self-handicapping strategies. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 44(4),
787–797.
589/599

Self-Fulfilling Prophecies
Burger, J. M. (1999). The foot-in-the-door
compliance procedure: A multiple-process
analysis and review. Personality and Social
Psychology Review 3(4), 303–325.
Crano, W. D., & Mellon, P. M. (1978, Febru-
ary). Causal influence of teachers’ expecta-
tions on children’s academic performance: A
cross-lagged panel analysis. Journal of Edu-
cational Psychology 70(1), 39–49.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M.
(1999). Stereotype threat and women’s math
performance. Journal of Experimental So-
cial Psychology 35, 4–28.
Steele C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995, Novem-
ber). Stereotype threat and the intellectual
test
performance
of
African
Americans.
Journal of Personality and Social Psycho-
logy 69(5), 797–811.
590/599

The Moment
Kahneman, D. (2010, March). The riddle of
experience vs. memory. Retrieved December
2010
from
http://blog.ted.com/2010/03/
01/the_riddle_of_e/.
Consistency Bias
Ariely, D. (2008). Predictably irrational:
The hidden forces that shape our decisions.
New York: HarperCollins.
Burger, J. M., & Petty, R. E. (1981). The low-
ball compliance technique: Task or person
commitment. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 40(3), 492–500.
Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J. T., Bassett, R., &
Miller, J. A. (1978, May). Low-ball procedure
for
producing
compliance:
Commitment
then cost. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 36(5), 463–476.
591/599

Dean, J. (2008, February). How the consist-
ency bias warps our personal and political
memories. Retrieved December 2010 from
http://www.spring.org.uk/2008/02/how-
consistency-bias-warps-our-personal.php
Goethals, G. R., & Reckman, R. F. (1973,
November). The perception of consistency in
attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 9(6), 491–501.
Markus, G. B. (1986). Stability and change in
political attitudes: observed, recalled, and
explained. Political Behavior 8(1), 21–44.
Markus, H., & Kunda, Z. (1986). Stability
and Malleability of the Self-Concept. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 51(4),
858–866.
Scharfe, E., & Bartholomew, K. (1998). Do
you remember? Recollections of adult at-
tachment patterns. Personal Relationships
5(2), 219–234.
592/599

The Representativeness
Heuristic
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A.
(1982). Judgment under uncertainty: heur-
istics and biases. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983, Octo-
ber). Extension versus intuitive reasoning:
The conjunction fallacy in probability judg-
ment. Psychological Review 90(4), 293–315.
Yudkowsky, E. (2007, September 19). Con-
junction
fallacy.
Less
Wrong.
Retrieved
December 2010 from http://lesswrong.com/
lw/ji/conjunction_fallacy/.
Expectation
Advertising: Coke-Pepsi Slugfest. (1976, July
26). Time.
593/599

Bertolucci, J. (2008, November 24). HD or
standard def? One in five HDTV owners
don’t know the difference. PCWorld.
Brochet, F. (n.d.). Chemical object repres-
entation
in
the
field
of
consciousness.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.enophilia.net/writable/uploadfile/
chimica%20della%20degustazione.pdf.
Goldstein, R., Almenberg, J., Dreber, A.,
Emerson, J. W., Hersch-kowitsch, A., & Katz,
J. (2008, Spring). Do more expensive wines
taste better? Journal of Wine Economics
3(1), 1–9.
Lehrer, J. (2007, November 2). The sub-
jectivity of wine. Frontal Cortex. Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://scienceblogs.com/cortex/2007/11/
the_subjectivity_of_wine.php.
Lehrer, J. (2008, February 24). Grape ex-
pectations: What wine can tell us about the
nature of reality. Boston Globe.
594/599

Logan, M. (2009, June 11). The pull of cigar-
ette
packaging.
The
Star.
Morrot,
G.,
Brochet, F., & Dubourdieu, D. (2001 Novem-
ber). The color of odors. Brain and Lan-
guage 79(2), 309–320.
Simonite, T. (2009, October 7). Think your-
self a better picture. New Scientist.
Woolfolk, M. E., Castellan, W., & Brooks, C.
I. (1983). Pepsi versus Coke: Labels, not
tastes, prevail. Psychological Report, 52,
185–186.
The Illusion of Control
Fast, N., Gruenfeld, D. H., Sivanathan, N., &
Galinsky, A. D. (2008, December 1). Illusory
control: A generative force behind power’s
far-reaching
effects.
Stanford
University
Graduate School of Business Research Paper
No.
2009.
Available
at
SSRN:
ht-
tp://ssrn.com/abstract=1314952.
595/599

Jarrett, C. (2010, November). Can psycho-
logy help combat pseudoscience? British
Psychological
Society
Research
Digest.
Retrieved December 2010 from http://bps-
research-digest.blogspot.com/2010/11/can-
psychology-help-combat.html.
Jenkins, H. H., & Ward, W. C. (1965). Judge-
ment of contingency between responses and
outcomes. Psychological Monographs 79,
1–17.
Kluger, J. (2009, March 10). Why powerful
people
overestimate
themselves.
Time.
Retrieved
December
2010
from
ht-
tp://www.time.com/time/health/article/
0,8599,1883658,00.html.
Langer, E. J. (1977). The psychology of
chance. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 7(2), 185–203.
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of control.
Journal of Personality and Social Psycho-
logy 32(2), 311–328.
596/599

Langer, E. J., Roth, J. Heads I win, tails it’s
chance: The illusion of control as a function
of the sequence of outcomes in a purely
chance task. Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology 32(6), 951–955.
Pronin, E., Wegner, D. M., McCarthy, K., &
Rodriguez,
S.
(2006).
Everyday
magical
powers: The role of apparent mental causa-
tion in the overestimation of personal influ-
ence. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology 91(2), 218–231.
Tijms, H. C. (2004). Understanding probab-
ility: Chance rules in everyday life. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Ward, W. C., & Jenkins, H. M. (1965). The
display of information and the judgment of
contingency. Canadian Journal of Psycho-
logy 19, 231–241.
597/599

The Fundamental Attribution
Error
Ames,
M.
(2005).
Going
postal:
Rage,
murder,
and
rebellion:
From
Reagan’s
workplaces to Clinton’s Columbine and bey-
ond. Brooklyn, NY: Soft Skull Press.
Dreifus, C. (2007, April 3). Finding hope in
knowing the universal capacity for evil. New
York Times.
Kluger, J. (2007, April 19). Inside a mass
murderer’s mind. Time.
Weir, B., Horng, E., Kotzen, J., & Sterns, O.
(2008, Februrary 9). What pushes shooters
over the edge? ABC News. Retrieved Decem-
ber
2010
from
http://abcnews.go.com/
GMA/story? id= 4267309&page=1.
Zimbardo, P. G. (2010). A simulation study
of the psychology of imprisonment conduc-
ted at Stanford University. Retrieved Decem-
ber 2010 from http://www.prisonexp.org/.
598/599

1
To be precise, the right hemisphere gets in-
formation from the left visual field, not just
the left eye. The opposite is true for the right.
A portion of the left visual field can be seen
by the right eye, just around the nose.

