Young Children Develop in an 
Environment of Relationships
working paper 1 1

members

Jack P. Shonkoff, M.D., Chair
Julius B. Richmond FAMRI Professor of Child Health and 
Development; Director, Center on the Developing Child, 
Harvard University
W. Thomas Boyce, M.D.
Sunny Hill Health Centre/BC Leadership Chair in Child 
Development; Professor, Graduate Studies and Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver
Judy Cameron, Ph.D.
Professor of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh; Senior 
Scientist, Oregon National Primate Research Center; 
Professor of Behavioral Neuroscience and Obstetrics & 
Gynecology, Oregon Health and Science University
Greg J. Duncan, Ph.D.
Distinguished Professor, Department of Education,
University of California, Irvine
Nathan A. Fox, Ph.D.
Distinguished Professor; Director, Child Development 
Laboratory, University of Maryland College Park
Megan R. Gunnar, Ph.D.
Regents Professor and Distinguished McKnight University 
Professor, Institute of Child Development, 
University of Minnesota
Pat Levitt, Ph.D.
Director, Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute;  Provost Professor of 
Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Pharmacy
Chair, Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of 
Medicine of the University of Southern California
Linda C. Mayes, Ph.D.
Arnold Gesell Professor of Child Psychiatry, Pediatrics, and 
Psychology, Yale Child Study Center
Special Advisor to the Dean, Yale School of Medicine
Bruce S. McEwen, Ph.D.
Alfred E. Mirsky Professor; Head, Harold and Margaret 
Milliken Hatch Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, 
The Rockefeller University
Charles A. Nelson, Ph.D.
Richard David Scott Chair in Pediatric Developmental 
Medicine Research, Children’s Hospital Boston; 
Professor of Pediatrics and Neuroscience, Harvard 
Medical SchoolRATP

SNBWTGP­EKP
PPARPFORMER

BLM

TFWITNGACBPTNCSL
TBFPA
TBECF
TCTMAF
TNFTPPOF
ross a. thompson, ph.D.
Professor of Psychology, University of California, Davis
contributing members 
susan nall bales
President, FrameWorks Institute
william t. greenough, ph.D.
Swanlund Professor of Psychology, Psychiatry, and Cell and 
Developmental Biology; Director, Center for Ad vanced Study 
at University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
eric knudsen, ph.D.
Edward C. and Amy H. Sewall Professor of Neurobiology,  
Stanford University School of Medicine
Deborah phillips, ph.D.
Professor of Psychology and Associated Faculty, Public Policy 
Institute; Co-Director, Research Center on Children in the U.S., 
Georgetown University
arthur J. rolnick, ph.D.
Senior Vice President and Director of Research, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
former members 
betsy lozoff, m.D.
Professor of Pediatrics, University of Michigan  
Medical School; Research Professor. Center for Human 
Growth and Development, University of Michigan
partners 
the frameworks institute
the national governors association center for best practices
the national conference of state legislatures
sponsors 
the birth to five policy alliance 
the buffett early childhood fund 
the John D. and catherine t. macarthur foundation 
Palix foundation
the pierre and pamela omidyar fund
About the Authors
The National Scientific Council on the Developing Child, housed at the Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University, is a multi-
disciplinary collaboration designed to bring the science of early childhood and early brain development to bear on public decision-
making. Established in 2003, the Council is committed to synthesizing and communicating science to help inform policies that promote 
successful learning, adapative behavior, and sound physical and mental health for all young children. For more information, go to 
http://www.developingchild.net.
Please note: The content of this paper is the sole responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the opinions of the 
funders or partners.
Suggested citation: National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. (2004). Young children develop in an environment of 
relationships. Working Paper No. 1. Retrieved from http://www.developingchild.net
© 2004, National Scientific Council on the Developing Child, Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University	
UPDATED & REPRINTED: OCTOBER 2009

www.developingchild.NET	
Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships  1
Growth-promoting relationships are based on 
the child’s continuous give-and-take (“serve and 
return” interaction) with a human partner who 
provides what nothing else in the world can offer 
– experiences that are individualized to the child’s 
unique personality style; that build on his or her 
own interests, capabilities, and initiative; that 
shape the child’s self-awareness; and that stimulate 
the growth of his or her heart and mind.
Young children experience their world as 
an environment of relationships, and these re­
lationships affect virtually all aspects of their 
development – intellectual, social, emotional, 
physical, behavioral, and moral. The quality 
and stability of a child’s human relationships 
in the early years lay the foundation for a wide 
range of later developmental outcomes that re­
ally matter – self-confidence and sound men­
tal health, motivation to learn, achievement in 
school and later in life, the ability to control ag­
gressive impulses and resolve conflicts in non­
violent ways, knowing the difference between 
right and wrong, having the capacity to develop 
and sustain casual friendships and intimate re­
lationships, and ultimately to be a successful 
parent oneself.
Stated simply, relationships are the “ac­
tive ingredients” of the environment’s influ­
ence on healthy human development. They 
incorporate the qualities that best promote 
competence and well-being – individualized 
responsiveness, mutual action-and-interac­
tion, and an emotional connection to another 
human being, be it a parent, peer, grandpar­
ent, aunt, uncle, neighbor, teacher, coach, 
or any other person who has an important 
impact on the child’s early development. 
Relationships engage children in the human 
community in ways that help them define 
who they are, what they can become, and how 
and why they are important to other people. 
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
In the words of the distinguished develop­
mental psychologist Urie Bronfenbrenner: …
in order to develop normally, a child requires pro­
gressively more complex joint activity with one 
or more adults who have an irrational emotional 
relationship with the child. Somebody’s got to be 
crazy about that kid. That’s number one. First, 
last, and always.
nurturing and stable relationships with 
caring adults are essential to healthy human 
development beginning from birth. Early, se­
cure attachments contribute to the growth of 
a broad range of competencies, including a 
love of learning, a comfortable sense of one­
self, positive social skills, multiple successful 
relationships at later ages, and a sophisti­
cated understanding of emotions, commit­
ment, morality, and other aspects of human 
relationships. Stated simply, establishing suc­
cessful relationships with adults and other 
children provides a foundation of capacities 
that children will use for a lifetime.14, 15, 16, 17 
The Issue
healthy development depends on the quality and reliability of a young child’s 
relationships with the important people in his or her life, both within and outside the family. 
Even the development of a child’s brain architecture depends on the establishment of these rela­
tionships.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
What Science Tells Us
Young children experience their world as an 
environment of relationships, and these 
relationships affect virtually all aspects 
of their development.

2  Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships	
 www.developingchild.NET
National scientific council on the developing child
The “serve and return” interaction between par­
ent and baby – in which young children naturally 
reach out for interaction through babbling, facial 
expressions, and gestures and adults respond 
with the same kind of vocalizing and gesturing 
back at them – builds and strengthens brain ar­
chitecture and creates a relationship in which the 
baby’s experiences are affirmed and new abili­
ties are nurtured. Children who have healthy 
relationships with their primary caregivers are 
more likely to develop insights into other peo­
ple’s feelings, needs, and thoughts, which form 
a foundation for cooperative interactions with 
others and an emerging conscience. Sensitive 
and responsive parent-child relationships also 
are associated with stronger cognitive skills in 
young children and enhanced social compe­
tence and work skills later in school, which illus­
trates the connection between social/emotional 
development and intellectual growth. The 
broader quality of the home environment (in­
cluding toys, activities, and interactions with­
in the family setting) also is strongly related 
to early cognitive and language development, 
performance on IQ testing, and later achieve­
ment in school.12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26

Young children also learn a great deal from each 
other. They learn how to share, to engage in re­
ciprocal interactions (e.g., taking turns, giving 
and receiving), to take the needs and desires of 
others into account, and to manage their own im­
pulses. Just being around other children, how­
ever, is not enough. The development of friend­
ships is essential, as children learn and play 
more competently in the rapport created with 
friends rather than when they are dealing with 
the social challenges of interacting with casual 
acquaintances or unfamiliar peers.27, 28

The warmth and support of the caregiver in a 
child care setting also influence the development 
of important capabilities in children, includ­
ing greater social competence, fewer behavior 
problems, and enhanced thinking and reasoning 
skills at school age. Young children benefit in 
these ways because of the secure relationships 
they develop in such settings, and because of the 
ways in which the caregivers provide cognitively 
stimulating activities and support for develop­
ing positive relationships with other children. 
Unfortunately, the generally poor quality of care 
provided in many child care arrangements in 
the United States does not support these ben­
efits because of high caregiver turnover, poorly 
designed programs, or inadequate preparation 
of staff. Current research also suggests the addi­
tional risk that a greater amount of time in out-
of-home care during infancy may be associated 
with greater disobedience and aggression by the 
time children enter school.12, 22, 23, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33

Relationships are important to school adjust­
ment. Children who develop warm, positive 
relationships with their kindergarten teach­
ers are more excited about learning, more 
positive about coming to school, more self-
confident, and achieve more in the classroom. 
Relationships with peers also are important. 
Children who experience greater peer accep­
tance and friendship tend to feel more positively 
about the school experience and perform better 
in the classroom.33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38

Children have different ways of interacting with 
their peers. Some are gregarious, others are too 
shy to get involved (although they want to), 
some need time to “warm up,” and others are 
not as interested in being sociable. All of these 
variations fall within a normal range, and it is 
essential to differentiate among the many poten­
tial reasons (both biological and environmental) 
that a young child may have limited or difficult 
interactions with others. Playing cooperatively, 
making friends, and sustaining friendships over 
time are not always easy. Any child with severely 
limited peer involvement is at considerable risk 
for significant adverse developmental conse­
quences.39, 40, 41, 42, 43

Secure and stable relationships with car­
ing adults assure that young children are ad­
equately nourished; protected from dangerous 
illnesses, exposure to toxins, and hazards that 
Children who develop warm, positive relationships 
with their kindergarten teachers are more excited 
about learning, more positive about coming to 
school, more self-confident, and achieve 
more in the classroom.

www.developingchild.NET	
Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships  3
can lead to preventable injuries; provided pre­
ventive health check-ups; protected from ex­
cessive stress; and afforded predictable daily 
routines that convey a sense of security. These 
influences contribute significantly to healthy 
brain development and depend upon the care 
and support provided by individuals in the 
community as well as in the family.12, 44

Young children are highly vulnerable emotion­
ally to the adverse influences of parental men­
tal health problems and family violence. One 
of the most extensively documented of these 
vulnerabilities is the negative impact of a 
mother’s clinical depression on her young 
children’s emotional development, social 
sensitivity, and concept of themselves, ef­
fects that have been demonstrated in both 
developmental research and studies of brain 
functioning. Young children who grow up 
in seriously troubled families, especially 
those who are vulnerable temperamentally, 
are prone to the development of behavioral 
disorders and conduct problems.45, 46, 47, 48, 49
Animal studies have shown that the quality of 
the mother-infant relationship can influence 
gene expression in areas of the brain that regu­
late social and emotional function and can even 
lead to changes in brain structure. The nature 
of the relationship also can have long-term 
influences (into adulthood) on how the body 
copes with stress, both physically and emo­
tionally.15, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60

Science indicates that the quality of early par­
ent-child relationships can be strengthened, 
but successful interventions are more difficult 
to achieve when relationships are significantly 
troubled or disturbed. Preventive interventions 
also can produce a variety of positive outcomes, 
depending on the extent to which the knowl­
edge and skills of the staff and the quality of the 
implementation are matched to the magnitude 
of the challenges being addressed. 12, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65



as the public’s appetite for scientific infor- 
mation about the development of young chil­
dren is whetted by exciting new findings, the 
risk of exaggerated or misleading messages 
grows. Within this context, it is essential that 
scientific fact be differentiated from popularly 
accepted fiction. 
Contrary to common assumptions, scientific 
evidence shows that the influence of relation­
ships on development continues through­
out the lifespan. These relationships are not 
more important at a particular stage of a child’s 
life compared to another, but the nature of 
those impacts does vary by age and develop­
mental status.4

In contrast to frequently cited concerns, science 
indicates that young children can benefit sig­
nificantly from secure relationships with mul­
tiple caregivers (within or outside the family), 
while their attachments to their parents remain 
primary and central.13 There is no credible sci­
entific evidence to support the claim that close 
relationships with other nurturing and reliable 
adults who they trust, especially early in life, 
interfere with the strength of the young child’s 
primary relationship with his or her parents. 

Although young children certainly can estab­
lish healthy relationships with more than one 
or two adults, prolonged separations from fa­
miliar caregivers and repeated “detaching” and 
“re-attaching” to people who matter are emo­
tionally distressing and can lead to enduring 
problems. There is no scientific evidence to sup­
port the belief that frequently rotating relation­
ships with large numbers of adult caregivers pro­
vide valuable learning opportunities in the early 
years of life. Although the importance of sus­
tained, reliable relationships within the fam­
ily is well understood, the need for stable and 
predictable relationships in child care set­
tings is acknowledged less frequently, and 
the disruptive impacts of the abrupt changes 
related to high caregiver turnover are too often 
disregarded.66, 67
Popular Misrepresentations of Science
what science tells us

4  Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships	
 www.developingchild.NET
National scientific council on the developing child
the importance of mother-child relation­
ships is old news. The importance of other 
family relationships (with fathers, siblings, and 
grandparents) is semi-old news. The impact 
of these relationships on the development of 
the brain is new news. And the important in­
fluence of relationships outside of the fam­
ily – with child care providers, peers, teachers, 
neighbors, and other adults and children in the 
community – is even newer, because these in­
dividuals are often valued more for what they 
do than for the meaning of their role in the life 
experience of very young children. Greater un­
derstanding of what science tells us about the 
importance of a range of relationships for early 
childhood development leads us to think about 
many areas of policy and practice in a new light.

“Quality” in early child care and education, 
for example, is often defined in terms of adult-
child ratios, group size, physical facilities, and, 
more recently, cognitively oriented curriculum. 
But “quality” is perceived differently when we 
view child care as a prominent feature of the 
environment of relationships in which young 
children develop. The importance of ensur­
ing that relationships in child care are nurtur­
ing, stimulating, and reliable leads to an em­
phasis on the skills and personal attributes of 
the caregivers, and on improving the wages 
and benefits that affect staff turnover.12, 68, 69, 70

Parental leave policies in the United States cur­
rently provide parents of young children with few 
options. A maximum of only three months of 
unpaid leave is assured for parents of newborns, 
and these policies cover only about half of 
American workers. Of those who are eligible for 
leave, only those who can get by without earned 
income can afford to take it, and fewer than half 
of workers even have this option without risk­
ing loss of their jobs. These policies seem highly 
problematic when viewed in relation to exten­
sive scientific evidence of the vital importance 
of establishing a strong and healthy mother-in­
fant bond beginning in the early months of life. 
They elicit even greater alarm when viewed in 
the context of concerns about the potential ad­
verse effects on very young babies of early and 
extended experiences in out-of-home child care 
arrangements of highly variable quality.71, 72, 73

For mothers receiving welfare support under 
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), 
federal rules require that states impose work 
requirements of 30 or more hours per week. 
Although modifications are permissible, about 
half of the states do not exempt mothers of chil­
dren less than 12 months of age, and some states 
permit mandated maternal employment be­
ginning a few weeks after a baby’s birth. When 
viewed as an adult-oriented employment policy, 
TANF can be a subject for reasonable debate. 
But when examined from a child-oriented per­
spective, it reflects a wide gap between what we 
know about the importance of early family re­
lationships and what we are doing to promote 
the health and well-being of our nation’s most 
vulnerable young children.74, 75
The Science-Policy Gap
Parental leave policies in the United States 
currently provide parents of young children 
with few options.

www.developingchild.nET	
Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships  5
the science of early childhood develop­
ment is sufficiently mature to support a num­
ber of well-documented, evidence-based impli­
cations for those who develop and implement 
policies that affect the health and well-being of 
young children. Five compelling messages are 
particularly worthy of thoughtful consideration: 
When considered within the context of a child’s 
environment of relationships, the concept of 
school readiness is not exclusively a matter of 
fostering literacy and number skills. It must also 
include the capacity to form and sustain posi­
tive relationships with teachers, children, and 
other adults, and develop the social and emo­
tional skills for cooperating with others.66, 76, 77

When viewed as an important part of a child’s en­
vironment of relationships, early childhood edu­
cation must strive to involve young children in re­
ciprocal learning interactions with teachers and 
peers rather than isolated “pre-academic” work, 
and it should capitalize on children’s natural in­
terests and intrinsic drive to learn, rather than 
follow an adult-determined agenda. Stated sim­
ply, young children learn best in an interactive, 
relational mode rather than through an educa­
tion model that focuses on rote instruction.78

Extending the length and coverage of leave cur­
rently provided under the Family and Medical 
Leave Act would provide the critical necessities of 
time and economic security that are required for 
parents to develop the nurturing relationships 
with their children that are essential to healthy 
development. Much can be learned from other 
industrialized nations that promote greater pa­
rental choice and child well-being by providing 
subsidized parental leave for those who wish to 
stay at home with their babies, and affordable, 
decent quality, early care and education for the 
children of those who choose or are compelled 
to return to work.73, 78 

In the absence of consistent evidence that mater­
nal employment intrinsically helps or hurts most 
children, science has little to add to the ongoing 
political debate about whether paid work should 
be a mandated requirement for mothers on pub­
lic assistance. Nevertheless, emerging data that 
suggest that maternal employment in the first 
six months of an infant’s life may be associated 
with later developmental problems, and con­
cerns about the potential adverse impacts of 
extended out-of-home child care experiences 
on young children’s social development and 
behavior, require thoughtful public discussion. 
Each raises serious concerns about the potential 
harm of mandated maternal employment and 
the limited availability of affordable, high qual­
ity child care, particularly for the already vul­
nerable babies of low-income women on public 
assistance. It is time for society to weigh the evi­
dence carefully and fashion a more thoughtful 
policy for parents in the workforce, particularly 
for those who earn low wages.12, 79, 80

Traditional child welfare approaches to maltreat­
ment focus largely on physical injury, the rela­
tive risk of recurrent harm, and questions of child 
custody, in conjunction with a criminal justice 
orientation. In contrast, when viewed through a 
child development lens, the abuse or neglect of 
young children should be evaluated and treated 
as a matter of child health and development 
within the context of a family relationship crisis, 
which requires sophisticated expertise in both 
early childhood and adult mental health. The 
regularized referral of suspected cases of child 
abuse or neglect from the child welfare system 
to the early intervention system would assure 
appropriate developmental and behavioral as­
sessment and treatment as needed. Child abuse 
prevention strategies that emphasize both the 
developmental needs of children and the im­
portance of community-based supports for 
families provide another clear example of how 
we can close the gap between science and prac­
tice for our most vulnerable young children.12
Implications for Policy and Programs
Stated simply, young children learn best in 
an interactive, relational mode rather than 
through an education model that focuses on 
rote instruction.
Implications for policy and programs

6  Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships	
 www.developingchild.NET
National scientific council on the developing child
1.   Berscheid, E., & Reis, H.T. (1998). Attraction and close
relationships. In D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey 
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology, Vol. 1 (2nd Ed.). 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
2.   Collins, W.A., & Laursen, B. (1999). Relationships as de­
velopmental contexts. The Minnesota Symposia on Child 
Psychology, Vol. 30. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
3.   Dunn, J. (1993). Young children’s close relation­
ships: Beyond attachment. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications.
4.   Reis, H.T., Collins,W.A. & Berscheid, E. (2000). 
Relationships in human behavior and development. 
Psychological Bulletin, 126(6), 844-872.
5.   Dawson, D. , & Fischer, K.W. (Eds.) (1994). Human 
behavior and the developing brain. New York: Guilford 
Press.
6.   Panksep, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience. New York: 
Oxford.
7.   Bornstein, Marc (Ed.) (2002). Handbook of parenting 
(2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
8.   Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P.R. (Eds.) (1999). Handbook of at­
tachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 
89-111). New York: Guilford.
9.   Cochran, M., Larner, M., Riley, D., Gunnarsson, L., & 
Henderson, C.R., Jr. (1990). Extending families: The 
social networks of parents and their children. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
10. Fogel, A. (1993). Developing through relationships: Origins 
of communication, self, and culture. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
11. Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive 
development in social context. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
12. Shonkoff, J.P., & Phillips, D. (Eds.) (2000). From neurons 
to neighborhoods: The science of early childhood develop­
ment. Committee on Integrating the Science of Early 
Childhood Development.Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
13. Thompson, R.A. (1998). Early sociopersonality develop­
ment. In W. Damon (Ed.), & N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.) 
Handbook of child psychology, Vol. 3: Social, emotional, 
and personality development. (5th ed., pp. 25-104). New 
York: John Wiley & Sons.
14. Belsky, J., & Cassidy, J. (1994). Attachment: Theory and 
evidence. In M. Rutter & D. Hay (Eds.), Development 
through life. (pp. 373-402). Oxford, UK: Blackwell 
Scientific.
15. Thompson, R.A. (1999). Early attachment and later de­
velopment. In J. Cassidy & P.R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook 
of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications 
(pp. 265-286). New York: Guilford Press.
16. Thompson, R.A. (2000).The legacy of early attachments. 
Child Development, 71(1),145-152.
17. Waters, E., Kondo-Ikemura, K., Posada, G., & Richters, 
J.E. (1991). Learning to love: Mechanisms and mile­
stones. In M. Gunnar & L. Sroufe (Eds.), Self pro­
cesses and development. Minnesota Symposia on Child 
Psychology,Vol. 23. (pp. 217-255). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.
18. Bradley, R.H., Caldwell, B.M. Rock, S.L., & Ramey, C.T. 
(1989). Home environment and cognitive develop­
ment in the first three years of life: A collaborative study 
involving six sites and three ethnic groups in North 
America. Developmental Psychology, 25(18), 217-235.
19. Bradley, R.H., Caldwell, B.M., & Rock, S.L. (1988). Home 
environment and school performance: A ten-year follow-
up and examination of three models of environmental 
action. Child Development, 59(2), 852-867.
20. Estrada, P., Arsenio,W.F., Hess, R.D., & Holloway, S.D. 
(1987). Affective quality of the mother-child relation­
ship: Longitudinal consequences for children’s school-
relevant cognitive functioning. Developmental Psychology, 
23(2), 210-215.
21. Gottfried,A.W., & Gottfried,A.E. (1984). Home envi­
ronment and early cognitive development. New York: 
Academic Press.
22. Peisner-Feinberg, E.S., Burchinal, M.R., Clifford, R.M., 
Culkin, M.I., Howes, C., Kagan, S.I.,Yazejian, . . . Zelazo, 
J. (2000). The children of the Cost, Quality, and Outcomes 
Study go to school: Technical report. Chapel Hill, NC: 
Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
23. Pianta, R.C., Nimetz, S.L., & Bennett, E. (1997). Mother-
child relationships, teacher-child relationships, and 
school outcomes in preschool and kindergarten. Early 
Childhood Research Quarterly, 12(3), 263-280.
24. Kochanska, G., & Thompson, R.A. (1997).The emergence 
and development of conscience in toddlerhood and 
early childhood. In J.E. Grusec & L. Kuczynski (Eds.), 
Parenting and children’s internalization of values (pp. 
53-77). New York: Wiley.
25. Thompson, R.A., Meyer, S., & McGinley, M. (2006). 
Understanding values in relationship: The develop­
ment of conscience. In M. Killen & J. Smetana (Eds.), 
Handbook of moral development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
26. Kochanska, G. (2002). Mutually responsive orientation 
between mothers and their young children: A context for 
the early development of conscience. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 11(6), 191-195.
27. Rubin, K.H., Bukowski,W., & Parker, J.G. (1998). Peer in­
teractions, relationships, and groups. In W. Damon (Ed.) 
& N. Eisenberg (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child psychology, 
Vol. 3: Social, emotional, and personality development (5th 
ed., pp. 619-700). New York: Wiley.
28. Rose-Krasnor, L. (1997).The nature of social competence: 
A theoretical review. Social Development, 6, 111-135.
29. Lamb, M.R. (1998). Nonparental child care: Context, 
quality, correlates. In W. Damon (Ed.), & I.E. Seigel & 
K.A. Renninger (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology, 
Vol. 4: Child psychology in practice. (5th ed., pp.73-134). 
New York: Wiley.
30. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2000).The 
relation of child care to cognitive and language develop­
ment. Child Development, 71(4), 958-978.
31. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2002). Early 
child care and children’s development prior to school en­
try: Results from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. 
American Educational Research Journal, 39(1), 133-164.
32. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2003). Does 
amount of time spent in child care predict socioemo­
tional adjustment during the transition to kindergarten? 
Child Development, 74(4), 976-1005.
References

www.developingchild.NET	
Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships  7
33. Pianta, R.C. (1999). Enhancing relationships between 
children and teachers. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
34. Birch, S., & Ladd, G. (1997).The teacher-child relation­
ship and children’s early school adjustment. Journal of 
School Psychology, 35, 61-79.
35. Ladd, G.W., Birch, S.H., & Buhs, E.S. (1999). Children’s 
social and scholastic lives in kindergarten: Related 
spheres of influence? Child Development, 70(6), 
1373-1400.
36. Ladd, G.W., Kochenderfer, B.J., & Coleman, C.C. (1996). 
Friendship quality as a predictor of young children’s 
early school adjustment. Child Development, 67(6), 
1103-1118.
37. Ladd, G.W., Kochenderfer, B.J., & Coleman, C.C. (1997). 
Classroom peer acceptance, friendship, and victimiza­
tion: Distinct relational systems that contribute uniquely 
to children’s school adjustment? Child Development, 68, 
1181-1197.
38. Pianta, R.C., & Steinberg, M. (1992). Teacher-child rela­
tionships and the process of adjusting to school. In R.C. 
Pianta (Ed.), Beyond the parent:The role of other adults 
in children’s lives. New Directions for Child Development, 
57, 61-80.
39. Dunn, J. (2004). Children’s friendships: The beginnings of 
intimacy. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
40. Fox, N.A., Henderson, H.A., Rubin, K.H., Calkins, 
S.D., & Schmidt, L.A. (2001). Continuity and dis­
continuity of behavioral inhibition and exuberance: 
Psychophysiological and behavioral influences across the 
first four years of life. Child Development, 72 (1), 1-21. 
41.Kagan, J., Reznick, J.S., & Snidman, N. (1987).The physi­
ology and psychology of behavioral inhibition in chil­
dren. Child Development, 58(6), 1459-1473. 
42.Rothbart, M.K., Ahadi, S.A., & Hershey, K.L.(1994).
Temperament and social behavior in childhood. Merrill-
Palmer Quarterly, 40(1), 21-39. 
43. Rubin, K.H., Coplan, R.J., Nelson, L.J., Cheah, C.S.L., 
& Lagace-Seguin, D.G. (1999). Peer relationships in 
childhood. In M.H. Bornstein & M.E. Lamb (Eds.), 
Developmental psychology: An advanced textbook (4th 
ed., pp. 451-501). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
44. Gunnar, M.R., Brodersen, L., Nachmias, M., Buss, K., & 
Rigatuso, R., (1996). Stress reactivity and attachment 
security. Developmental Psychology, 29, 10-36. 
45. Dawson, G., & Ashman, D.B. (2000). On the origins of 
a vulnerability to depression: The influence of the early 
social environment on the development of psychobio­
logical systems related to risk of affective disorder. In 
C.A. Nelson (Ed.), The effects of early adversity on neu­
robehavioral development. Minnesota Symposia on Child 
Psychology, Vol. 31 (pp. 245-279). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
46. Dawson, G., Frey, K., Panagiotides, H., Yamada, E., Hessl, 
D., & Osterling, J.(1999). Infants of depressed mothers 
exhibit atypical frontal electrical brain activity during in­
teractions with mother and with a familiar, nondepressed 
adult. Child Development, 70(5), 1058-1066. 
47. Shaw, D.S., Gilliom, M., Ingoldsby, E.M., & Nagin, 
D.S.(2003). Trajectories leading to school-age conduct 
problems. Developmental Psychology, 39(2), 189-200. 
48. Shaw, D.S., Owens, E.B., Giovannelli, J., & Winslow, E.B. 
(2001). Infant and toddler pathways leading to early 
externalizing disorders. Journal of the American Academy 
of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40, 36-43. 
49. National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. 
(2008). Mental health problems in early childhood can 
impair learning and behavior for life. Working Paper No. 
6. Retrieved from http://www.developingchild.net 
50. National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. 
(2004). Children’s emotional development is built into 
the architecture of their brains. Working Paper No. 2. 
Retrieved from http://www.developingchild.net
51. Champagne, F.A., Francis, D., Mar, A., & Meaney, M.J. 
(2003). Variations in maternal care in the rat as a mediat­
ing influence for the effects of environment on develop­
ment. Physiology and Behavior, 79, 359-371. 
52. Meaney, M.J. (2001). Maternal care, gene expression, and 
the transmission of individual differences in stress reac­
tivity across generations. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
24, 1161-192. 
53. Liu, D., Diorio, J.,Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., 
Freedman, A., Sharma, S., Pearson, D., Plotsky, P.M., & 
Meaney, M.J. (1997). Maternal care, hippocampal gluco­
corticoid receptors, and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
responses to stress. Science, 277, 1659-1662. 
54. Leiderman, P. (1981). Human mother-infant social 
bonding: Is there a sensitive phase? In K. Immelmann, 
G. Barlow, L. Petrinovich, & M. Main (Eds.), Behavioral 
development (pp. 454-468). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
55. Caldji, C.,Tannenbaum, B., Sharma, S., Francis, D., 
Plotsky, P.M., & Meaney, M.J.(1998).Maternal care 
during infancy regulates the development of neural 
systems mediating the expression of fearfulness in the 
rat. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 95 (9), 5335-5340. 
56. Coplan, J.D., Andrews, M.W., Rosenbaum, L.A., Owens, 
M.J., Friedman, S., & Gorman, J.M. (1996). Persistent 
elevations of cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of 
corticotropin-releasing factor in adult nonhuman pri­
mates exposed to early-life stressors: Implications for 
the pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 93, 1619-1623. 
57. Liu, D., Diorio, J., Day, J.C., Francis, D.D., & Meaney, M.J. 
(2000). Maternal care, hippocampal synaptogenesis and 
cognitive development in rats. Nature Neuroscience, 3(8), 
799-806. 
58. Sanchez, M.M., Ladd, C.O., & Plotsky, P.M. (2001). Early 
adverse experience as a developmental risk factor for 
later psychopathlogy: Evidence from rodent and primate 
models. Development and Psychopathology, 13, 419-449. 
59. Sanchez, M.M., Hearn, E.F., Do, D., Rilling, J.K., & 
Herndon, J.G. (1998). Differential rearing affects corpus 
callosum size and cognitive function of rhesus monkeys. 
Brain Research, 812(1-2), 38-49. 
60. Shonkoff, J. & Meisels, S. (Eds.) (2000). Handbook of early 
childhood intervention. (2nd Ed.) New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
61. Brooks-Gunn,J.,Berlin,L.J.,& Fuligni,A.S.(2000).Early 
childhood intervention programs:What about the fam­
ily? In J.P. Shonkoff & S.J. Meisels (Eds.), Handbook of 
early childhood intervention (2nd ed., pp. 549-587). New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
62. Campbell, F.A., Ramey, C., Pungello, E., Sparling, J.,& 
Miller-Johnson, S.(2002) Early childhood education: 
Young adult outcomes from the Abecedarian Project. 
Applied Developmental Science, 6(1), 42-57. 
63. Currie, J. (2000). Early childhood intervention programs: 
What do we know?  Working Paper from the Children’s 
Roundtable: The Brookings Institution, Washington, 
DC: http://www.Brookings.org/es/children/docs/cur­
rie2000000401.htm. 
REFERENCEs

64. Gomby, D.S., Culross, P.L., & Behrman, R.E. (1999). 
Home visiting: Recent program evaluations – Analysis 
and recommendations. The Future of Children, 9, 4-26. 
65. Thompson, R.A. (1995). Preventing child maltreatment 
through social support: A critical analysis. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
66. Howes, C. (1999). Attachment relationships in the con­
text of multiple caregivers. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver 
(Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and 
clinical applications (pp. 671-687). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
67. Howes, C.H.,& Ritchie, S.(2002).A matter of trust.New 
York:Teachers College Press. 
68. Phillips, D., Mekos, D., Carr, S., McCartney, K., & Abbott-
Shim, M. (2000). Within and beyond the classroom door: 
Assessing quality in child care centers. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly, 15(4), 475-496. 
69. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1996). 
Characteristics of infant child care: Factors contribut­
ing to positive caregiving. Early Childhood Research 
Quarterly, 11(3), 269-306. 
70. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2000). 
Characteristics and quality of child care for toddlers 
and preschoolers. Applied Developmental Science, 4(3), 
116-125. 
71. Kamerman, S., & Kahn, A. (1995). Starting right: How 
America neglects its young children and what we can do 
about it. New York: Oxford University Press. 
72.Waldfogel, J.(1999). The impact of the Family and 
Medical Leave Act. Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management, 18 (2), 281-302. 
73. Waldfogel, J. (2001). International policies toward pa­
rental leave and child care. The Future of Children, 11(1), 
99-111. 
74. Duncan, G., & Chase-Lansdale, L. For better and for 
worse: Welfare reform and the well-being of children and 
families. New York: Russell Sage. 
75. Huston, A.C. (2002). Reforms and child development. 
The Future of Children, 12(1), 59-77. 
76. Pianta, R.C., Steinberg, M.,& Rollins, K.(1997).The first 
two years of school: Teacher-child relationships and 
deflection in children’s school adjustment. Development 
and Psycholopathology, 9, 63-79. 
77. Stipek, D.(2004). The early childhood classroom ob­
servation measure. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford 
University. 
78. Waldfogel, J.,Higuchi, Y., & Abe, M.(1999).Family leave 
policies and women’s retention after childbirth: Evidence 
from the United States, Britain, and Japan. Journal of 
Population Economics, 12, 523-545.
79. Han, W., Waldfogel, J., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2001). The 
effects of early maternal employment on children’s later 
cognitive and behavioral outcomes, Journal of Marriage 
and the Family, 63(2), 336-354.
80. Brooks-Gunn, J., Han, W., & Waldfogel, J. (2002). 
Maternal employment and child cognitive outcomes 
in the first three years of life. Child Development, 73(4), 
1052-1072.
NATIONAL SCIENTIFIC COUNCIL ON THE DEVELOPING CHILD
8  Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships	
 www.developingchild.NET


council working paper series
Working Paper #1
Young Children Develop in an Environment of Relationships (2004)
Working Paper #2
Children’s Emotional Development is Built into the Architecture of their Brains (2004) 
Working Paper #3
Excessive Stress Disrupts the Architecture of the Developing Brain (2005)
Working Paper #4
Early Exposure to Toxic Substances Damages Brain Architecture (2006)
Working Paper #5
The Timing and Quality of Early Experiences Combine to Shape Brain Architecture (2007) 
Working Paper #6
Mental Health Problems in Early Childhood Can Impair Learning and Behavior for Life (2008)
also from the council
A Science-Based Framework for Early Childhood Policy: Using Evidence to Improve 
Outcomes in Learning, Behavior, and Health for Vulnerable Children (2007) 
The Science of Early Childhood Development: Closing the Gap Between What We Know 
and What We Do (2007)  
50 Church Street, 4th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138  
617.496.0578
www.developingchild.harvard.edu
www.developingchild.net

