VIII
ZENO OF ELEA
WE have already seen how the consideration of the subject
of infinitesimals was forced upon the Greek mathematicians so
soon as they came to close grips with the problem of the
quadrature of the circle. Antiphon the Sophist was the first
to indicate the correct road upon which the solution was to
be found, though he expressed his idea in a crude form which
was bound to provoke immediate and strong criticism from
logical minds. Antiphon had inscribed a series of successive
regular polygons in a circle, each of which had double as
many sides as the preceding, and he asserted that, by con-
tinuing this process, we should at length exhaust the circle:
'he thought that in this way the area of the circle would
sometime be used up and a polygon would be inscribed in the
circle the sides of which on account of their smallness would
coincide with the circumference/1 Aristotle roundly said that
this was a fallacy which it was not even necessary for a
geometer to trouble to refute, since an expert in any science
is not called upon to refute all fallacies, but only those which
are false deductions from the admitted principles of the
science; if the fallacy is based on anything which is in con-
tradiction to any of those principles, it may at once be ignored.2
Evidently therefore, in Aristotle's view, Antiphon's argument
violated some 'geometrical principle', whether this was the
truth that a straight line, however short, can never coincide
with an arc of a circle, or the principle assumed by geometers
that geometrical magnitudes can be divided ad injinitum.
But Aristotle is only a representative of the criticisms
directed against the ideas implied in Antiphon's argument;
those ideas had already, as early as the time of Antiphon
1 Simpl. in Arist. Phys., p. 55. 6 Diels.
2 Arist. Phys. i. 2, 185 a 14-17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

272 
ZENO OF ELEA
himself (a contemporary of Socrates), been subjected to a
destructive criticism expressed with unsurpassable piquancy
and force. No wonder that the subsequent course of Greek
geometry was profoundly affected by the arguments of Zeno
on motion. Aristotle indeed called them 'fallacies', without
being able to refute them. The mathematicians, however, knew
better, and, realizing that Zeno's arguments were fatal to
infinitesimals, they saw that they could only avoid the diffi-
culties connected with them by once for all banishing the idea
of the infinite, even the potentially infinite, altogether from
their science; thenceforth, therefore, they made no use of
magnitudes increasing or diminishing ad infinitum, but con-
tented themselves with finite magnitudes that can be made as
great or as small as we please.1 If they used infinitesimals
at all, it was only as a tentative means of discovering proposi-
tions ; they proved them afterwards by rigorous geometrical
methods. An illustration of this is furnished by the Method of
Archimedes. In that treatise Archimedes finds (a) the areas
of curves, and (6) the volumes of solids, by treating them
respectively as the sums of an infinite number (a) of parallel
lines, i.e. infinitely narrow strips, and (b) of parallel planes,
i.e. infinitely thin laminae; but he plainly declares that this
method is only useful for discovering results and does not
furnish a proof of them, but that to establish them scientific-
ally a geometrical proof by the method of exhaustion, with
its double reductio ad absurdum, is still necessary.
Notwithstanding that the criticisms of Zeno had so impor-
tant an influence upon the lines of development of Greek
geometry, it does not appear that Zeno himself was really
a mathematician or even a physicist. Plato mentions a work
of his (TO, TOV Zrjvcovos ypdfifiara, or TO crvyypa/jLfia) in terms
which imply that it was his only known work.2 Simplicius
too knows Only one work of his, and this the same as that
mentioned by Plato 3; when Suidas mentions four, a Commen-
tary on or Exposition of Empedocles, Controversies, Against
the philosophers and On Nature, it may be that the last three
titles are only different designations for the one work, while
the book on Empedocles may have been wrongly attributed
1 Cf. Arist. Phys. iii. 7, 207 b 31. 
2 Plato, Parrnenides, 127 c sq.
3 Simpl. in Phys., pp. 139. 5, 140, 27 Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO OF ELEA 
273
to Zeno.* Plato puts into the mouth of Zeno himself an
explanation of the character and object of his book.2 It was
a youthful effort, and it was stolen by some one, so that the
author had no opportunity of considering whether to publish
it or not. Its object was to defend the system of Parmenides
by attacking the common conceptions of things. Parmenides
held that only the One exists, whereupon common sense
pointed out that many contradictions and absurdities will
follow if this be admitted. Zeno replied that, if the popular
view that Many exist be accepted, still more absurd results
will follow. The work was divided into several parts (Xoyot
according to Plato) and each of these again into sections
('hypotheses' in Plato, 'contentions', kTnyj:ipy\iLaTa, in Sim-
plicius): each of the latter (which according to Proclus
numbered forty in all3) seems to have taken one of the
assumptions made on the ordinary view of life and to have
shown that it leads to an absurdity. It is doubtless on
account of this systematic use of indirect proof by the reductio
ad absurdwm of particular hypotheses that Zeno is said to
have been called by Aristotle the discoverer of Dialectic4;
Plato, too, says of him that he understood how to make one
and the same thing appear like and unlike, one and many, at
rest and in motion.5
Zeno's arguments about motion.
It does not appear that the full significance and value of
Zeno's paradoxes have ever been realized until these latter
days. The most modern view of them shall be expressed in
the writer's own words:
'In this capricious world nothing is more capricious than
posthumous fame. One of the most notable victims of pos-
terity's lack of judgement is the Eleatic Zeno. 
Having
invented four arguments all immeasurably subtle and pro-
found, the grossness of subsequent philosophers pronounced
him to be a mere ingenious juggler, and his arguments to be
1 Zeller, i\ p. 587 note.
2 Plato, Parmenides 128 c-E.
3 Proclus in Parm., p. 694. 23seq.
4 Diog. L. viii. 57, ix. 25; Sext. Emp. Math. vii. 6.
5 Plato, Phaedrus 261 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

274 
ZENO OF ELEA
one and all sophisms. After two thousand years of continual
refutation, these sophisms were reinstated, and made the
foundation of a mathematical renaissance, by a German
professor who probably never dreamed of any connexion
between himself and Zeno. Weierstrass, by strictly banishing
all infinitesimals, has at last shown that we live in an
unchanging world, and that the arrow, at every moment of its
flight, is truly at rest. The only point where Zeno probably
erred was in inferring (if he did infer) that, because there
is no change, the world must be in the same state at one time
as at another. This consequence by no means follows, and in
this point the German professor is more constructive than the
ingenious Greek. 
Weierstrass, being able to embody his
opinions in mathematics, where familiarity with truth elimi-
nates the vulgar prejudices of common sense, has been able to
give to his propositions the respectable air of platitudes; and
if the result is less delightful to the lover of reason than Zeno's
bold defiance, it is at any rate more calculated to appease the
mass of academic mankind/1
Thus, while in the past the arguments of Zeno have been
treated with more or less disrespect as mere sophisms, we have
now come to the other extreme. It appears to be implied that
Zeno anticipated Weierstrass. This, I think, a calmer judge-
ment must pronounce to be incredible. If the arguments of
Zeno are found to be ' immeasurably subtle and profound'
because they contain ideas which Weierstrass used to create
a great mathematical theory, it does not follow that for Zeno
they meant at all the same thing as for Weierstrass. On the
contrary, it is probable that Zeno happened upon these ideas
without realizing any of the significance which Weierstrass
was destined to give them; nor shall we give Zeno any less
credit on this account.
It is time to come to the arguments themselves. It is the
four arguments on the subject of motion which are most
important from the point of view of the mathematician; but
they have points of contact with the arguments which Zeno
used to prove the non-existence of Many, in refutation of
those who attacked Parmenides's doctrine of the One. Accord-
ing to Simplicius, he showed that, if Many exist, they must
1 Bertrand Russell, The Principles of Mathematics, vol. i, 1903, pp.
347, 348.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO'S ARGUMENTS ABOUT MOTION 
275
be both great and small, so great on the one hand as to be
infinite in size and so small on the other as to have no size.1
To prove the latter of these contentions, Zeno relied on the
infinite divisibility of bodies as evident; assuming this, he
easily proved that division will continually give smaller and
smaller parts, there will be no limit to the diminution, and, if
there is a final element, it must be absolutely nothing. Conse-
quently to add any number of these m^-elements to anything
will not increase its size, nor will the subtraction of them
diminish it; and of course to add them to one another, even
in infinite number, will give nothing as the total. 
(The
second horn of the dilemma, not apparently stated by Zeno
in this form, would be this. A critic might argue that infinite
division would only lead to parts having some size, so that the
last element would itself have some size; to this the answer
would be that, as there would, by hypothesis, be an infinite
number of such parts, the original magnitude which was
divided would be infinite in size.) The connexion between
the arguments against the Many and those against motion
lies in the fact that the former rest on the assumption of
the divisibility of matter ad infinitum, and that this is the
hypothesis assumed in the first two arguments against motion.
We shall see that, while the first two arguments proceed on
this hypothesis, the last two appear to proceed on the opposite
hypothesis that space and time are not infinitely divisible, but
that they are composed of indivisible elements; so that the
four arguments form a complete dilemma.
The four arguments against motion shall be stated in the
words of Aristotle.
I. The Dichotomy.
'There is no motion because that which is moved must
arrive at the middle (of its course) before it arrives at the
end.7 2 (And of course it must traverse the half of the half
before it reaches the middle, and so on ad infinifaim.)
II. The Achilles.
'This asserts that the slower when running will never be
1 Simpl. in Phys., p. 139. 5, Diels.
2 Aristotle, Phys. vi. 9, 239 b 11.
T 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

276 
ZENO OF ELEA
overtaken by the quicker; for that which is pursuing must
first reach the point from which that which is fleeing started,
so that the slower must necessarily always be some distance
ahead/x
III. The Arrow.
' If, says Zeno, everything is either at rest or moving when
it occupies a space equal (to itself), while the object moved is
always in the instant (2<m 8' del TO fepofievov kv r<S vvv, in
the now), the moving arrow is unmoved/2
I agree in Brochard's interpretation of this passage,3 from
which Zeller4 would banish fj Kiveirai, ' or is moved \ The
argument is this. It is strictly impossible that the arrow can
move in the instant, supposed indivisible, for, if it changed its
position, the instant would be at once divided. Now the
moving object is, in the instant, either at rest or in motion;
but, as it is not in motion, it is at rest, and as; by hypothesis,
time is composed of nothing but instants, the moving object is
always at rest. This interpretation has the advantage of
agreeing with that of Simplicius,5 which seems preferable
to that of Themistius6 on which Zeller relies.
IV. The Stadium. 
I translate the first two sentences of
Aristotle's account7:
' The fourth is the argument concerning the two rows of
bodies each composed of an equal number of bodies of equal
size, which pass one another on a race-course as they proceed
with equal velocity in opposite directions, one row starting
from the end of the course and the other from the middle.
This, he thinks, involves the conclusion that half a given time
is equal to its double. The fallacy of the reasoning lies in
the assumption that an equal magnitude occupies an equal
time in passing with equal velocity a magnitude that is in
motion and a magnitude that is at rest, an assumption which
is false/
Then follows a description of the process by means of
1 Aristotle, P%? vi. 9, 239 b 14. 
2 Ib. 239 b 5-7.
8 V. Brochard, Etudes de Philosophic ancienne et de Philosophic moderne,
Paris 1912, p. 6.
4 Zeller, i5, p. 599. 
5 Simpl. in Fhys., pp. 1011-12, Diels.
6 Them, {ad loc, p. 392 Sp., p. 199 Sch.)
7 Phys. vi, 9, 239 b 33-240 a 18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO'S ARGUMENTS ABOUT MOTION 
277
letters A, B, G the exact interpretation of which is a matter
of some doubt1; the essence of it, however, is clear. The first
diagram below shows the original positions of the rows of
bodies (say eight in number). The A's represent a row which
is stationary, the B's and C's are rows which move with equal
velocity alongside the J/s and one another, in the directions
shown by the arrows. Then clearly there will be (1) a moment
when the J3's and C's will be exactly under the respective A%
as in the second diagram, and after that (2) a moment when
the B's and C's will have exactly reversed their positions
relatively to the A% as in the third figure.
The observation has been made2 that the four arguments
form a system curiously symmetrical. The first and fourth
consider the continuous and movement within given limits,
the second and third the continuous and movement over
1 The interpretation of the passage 240 a 4-18 is elaborately discussed
by R. K. Gaye in the Journal of Philology, xxxi, 1910, pp. 95-116. It is
a question whether in the above quotation Aristotle means that Zeno
argued that half the given time would be equal to double the half, i. e.
the whole time simply, or to double the whole, i. e. four times the half.
Gaye contends (unconvincingly, I think) for the latter.
2 Brochard, loc. cit, pp. 4, 5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

278 
ZENO OF ELEA
lengths which are indeterminate. In the first and third there
is only one moving object, and it is shown that it cannot even
begin to move. The second and fourth, comparing the motions
of two objects, make the absurdity of the hypothesis even
more palpable, so to speak, for they prove that the movement,
even if it has once begun, cannot continue, and that relative
motion is no less impossible than absolute motion. The first
two establish the impossibility of movement by the nature of
space, supposed continuous, without any implication that time
is otherwise than continuous in the same way as space; in the
last two it is the nature of time (considered as made up of
indivisible elements or instants) which serves to prove the
impossibility of movement, and without any implication that
space is not likewise made up of indivisible elements or points.
The second argument is only another form of the first, and
the fourth rests on the same principle as the third. Lastly, the
first pair proceed on the hypothesis that continuous magni-
tudes are divisible ad infinitum; 
the second pair give the
other horn of the dilemma, being directed against the assump-
tion that continuous magnitudes are made up of indivisible
elements, an assumption which would scarcely suggest itself
to the imagination until the difficulties connected with the
other were fully realized. Thus the logical order of the argu-
ments corresponds exactly to the historical order in which
Aristotle has handed them down and which was certainly the
order adopted by Zeno.
Whether or not the paradoxes had for Zeno the profound
meaning now claimed for them, it is clear that they have
been very generally misunderstood, with the result that the
criticisms directed against them have been wide of the mark.
Aristotle, it is true, saw that the first two arguments, the
Dichotomy and the Achilles, come to the same thing, the latter
differing from the former only in the fact that the ratio of
each space traversed by Achilles to the preceding space is not
that of 1:2 but a ratio of 1 : n, where n may be any number,
however large; but, he says, both proofs rest on the fact that
a certain moving object' cannot reach the end of the course if
the magnitude is divided in a certain way'.1 But another
passage shows that he mistook the character of the argument
1 Arist. Phys. vi. 9, 239 b 18-24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO'S ARGUMENTS ABOUT MOTION 
279
in the Dichotomy, He observes that time is divisible in
exactly the same way as a length; if therefore a length is
infinitely divisible, so is the corresponding time; he adds
' this is why (SLO) Zeno's argument falsely assumes that it is
not possible to traverse or touch each of an infinite number of
points in a finite time \1 thereby implying that Zeno did not
regard time as divisible ad infinitum like space. Similarly,
when Leibniz declares that a space divisible ad 
infinitum
is traversed in a time divisible ad iniinitum, he, like Aristotle,
is entirely beside the question. Zeno was perfectly aware that,
in respect of divisibility, time and space have the same
property, and that they are alike, always, and concomitantly,
divisible ad infinitum. 
The question is how, in the one as
in the other, this series of divisions, by definition inexhaustible,
can be exhausted; and it must be exhausted if motion is to
be possible. It is not an answer to say that the two series
are exhausted simultaneously.
The usual mode of refutation given by mathematicians
from Descartes to Tannery, correct in a sense, has an analogous
defect. To show that the sum of the infinite series 1 + -| + J + ...
is equal to 2, or to calculate (in the Achilles) the exact moment
when Achilles will overtake the tortoise, is to answer the
question when ? whereas the question actually asked is how ?
On the hypothesis of divisibility ad infinitum you will, in the
Dichotomy, never reach the limit, and, in the Achilles, the
distance separating Achilles from the tortoise, though it con-
tinually decreases, will never vanish. And if you introduce
the limit, or, with a numerical calculation, the discontinuous,
Zeno is quite aware that his arguments are no longer valid.
We are then in presence of another hypothesis as to the com-
position of the continuum; and this hypothesis is dealt with
in the third and fourth arguments.2
It appears then that the first and second arguments, in their
full significance, were not really met before G. Cantor formu-
lated his new theory of continuity and infinity. 
On this I
can only refer to Chapters xlii and xliii of Mr. Bertrand
Russell's Principles of Mathematics, vol. i. Zeno's argument
in the Dichotomy is that, whatever motion we assume to have
taken place, this presupposes another motion; this in turn
1 lb. vi. 2, 233 a 16-23. 
2 Brochard, loc. cit., p. 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

280 
ZENO OF ELEA
another, and so on ad infinitum. 
Hence there is an endless
regress in the mere idea of any assigned motion. Zeno's
argument has then to be met by proving that the 'infinite
regressJ in this case is ' harmless'.
As regards the Achilles, Mr. G. H. Hardy remarks that' the
kernel of it lies in the perfectly valid proof which it affords
that the tortoise passes through as many points as Achilles,
a view which embodies an accepted doctrine of modern mathe-
matics A1
The argument in the Arrow is based on the assumption that
time is made up of indivisible elements or instants. Aristotle
meets it by denying the assumption. ' For time is not made
up of indivisible instants (nows), any more than any other
magnitude is made up of indivisible elements.' ' (Zeno's result)
follows through assuming that time is made up of (indivisible)
instants (noivs); if this is not admitted, his conclusion does
not follow.'2 On the other hand, the modern view is that
Zeno's contention is true: ' If' (said Zeno) ' everything is at
rest or in motion when it occupies a space equal to itself, and
if what moves is always in the instant, it follows that the
moving arrow is unmoved.' 
Mr. Russell3 holds that thisis
1 a very plain statement of an' elementary fact';
' it is a very important and very widely applicable platitude,
namely " Every possible value of a variajble is a constant".}
If # be a variable which can take all values from 0 to l/
all the values it can take are definite numbers such as \ or \,
which are all absolute constants . . . Though a variable is
always connected with some class, it is not the class, nor
a particular member of the class, nor yet the whole class, but
any member of the class.' The usual x in, algebra < denotes
the disjunction formed by the various members' . . . 'The
values of x are then the terms of the disjunction; and each
of these is a constant. This simple logical fact seems to
constitute the essence of Zeno's contention that the arrow
is always at rest.' ' But Zeno's argument contains an element
which is specially applicable to continua. In the case of
motion it denies that there is such a thing as a state of motion.
In the general case of a continuous variable, it may be taken
as denying actual infinitesimals. For infinitesimals are an
1 Encyclopaedia Britannica, art, Zeno.
2 Arist. Phys. vi. 9, 239 b 8, 31.
Russell, Principles of Mathematics, i, pp. 350, 351.
3
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO'S ARGUMENTS ABOUT MOTION 
281
attempt to extend to the values of a variable the variability
which belongs to it alone. When once it is firmly realized
that all the values of a variable are constants, it becomes easy
to see, by taking any two such values, that their difference is
always finite, and hence that there are no infinitesimal differ-
ences. If x be a variable which may take all real values
from 0 to 1, then, taking any two of these values, we see that
their difference is finite, although x is a continuous variable.
It is true the difference might have been less than the one we
chose; but if it had been, it would still have been finite. The
lower limit to possible differences is zero, but all possible
differences are finite; and in this there is no shadow of
contradiction. This static theory of the variable is due to the
mathematicians, and its absence in Zeno's day led him to
suppose that continuous change was impossible without a state
of change, which involves infinitesimals and the contradiction
of a body's being where it is not/
In his later chapter on Motion Mr. Russell concludes as
follows:1
'It is to be observed that, in consequence of the denial
of the infinitesimal and in consequence of the allied purely
technical view of the derivative of a function, we must
entirely reject the notion of a state of motion. Motion consists
merely in the occupation of different places at different times,
subject to continuity as explained in Part V. There is no
transition from place to place, no consecutive moment or
consecutive position, no such thing as velocity except in the
sense of a real number which is the limit of a certain set
of quotients. The rejection of velocity and acceleration as
physical facts (i. e. as properties belonging at each instant to
a moving point, and not merely real numbers expressing limits
of certain ratios) involves, as we shall see, some difficulties
in the statement of the laws of motion; but the reform
introduced by Weierstrass in the infinitesimal calculus has
rendered this rejection imperative.'
We come lastly to the fourth argument (the Stadium).
Aristotle's representation of it is obscure through its extreme
brevity of expression, and the matter is further perplexed by
an uncertainty of reading. But the meaning intended to be
conveyed is fairly clear. The eight A% B's and (7s being
1 Op. cit, p. 473.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

282 
ZENO OF ELEA
initially in the position shown in Figure 1, suppose, e.g., that
the B's move to the right and the C's to the left with equal
velocity until the rows are vertically under one another as in
Figure 2. Then Gx has passed alongside all the eight B's (and B±
alongside all the eight C's), while Bx has passed alongside only
half the A'a (and similarly for Cx). But (Aristotle makes Zeno
say) Gx is the same time in passing each of the B's as it is in
passing each of the A's. It follows that the time occupied by Cx
in passing all the A's is the same as the time occupied by
Oj in passing half the A'&, or a given time is equal to its half.
Aristotle's criticism on this is practically that Zeno did not
understand the difference between absolute and relative motion.
This is, however, incredible, and another explanation must be
found. 
The real explanation seems to be that given by
Brochard, Noel and Russell. Zeno's object is to prove that
time is not made up of indivisible elements or instants.
Suppose the B's have moved one place to the right and the C's
one place to the left, so that 2?13 which was under Av is now
under A5, and C1? which was under A5, is now under A±. We
must suppose that Bx and Cx are absolute indivisible elements
of space, and that they move to their new positions in an
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ZENO'S ARGUMENTS ABOUT MOTION 
283
instant, the absolute indivisible element of time; this is Zeno's
hypothesis. But, in order that B19 Cx may have taken up
their new positions, there must have been a moment at which
they crossed or Bx was vertically over 0 r 
Yet the motion
has, by hypothesis, taken place in an indivisible instant.
Therefore, either they have not crossed (in which case there
is no movement), or in the particular indivisible instant two
positions have been occupied by the two moving objects, that
is to say, the instant is no longer indivisible. And, if the
instant is divided into two equal parts, this, on the hypothesis
of indivisibles, is equivalent to saying that an instant is double
of itself.
Two remarks may be added. Though the first two argu-
ments are directed against those who assert the divisibility ad
infinitum 
of magnitudes and times, there is no sufficient
justification for Tannery's contention that they were specially
directed against a view, assumed by him to be Pythagorean,
that bodies, surfaces and lines are made up of mathematical
points. There is indeed no evidence that the Pythagoreans
held this view at all; it does not follow from their definition
of a point as a ' unit having position' (jiovas Geo-iv 'iypvo-a);
and, as we have seen, Aristotle says that the Pythagoreans
maintained that units and numbers have magnitude.1
It would appear that, after more than 2,300 years, con-
troversy on Zeno's arguments is yet by no means at an end.
But the subject cannot here be pursued further.2
1 Arist. Metaph. M. 6, 1080 b 19, 32.
2 It is a pleasure to be able to refer the reader to a most valuable and
comprehensive series of papers by Professor Florian Cajori, under the
title 'The History of Zeno's arguments on Motion', published in the
American Mathematical Monthly of 1915, and also available in a reprint.
This work carries the history of the various views and criticisms of
Zeno's arguments down to 1914. I may also refer to the portions of
Bertrand Russell's work, Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field
for Scientific Method in Philosophy, 1914, which deal with Zeno, and to
Philip E. B. Jourdain's article, ' The Flying Arrow; an Anachronism ', in
Mind, January 1916, pp. 42-55.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

