
Handbook of International Research in
Mathematics Education
is third edition of the Handbook of International Resear in
Mathematics Education provides a comprehensive overview of the most
recent theoretical and practical developments in the ﬁeld of mathematics
education. Authored by an array of internationally recognized solars and
edited by Lyn D. English and David Kirshner, this collection brings together
overviews and advances in mathematics education resear spanning
established and emerging topics, diverse workplace and sool
environments, and globally representative research priorities.
New perspectives are presented on a range of critical topics including
embodied learning, the theory–practice divide, new developments in the
early years, educating future mathematics education professors, problem
solving in a 21st-century curriculum, culture and mathematics learning,
complex systems, critical analysis of design-based resear, multimodal
tenologies, and e-textbooks. Comprised of 12 revised and 17 new
apters, this edition extends the Handbook’s original themes for
international resear in mathematics education and remains in the process
a definitive resource for the field.
Lyn D. English is a professor of STEM in education within the Faculty of
Education at eensland University of Tenology, Australia. She is a
fellow of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and the founding
editor of the international journal Mathematical Thinking and Learning.

David Kirshner is a professor in the Sool of Education at Louisiana State
University, USA, and co-director of the Gordon A. Cain Center for
Scientiﬁc, Mathematical, Engineering, and Tenological Literacy at that
institution.

Handbook of International
Research in Mathematics Education
Third Edition
Edited by
Lyn D. English and David Kirshner

First published 2016
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2016 Taylor & Francis
The right of the editors to be identified as the authors of the editorial
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Handbook of international research in mathematics education / 
 [edited] by Lyn D. English and David Kirshner.— [3rd edition].
  pages cm
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1. Mathematics—Study and teaching—Research. I. English, Lyn D. II. 
Kirshner, David, 1950–
 QA11.2.H36 2015

510.71—dc23
2015007357
ISBN: 978-0-415-83203-8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-83204-5 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-44894-6 (ebk)
Typeset in Galliard
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

Contents
Acknowledgments
List of Reviewers
Section I
Priorities in International Mathematics Education
Research
1 Changing Agendas in International Research in Mathematics
Education
Lyn D. English David Kirshner
2 Perspectives on Priority Mathematics Education: Unpacking and
Understanding a Complex Relationship Linking Teacher
Knowledge, Teaching, and Learning
Charalambos Y. Charalambous and Demetra Pitta-Pantazi
3 Approaches to Embodied Learning in Mathematics
Susan Gerofsky
4 Configuring Learning Theory to Support Teaching
David Kirshner
Section II

Democratic Access to Mathematics Learning
5 Young Children’s Access to Powerful Mathematics Ideas: A
Review of Current Challenges and New Developments in the Early
Years
Joan Moss Catherine D. Bruce Janette Bobis
6 Powerful Ideas in Elementary School Mathematics
David W. Carraher Analúcia D. Schliemann
7 Students’ Access to Mathematics Learning in the Middle and
Junior Secondary Schools
Teresa Rojano
8 Mathematical Structure, Proof, and Definition in Advanced
Mathematical Thinking
Joanna Mamona-Downs and Martin L. N.Downs
9 Reform as an Issue for Mathematics Education Research: Thinking
About Change, Communication, and Cooperation
Michael N. Fried and Miriam Amit
10 Prospective Mathematics Teachers’ Learning and Knowledge for
Teaching
João Pedro da Ponte Olive Chapman
11 Educating Future Mathematics Education Professors
Jeremy Kilpatrick and Denise A. Spangler
Section III

Transformations in Learning Contexts
12 Problem Solving in a 21st-Century Mathematics Curriculum
Lyn D. English Julie Gainsburg
13 Critical Issues in Culture and Mathematics Learning
Peter Appelbaum Charoula Stathopoulou
14 Mathematics Education and Democracy: An Open Landscape of
Tensions, Uncertainties, and Challenges
Ole Skovsmose Miriam Godoy Penteado
15 Toward a Sociology of Mathematics Education: Examining
Democratic Access in U.S. Schools
Celia Rousseau Anderson William F. Tate
16 Mathematics Learning In and Out of School: Towards Continuity
or Discontinuity?
Guida de Abreu Sarah Crafter
17 Perspectives on Complex Systems in Mathematics Learning
Brent Davis Elaine Simmt
Section IV
Advances in Research Methodologies
18 Researching Mathematical Meanings for Teaching
Patrick W. Thompson
19 Measurement Challenges in Mathematics Education Research

Rosemary Callingham
20 Design Research: An Analysis and Critique
Paul Cobb Kara Jackson Charlotte Dunlap
21 The Intertwining of Theory and Practice: Influences on Ways of
Teaching and Teachers’ Education
Annalisa Cusi Nicolina A. Malara
22 Knowledge Creation Through Dialogic Interaction Between the
Practices of Teaching and Researching
Kenneth Ruthven Simon Goodchild
Section V
Influences of Advanced Technologies
23 Foundations for the Future: The Potential of Multimodal
Technologies for Learning Mathematics
Stephen J. Hegedus David O. Tall
24 Statistical Software and Mathematics Education: Affordances for
Learning
Jane Watson and Noleine Fitzallen
25 The Use of Digital Technology in Mathematical Practices:
Reconciling Traditional and Emerging Approaches
Luis Moreno-Armella and Manuel Santos-Trigo
26 Computerized Environments in Mathematics Classrooms: A
Research-Design View

Rina Hershkowitz Michal Tabach Tommy Dreyfus
27 E-Textbooks in/for Teaching and Learning Mathematics: A
Potentially Transformative Educational Technology
Birgit Pepin Ghislaine Gueudet Michal Yerushalmy Luc Trouche Daniel
I. Chazan
28 Digital Technologies in the Early Primary School Classroom
Nathalie Sinclair Anna Baccaglini-Frank
Final Comment
29 Mathematics Education Research: A Strategic View
Hugh Burkhardt
Index

Acknowledgments
e publication of this third edition of the Handbook of International
Resear in Mathematics Education would not have been possible without
the commitment of the authors, many of whom are new contributors to this
edition. David and I extend our sincere thanks to our authors, who willingly
made improvements to their apters on receiving reviewers’ feedba. To
the reviewers, we extend our heartfelt thanks. Your thoughtful, constructive
reviews were invaluable to all of us as we worked towards producing a
third edition Handbook of solarly distinction. roughout the book’s
development David and I established a strong partnership that never
wavered even through sometimes roy waters. I was very fortunate in
securing David as my co-editor and remain forever grateful for his
reasoned and insightful advice on all aspects of the book. I also gratefully
anowledge the Australian Resear Council, who funded some of the
resear I address in Chapters 1 and 12. We further anowledge the
professional input from Jessica Leader, who skillfully assisted us with the
formaing of the book. Finally, we thank the production team at Taylor &
Francis, including Catherine Bernard and Trevor Gori, for their support
during the production process.
In Memoriam
David and I wish to express our deepest sympathy for the recent passing of
one of our apter authors, Dr. Martin Downs, who co-authored apter 8
with Joanna Mamona-Downs. I have known both Joanna and Martin for
many years, and have fond memories of the times we shared at various

international conferences. Martin’s passing is indeed a great loss to our
international community. As a Group theorist, Martin had deep insights
into the essence of mathematical structures as evident in his and Joanna’s
apter. Martin’s ri work in this ﬁeld continues to generate increasing
interest from solars globally. His memory will be kept alive not only
through the editions of this Handbook but also through the lectures, papers,
and mathematical conversations his research will continue to inspire.
Lyn D. English
David Kirshner

Reviewers
Dor Abrahamson
Anna Baccaglini-Frank
Claire Berg
Alan Bishop
Hugh Burkhardt
Beatriz D’Ambrosio
Thomas Dick
Ed Dubinsky
Julie Gainsburg
Peter Gates
Simon Goodchild
Keono Gravemeijer
Jim Greeno
Barbro Grevholm
Anthony Harradine
Kate Highfield
Karen Hollerbrands
Gert Kadunz
Mandy Jansen
Jane-Jane Lo
Luis Moreno-Armella
Nicholas Mousoulides
Nitsa Movshovitz-Hadar
Patricia Moyer-Packenham

Na’ilah Nasir
Helena Osana
Efi Paparistodemou
Despina Potari
Arthur Powell
Bob Reys
Ornella Robutti
Annie Selden
Elaine Simmt
Adrian Simpson
Nathalie Sinclair
Denise Spangler
Bharath Sriraman
Paola Sztajn
Michal Tabach
Brendan Tangney
Patrick Thompson
Margaret Walshaw

Section I
Priorities in International
Mathematics Education Research

1 Changing Agendas in International
Research in Mathematics Education
Lyn D.English
Queensland University of Technology
DavidKirshner
Louisiana State University
Handbooks serve an important function for our resear community in
providing state-of-the-art summations, critiques, and extensions of existing
trends in resear. In the intervening years between the second and third
editions of the Handbook of International Resear in Mathematics
Education, there have been stimulating developments in resear, as well as
new allenges in translating outcomes into practice. is third edition
incorporates a number of new apters representing areas of growth and
allenge, in addition to substantially updated apters from the second
edition. As su, the Handbook addresses ﬁve core themes, namely,
Priorities in International Mathematics Education Resear, Democratic
Access to Mathematics Learning, Transformations in Learning Contexts,
Advances in Resear Methodologies, 
and Inﬂuences of Advanced
Technologies.
In opening the ﬁrst apter of the Handbook’s second edition, English
(2008) argued that many of the important questions that need to be
addressed in mathematics education are not being answered. In
highlighting some of these concerns, a number of “catalysts for ange”
were identiﬁed as fuelling the need for further resear. ese catalysts
included national and international mathematics testing, the impact of

social and cultural factors (including economic and political inﬂuences), an
increased focus on the professional learning of teaers, a revival of theory
development, the enhanced sophistication and availability of tenology,
and the increased globalization of our ﬁeld. To what extent these factors
continue to have a signiﬁcant impact on our ﬁeld is open to debate, as are
the global resear questions demanding aention. Although responses to
these issues would vary from nation to nation and indeed, from one
resear group to another, it is worth reﬂecting on some of the allenges,
both the longstanding and the emerging, that appear to be shaping (or
reshaping) mathematics education research.
In an introductory apter of this nature we cannot, of course, do justice
to the myriad factors impacting our ﬁeld. As Heid (2012) emphasized in her
ﬁnal editorial for the Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
although it is desirable to identify the major problems in mathematics
teaing and learning and to target appropriate resear agendas, we
cannot expect universal agreement on what these problems and agendas
might be. What we can strive for, however, is the means to determine
“great allenges, especially ones on whi progress can be made in the
near future” (Heid, 2012, p. 503). We tou upon just a few of these in this
ﬁrst apter and leave the reader to explore ea of the sections for a more
in-depth and diverse coverage of global allenges facing researers,
teaers, and policy developers alike. To provide a partial guide to the
issues examined by the authors, we devote the last portion of this apter
to a summary of the chapters within each of the sections.

Emerging and Continuing Challenges
One of the ongoing allenges facing all of us today is operating eﬀectively
in a world that is increasingly shaped by complex, dynamic, and powerful
information systems fuelled by unprecedented developments in tenology.
Students’ future careers, many of whi might not exist today or only in
emergent forms, will require skills in interpreting, explaining, and
developing structurally complex systems. Spanning a range of ﬁelds
including social, economic, political, and scientiﬁc domains, su systems
will demand mathematically powerful knowledge and reasoning processes,
skills in dealing eﬀectively with sophisticated tenology, and the ability to
think ﬂexibly, creatively, and innovatively—all essential to life-long
learning. e apters in this Handbook explore various ways in whi we
might increase all students’ access to opportunities that nurture these core
foundations. From sool curriculum renewal, to advancing theory and
resear methodologies, through to capitalizing on tenological
developments, the authors oﬀer international perspectives on broadening
opportunities for mathematics learning and teaching.
Selecting particular issues to highlight in this opening apter is a
allenge in itself. ese are many and varied, with some presenting more
urgency than others depending on the unique features of a nation’s
educational system. Complementing the allenges explored in ea of the
main sections, we address brieﬂy two issues that we see as having a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on shaping the agenda of future mathematics
education: the increased international focus on STEM education and the
ever-present endeavors to link research with practice.
International Developments in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics

(STEM) Education
Promoting 
STEM 
education 
(science, 
engineering, 
mathematics,
tenology) has become a central concern of policy makers across the
globe, with many nations formally recognizing the signiﬁcant role of STEM
skills across multiple economic sectors (e.g., Honey, Pearson, &
Sweingruber, 2014; Marginson, Tytler, Freeman, & Roberts, 2013;
National Resear Council, 2014; National Science and Tenology Council,
2013; Oﬃce of the Chief Scientist, 2013). In the United States, for example,
the 2013 report from the Commiee on STEM Education maintained that
“e jobs of the future are STEM jobs,” with STEM competencies
increasingly required not only within, but also outside of, speciﬁc STEM
occupations (National Science and Tenology Council, 2013, p. vi).
Developing students’ competencies in the STEM disciplines is thus regarded
as an urgent goal of many education systems, fuelled in part by current or
predicted shortages in the STEM workforce and also by outcomes from
international comparative assessments (e.g., OECD, 2013).
A major domain of the 2012 Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) was mathematical literacy, with a focus on allenging
problems set in real-world contexts and the mathematical thinking and
processes applied to solutions (OECD, 2013). It is not surprising then, that
one of the key ﬁndings of the report, STEM: Country Comparisons
(Marginson et al., 2013), was that many nations with strong STEM agendas
and international testing outcomes have a well-developed curriculum that
focuses on inquiry, problem solving, critical thinking, creativity, and
innovation. Combined with an emphasis on disciplinary thinking and
literacies, these curricula display a heavy commitment to broadening STEM
engagement and achievement.
While educational bodies are lobbying for greater aention to STEM
education, the nature of su learning and how the component disciplines

might be integrated eﬀectively within the curriculum do not appear to have
received the required resear aention. Calls for more in-depth
connections among the STEM disciplines appear in the Common Core State
Standards for Mathematics (www.corestandards.org/Math/) and the Next
Generation Science Standards (www.nextgenscience.org/) in the United
States. Interestingly, the California Department of Education (STEM Task
Force Report, 2014) considers STEM education to be more than “an
interdisciplinary applied approa”; rather, STEM education is viewed as
comprising aributes that are common to the four disciplines, namely,
engaging students in “critical thinking, inquiry, problem solving,
collaboration, and what is oen referred to in engineering as design
thinking” (p. 7). is perspective aligns with the recognition by many
nations of the importance of these generic skills in advancing students’
learning across the STEM disciplines.
An aspect of concern for mathematics education within an integrative
STEM approa, however, is the need to maintain a strong presence and
role alongside the other disciplines. A balanced distribution of the four
discipline areas is essential, otherwise mathematics could very well be in
danger of being overshadowed. At present, science seems to dominate
many current STEM reports. Indeed, the STEM acronym itself is frequently
referred to as simply “science” (e.g., Oﬃce of the Chief Scientist, 2014).
Many countries also refer to the role of STEM education as one that fosters
“broad-based scientiﬁc literacy” with a key objective in their sool
programs being “science for all,” reﬂected in an increased focus on science
education in elementary, junior, and middle secondary sool curricula
(Marginson et al., 2013, p. 70). As Marginson et al. commented, discussions
on STEM education rarely adopt the form of “mathematics for all” even
though mathematics underpins the other disciplines; they thus argue that
“the stage of mathematics for all should be shied further up the
educational scale” (p. 70). Even the rise in engineering education,

commencing in the early sool years (e.g., Laapelle & Cunningham,
2014), would appear to be oriented primarily towards the science strand at
the expense of mathematics. is concern has been raised by several
researers in engineering education (e.g., English & King, 2015; Honey et
al., 2014; Walkington, Nathan, Wolfgram, Alibali, & Srisurichan, 2014).
An interesting way of viewing mathematics within a uniﬁed STEM
approa is evident in the California State Department (2014), where the
integrative nature of ea of the four disciplines is deﬁned. Mathematics is
viewed in terms of fostering “mathematically literate” students, who not
only know how “to analyze, reason, and communicate ideas eﬀectively,”
but can also “mathematically pose, model, formulate, solve, and interpret
questions and solutions in science, tenology, and engineering” (p. 11).
Although advancing mathematics learning from su a perspective is
potentially ri, the discipline nevertheless remains underrepresented in
terms of ways to aieve this, with science still appearing to receive
considerably greater attention, as Honey et al. (2014) indicated.
One of the underutilized roles of mathematics within STEM lies in
providing critical grounding for success beyond sool, where skills are
needed for making informed decisions on issues that are central to national
and international debates on political, economic, environmental, health, and
defense issues, to name a few. Together with the exponential rise in digital
information within STEM, the ability to handle contradictory and
potentially unreliable online data is critical (Lumley & Mendelovits, 2012).
Mathematics provides the grist for making evidence-based decisions in
dealing with data across disciplines. More recognition needs to be given to
this powerful role of mathematics in STEM integration.
In essence, we argue that mathematics as a discipline within the current
STEM climate needs to have a stronger voice. Mathematics must maintain
equitable discipline representation, especially with the burgeoning of
publications devoted to STEM education (e.g., Honey et al., 2014; National

Resear Council, 2014; Purzer, Stroble, & Cardella, 2014; International
Journal of STEM Education; www.stemeducationjournal.com/). At the same
time, the resear conducted across all STEM disciplines needs to rea the
classroom and other relevant learning environments. As we indicate in the
next section, one of the most enduring allenges for mathematics
education, and indeed any field, is linking research with practice.
Linking Research with Practice
e perennial nature of the resear into practice allenge is evident in the
numerous reports, editorials, and articles devoted to ways in whi we
might translate and disseminate our signiﬁcant resear outcomes so that
they directly enhance learning and teaing (e.g., Arbaugh et al., 2010;
Burkhardt & Soenfeld, 2003; Heid, 2012). Indeed, though only Chapter 9
by Miael Fried and Miriam Amit on mathematics education reform was
solicited to address this theme, it has been substantively addressed
throughout the book, especially in Chapters 2, 4, 5, 7, 10, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
and 29. us a general overview of the resear/practice ri in this
introductory apter also serves to orient the reader to a major theme of
the Handbook.
Policy concerns about the alienation of resear from educational
practice, and more generally about the eﬃcacy of educational resear, are
deep-seated and international in scope. As reported in Vanderlinde and van
Braak (2010), since the turn of the century there have been major
governmental and government-funded reports ﬁled in the UK, France, e
Netherlands, and the United States, as well as multinational reports from
the OECD’s Center for Educational Resear and Innovation, and the
Commission of the European Communities.
Because funding of educational resear is tied to public and political

perception of its impact on practice, researers are necessarily aentive to
criticisms that educational resear results are lile utilized (Onderwijsraad,
2003), of poor quality (Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy (2002), and of
limited inﬂuence (Burkhardt & Soenfeld, 2003). Still, there is lile
consensus as to what role educational resear should play, for instance
whether production of knowledge or improvement of educational practice
should predominate (Mortimore, 2000; Bauer & Fisher, 2007); and whether,
in principle, knowledge produced by educational resear can directly
delineate educational practice, or if its appropriate service is to enri the
conversation about educational possibilities (Bridges, Smeyers, & Smith,
2008; Nuthall, 2004).
To gain some perspective on the range of issues involved in the
resear/practice split, we turn to the work of Broekkamp and Van Hout-
Wolters (2007), whi identiﬁes four quite diﬀerent interpretations of the
underlying concern, as summarized in Vanderlinde and van Braak (2010, p.
302):
1. Educational resear yields few conclusive results; or educational
resear does not provide valid and reliable results that are conﬁrmed
through unambiguous and powerful evidence.
2. Educational resear yields few practical results; or educational
research is limited in practical use.
3. Practitioners believe that educational resear is not conclusive or
practical; or educational research is not meaningful for teachers.
4. Practitioners make lile (appropriate) use of educational resear; or
practitioners do not have the skills to use educational research results.
Depending on whi interpretation one subscribes to, the actions needed
to affect positive change will vary widely:

1. Rethink the kinds of resear questions that are pursued and/or the
methodologies employed to address those questions (Levin &
O’Donnell, 1999); or invest more in high-quality, validated resear
(Kennedy, 1997).
2. Design resear studies that more eﬀectively address the needs of
practitioners (Hammersley, 2002); include practitioners as partners in
research (De Vries & Pieters, 2007; Ruthven & Goodchild, 2008).
3. Do a beer job of articulating the linkages of resear studies to
practice (Gore & Gitlin, 2004); or train teaers in the science of
educational research (NRC, 2002).
4. Disseminate resear results more widely (Chafouleas & Riley-
Tillman, 2005); or train practitioners in the interpretation and
utilization of educational resear results (Edwards, Sebba, &
Rickinson, 2007).
e critical point oﬀered by Broekkamp and Van Hout-Wolters (2007) is
that our current discourse about the resear/practice gap is dominated by
“monocausal analyses”: “When a certain cause has been determined, there
is oen a plea for the extensive and radical application of a single solution
that is supposed to close the gap. Other solutions are then regarded as
incompatible” (p. 204). We do well to keep this point in mind as we
consider the multifaceted and conﬂicting interpretations of the
resear/practice gap, and the need for judicious and inclusive solutions to
it.

Overview of Handbook Chapters
Section I: Priorities in International Mathematics
Education Research
We now turn to highlighting some of the core points raised in the apters
of ea section. ose of the ﬁrst section, following this introductory
apter, provide an exoskeleton for the concerns of mathematics education
resear with respect to teaing and learning. e starting point is
recognition, well established by “almost four decades of signiﬁcant
solarly work … that teaers make a diﬀerence in student learning”
(Charalambous & Pia-Pantazi, Chapter 2, p. 44). e allenge undertaken
by the authors in this section is to provide perspectives on how to ground
the resear eﬀort so as to mine this ri connection of learning and
teaching for the benefit of teachers and students.
To begin, Charalambos Charalambous and Demetra Pia-Pantazi
(Chapter 2) provide a state-of-the-art review of the literature, focusing on
theoretical and methodological advances in resear over the past decade
on mathematics teacher knowledge, teaching practice, and student learning.
Although these topics are ﬁrst treated independently, the goal of the
apter is to understand them in mutual relation. eir review documents
the extant multifaceted eﬀort to derive insight into the learning/teaing
connection for mathematics.
e next two apters move away from this basic overview in opposite
directions, from inward toward the substance of learning and teaing, to
outward toward the structure of the supporting disciplines. Susan Gerofsky
(Chapter 3) seeks grounding for mathematics learning and teaing in the
body, highlighting approaes to embodiment through metaphor and
language, cognitive science, semiotics, cultural studies, feminist materialism,
and gesture and performance studies. Gerofsky begins by tracing the roots

of the current emphasis on embodiment to the encompassing philosophical
transition from modernist to postmodernist sensibilities, the mind/body
dualism of modernism gradually giving way to “a fully embodied world
where mental and physical ways of being are inseparable” (p. 64). Her
inclusive overview of the various approaes to embodiment provides a
birds-eye view of a sea ange in mathematics education thinking that
easily can be missed by solars focusing more locally on personal agendas
of resear. Gerofsky concludes the apter by documenting the many
touch points in her own Graphs & Gestures Project to the various literatures
on embodied learning, thereby illustrating the interdisciplinary potential of
this scholarship.
To conclude the opening section, David Kirshner (Chapter 4) addresses
the conundrum for educators posed by the presence of multiple branes of
psyology (e.g., behavioral, developmental, sociocultural) ea providing
its own independent vision of learning. Kirshner cautions against adopting
any single one of these major theoretical sools to guide educational
practice. Likewise he esews the integrative sools (e.g., situated
cognition, social constructivism) that have sprung up in the interstices of the
major branes. From a Sociology of Scientiﬁc Knowledge perspective,
Kirshner argues that adopting any single theorization—either unitary, or
integrative—serves psyology’s interest in aieving paradigmatic unity,
the hallmark of a mature science (Kuhn, 1970). But it denies the current
multiparadigmatic reality of psyology, and it subverts education’s own
interest in aieving coherent theoretical grounding for what, indeed, are
separate and discrete notions of learning that motivate educational practice
across its broad span.
As an alternative, Kirshner articulates independently coherent genres of
teaing, ea addressing itself to a unique learning goal (knowledge, skills,
dispositions; see National Council for Accreditation of Teaer Education
[NCATE], 2002), ea informed by a theorization of learning speciﬁc to that

goal. Su a move, he argues, resolves the conflict that arises when groups
of solars line up behind diﬀerent basic notions of learning, and the
confusion inherent in aempts to stret a single theorization across
incommensurable conceptions of learning.
Section II: Democratic Access to Mathematics
Learning
e apters in the second section address the theme of democratic access
to a sound mathematics education throughout sooling. is theme was
also addressed in the previous editions of the Handbook, where issues
related to learners, teaers, and learning contexts were examined. In the
current edition, a shiing landscape of learning contexts has emerged as a
more sustained focus of resear, so we have collected related apters
where the theme of transformations in learning contexts is examined. e
current section maintains the interest on learners, whi we trace through
grade-bands from early ildhood education through university-level
mathematics education, and we have added in a apter on mathematics
education reform as it impacts students’ educational experiences in sools.
e penultimate apter turns to a focus on the education of mathematics
teaers, and a ﬁnal apter has been added on the mu-neglected topic of
mathematics education doctoral programs to round out the focus on issues
related to school learning.
I n Chapter 5, Moss, Bruce, and Bobis present a picture of dynamic
possibility for mathematics in the early grades to counter the low
expectations and limited allenge inherent in many current curricula.
Current practice reﬂects a mélange of inﬂuences, including an outmoded
perspective of unstructured play as the optimal pathway to concept
aainment in the early years, a narrow curricular tradition focused on

counting and on sorting and naming of shapes, and a behaviorist focus on
repetition and reinforcement as guiding instructional modes. e apter
presents alternatives to all of these inﬂuences, centered around a guided
discovery alternative to unstructured play illustrated through vignees that
demonstrate the depth and sophistication of learning possible for young
ildren. ese innovative teaing practices are framed with a special
focus on geometry/visualization instruction, whi Moss, Bruce, and Bobis
highlight as a burgeoning area of current resear. An equity thesis
enwraps the whole apter. Early ildhood mathematics aievement is
the single most signiﬁcant factor in later academic success (e.g., Was,
Duncan, Siegler, & Davis-Kean, 2014); and guided discovery succeeds
equally well with students of all bagrounds. Early mathematics education
has a special cultural role to play in narrowing gender, class, and race
achievement gaps, and in increasing social mobility.
Progressing to the elementary sool years, Carrarher and Sliemann
(Chapter 6) target the powerful ideas of functions and relations as an
avenue for increasing learning access for elementary sool students. e
authors view these ideas as facilitating more in-depth learning and
understanding of key mathematical content areas, laying the foundation for
major long-term developments. Carrarher and Sliemann draw upon four
core notions in examining these foundational domains of functions and
relations. First, the operations of arithmetic are themselves, functions—the
ﬁrst instances that students encounter. Second, functions and relations are
central to the development of students’ concept of number beyond natural
numbers, and they also underlie variables. ird, these ideas play a uniting
role in linking arithmetic, algebra, and geometry, with the abstract nature
of functions calling for representation in diverse forms su as tables of
data, graphs, diagrams, arithmetic and algebraic expressions, and even as
spoken and wrien language. e ﬁnal notion builds on the fact that the
le- and right-hand sides of equations and inequalities can be viewed as

“the comparison of two functions across their domains” (p. 193).
In arguing for greater aention on these core ideas, Carraher and
Sliemann provide ri examples of how we might advance students’
access to these underrepresented topics in existing curricula. ey argue
that bringing out early understanding of functions and relations through
informal methods can lead to more in-depth and integrated mathematical
knowledge, as well as an enhanced ability to draw generalizations.
Furthermore, early access to these constructs can lay powerful foundations
for the later introduction of formal study of these topics.
In examining access to mathematics in the middle and junior secondary
sools, Rojano (Chapter 7) analyzes the role of sense development and
meaning assignment as processes that provide access to life-long
mathematics learning. Adopting a semiotic perspective, Rojano provides an
in-depth analysis of the relationship between these processes and students’
mathematics and linguistic experiences, and argues how it is possible to
design teaing models that are appropriate for these sool levels. In
addition, Rojano addresses modes of tenology use that have the potential
to oﬀer students increased experimental approaes to mathematics, link
their learning across domains, and provide an early introduction to
advanced mathematics topics. For example, developments in three-
dimensional Dynamic Geometry enable students in the junior secondary
sool to access themes of spatial geometry usually reserved for college or
university study.
Rojano also toues upon the rapid growth in interactive materials on
the Cloud and through mobile devices, whi she views as wielding
significant influences over social aspects in fostering long-term mathematics
learning (further discussion on these promising tenological developments
is presented in the last section of this Handbook). While welcoming these
breakthroughs in tenology, Rojano reminds us of the need to work
towards closing the gap between resear and practice, one of the ever-

present allenges we face. We would add that increasing students’ access
to these new tenologies is paramount. It cannot be assumed, of course,
that the latest tenology is available to all students across all nations, or
even in the more aﬄuent ones. Increasing this access is an equally
challenging issue that warrants urgent attention.
Moving to tertiary-level mathematics in Chapter 8, Mamona-Downs and
Downs discuss ways of increasing students’ access to advanced
mathematical thinking with respect to mathematical structure, proof, and
deﬁnition. ey adopt the notion of mathematical structure as an avenue to
blend intuition and semantics with the abstract and the formal, whi
enables the authors to investigate ways to enhance the transition period
from sool study to university. Given that this transition period can be
diﬃcult for many students, the authors illustrate how structure has a
supportive role in developing understanding of proof and deﬁnition. For
example in considering their perspective on proof, they maintain that the
rules of predicate logic must be respected explicitly, given that proof
construction can be a diﬃcult process for many students. For example,
students can accept faulty argumentation because they fail to understand
the language used and the structure involved.
Fried and Amit (Chapter 9) address allenges facing all nations engaged
in the complex endeavor of mathematics education reform—indeed, reform
in general. As the authors indicate, su reform targets nearly every
component in the ﬁeld including teaing and learning and the associated
environments, curriculum design, assessment, tenological developments,
national and economic needs, cultural values, and social justice. As su,
resear that addresses reform in mathematics education needs to be
considered holistically, not reduced to any one of these sectors.
In advancing a general framework for addressing reform resear in our
ﬁeld, Fried and Amit consider three core interrelated factors: ange,
communication, and cooperation. At the heart of reform lies ange, whi

is entwined with communication, itself a complex process embracing
diﬀerent populations with varied interests, expertise, and needs. Promoting
ange through reform resear is a signiﬁcant allenge. Researers of
course must consider how their work on reform eﬀects ange and what
the anticipated (and unanticipated) responses to ange might be. e laer
aspect is especially important given that reform movements are not always
successful, especially when rapid anges are expected across many sectors.
As a ﬁnal point, Fried and Amit emphasize the importance of reform
researers being cognizant of the role of values in the reform process. e
perspectives and values of many other stakeholders need to be taken into
consideration including those of other mathematics education researers,
mathematicians, scientists, philosophers, and historians. e importance of
cooperation in undertaking reform research is thus emphasized.
I n Chapter 10, Pedro da Ponte and Chapman update their review of
resear on the education of prospective mathematics teaers from the
second edition of the Handbook to include the period 2006–2013. eir
graphic model of the domain includes an inner core of mathematical
knowledge intersecting with mathematics teaing knowledge and
embedded within the prospective teaer’s professional identity, whi
itself is embedded in the professional community of teaers. Impinging on
this from the outside is a wide range of cultural, institutional, and
professional factors. e review is centered around the three elements of
the inner core, providing continuity with the previous Handbook and
enabling a coherent analysis of trends in the literature, whi occupy the
concluding section of the chapter.
ese trends include continuing “deﬁciencies in prospective teaers’
knowledge of mathematics and mathematics teaing that require special
aention in teaer education,” (p. 293), as well as “a variety of
instructional approaes [that] can make a diﬀerence to the quality of this
knowledge su as building on prospective teaers’ sense making of

mathematics and mathematics learning by involving them in activities that
bear on fundamental mathematical ideas at sool level and focusing on the
learner’s thinking” (p. 293). In terms of the infrastructure of resear,
daPonte and Chapman have noted a paucity of large-scale, objectively
oriented research studies (see also Chapter 29 for a discussion of this point).
Section III concludes with Chapter 11 by Kilpatri and Spangler
addressing an underrepresented domain, namely, educating future
professors of mathematics education. Given that this education is
foundational to the professional growth of future teaers and leaders in
sools, universities, education departments, and other institutions, it is
surprising that limited resear has been devoted to the topic. Kilpatri
and Spangler present an informative and insightful examination of the
comparatively recent establishment of doctoral programs for mathematics
educators, and their growth in the United States and in other countries. e
nature of doctoral programs varies widely, with diﬀerent emphases placed
on course work, dissertations, and ﬁeld experiences. e authors argue that
irrespective of where new professors are eventually employed, they must
be prepared in both mathematics and mathematics education. Doctoral
programs should provide the foundations for the current and future
development of the required mathematical and pedagogical knowledge,
skills, and competencies. At the same time, these programs should provide
future professors with valuable experience in teaing mathematics and
mathematics education.
Kilpatri and Spangler emphasize that irrespective of how su
programs might ange over the years, they must engender in these young
professors a wide-ranging perspective on the ﬁeld and proﬁciencies in
critically analyzing reported resear. We would reiterate these points,
including the importance of a solid knowledge and appreciation of resear
and developments across a range of mathematics topics, and experience in
conducting and critiquing research studies.

Section III: Transformations in Learning Contexts
is third section of the Handbook brings together apters related to the
anging contexts of mathematics education, including the diﬀerent
demands of the workplace and the economy wrought by tenological
innovations, the anging cultural, political, and demographic environment
of the sools and the broader societies, and the anging intellectual
landscape occasioned by complexity theory.
English and Gainsburg (Chapter 12) open the section with examining
problem solving and advancing it beyond the current literature. ey set
the scene by reviewing brieﬂy how problem-solving resear over many
years has yielded numerous pendulum-like swings in recommendations for
mathematics education. Among the debates are the eﬀectiveness of
teaing general heuristics and strategies, the role of mathematical content
(as the means versus the learning goal of problem solving), the role and
relevance of context, and whether social and aﬀective dimensions should be
central concerns of problem-solving education.
English and Gainsburg look beyond these unresolved debates to examine
the literature on the demands of modern work and life. ey consider some
of the drivers of ange in the workplace and everyday life, resultant
anges in the nature of quantitative problems arising in these anging
contexts, and the competencies needed for successful solving of su
problems. e authors then return to the long-standing debates that
introduced the apter and suggest possible resolutions responsive to the
anging context of 21st century problem solving. ey argue that,
although we cannot just transport mathematical problems beyond sool
into the classroom, there are many ways in whi “sool problems” can be
realistically contextualized. e result, English and Gainsburg maintain,
should encompass a transition to more cognitively allenging problems
where students’ curiosity is stimulated, critical thinking and creative

solutions are fostered, and multiple entry and exit points are included to
facilitate increased access by a range of students.
I n Chapter 13, Appelbaum and Stathopoulou address the burgeoning
interest in culture that has emerged in mathematics education in recent
decades. Because individual psyology has dominated our ﬁeld
historically, there is a tendency to regard the new focus on culture as a
unitary alternative. Early in their apter, Appelbaum and Stathopoulou
disabuse us of this premise in the form of a two-dimensional table that
crosses ﬁve notions of culture with six notions of mathematics/mathematics
education, the cells of whi reﬂect distinct interests and orientations “that
have become signiﬁcant in the ﬁeld, including: mathematics as a culture;
funds of knowledge pedagogies; ethnomathematical critiques and
approaes to teaing and learning; popular culture studies; public
pedagogies; and critical mathematics education” (p. 340). Even though
“these are not separate, analytic categories, but mutually informing strands
of interwoven discourse” (p. 340), we risk incoherence in our theories and in
our educational initiatives if we address mathematics and culture without
identifying our particular location within this broad set of discourses. e
apter by Appelbaum and Stathopoulou provides insightful outlines of the
major formations in that landscape, as a valuable resource for orienting
ourselves—as individual researchers and as a community.
Skovsmose and Penteado (Chapter 14) examine through a philosophical
lens the complexities aending to the relation of democratic ideals and
mathematics education. is complexity stems in part from the diﬀerent
forms that democracy has taken—for instance, a Rousseauean participatory
democracy versus notions of representative democracy conceived in terms
of “‘competitive struggle’ [wherein] people’s democratic activity consists
solely in casting their votes” (p. 359). However, as these ideals have played
out, democratic principles have called into play a variety of associated
concepts su as social justice, equality, and freedom, ea just as complex

and contested as democracy, itself. e result is an “aporetic condition” (p.
361) characterized by tensions, uncertainties, and challenges.
Skovsmose and Penteado explore multiple facets of how notions of
democracy have played out in the larger society and in the microcosms of
mathematics education practice. ese ri portraits do not and cannot
cohere; however, “contested concepts might have other functions than
providing analytical clarity and proper justiﬁcations for particular
educational 
approaes”—particularly, 
they 
can 
fuel “pedagogical
imaginations … [that] help to reveal that alternative educational practices
are possible” (p. 365).
In Chapter 15, Rousseau Anderson and Tate home in on the intricacies of
race, class, and equity policies and solarship to organize a review of the
sociology of mathematics education oriented to the U.S. context. e
review is structured around a set of four questions: How does mathematics
education socialize? What role does mathematics education serve in
credentialing? How do various entities in society inﬂuence mathematics
education? What role does mathematics education play in creating and
maintaining inequality? e apter is introduced through a vignee of
teaing in a low socio-economic status–classroom, whi is revisited in the
course of addressing ea of these organizing questions, lending a sense of
coherence and intertextuality to the topic.
In common with many of the authors in this Handbook, Rousseau
Anderson and Tate provide guidance as to how to negotiate the diverse and
oen contradictory theorizations and approaes encountered in the
literature. In particular, race, class, and equity in mathematics education are
informed by a broad array of solarly ﬁelds and theoretical endeavors.
Rousseau Anderson and Tate suggest the virtues and advantages of
organizing mathematics education inquiry as a subdiscipline of the
sociology of education, whi itself is a subdiscipline of sociology. In
addition to providing a broader arena of inﬂuence for our solarship, this

move would facilitate access to constructs and perspectives of sociology
that we currently are neglecting. For instance a “geospatial perspective
would take into account multiple factors at the local level that might be
related to educational aievement and aainment. ese factors would
include … employment and other economic indicators [that] … are well
beyond the scope of traditional mathematics education solarship. Yet,
aention to these factors is necessary to understand the nature of
democratic access at a local level and to design interventions that are likely
to be successful” (p. 391).
I n Chapter 16, de Abreu and Craer focus on the continuities and
discontinuities of mathematics learning in and out of sool: “Our major
interest resides in examining the implications of these [cultural] processes
to the understanding of sool mathematical learning. What makes
mathematical practices to be experienced as continuous or discontinuous
between in school and out of school settings?” (p. 395)
e structure of their apter reﬂects historical shis in the cultural
psyology of mathematics education. “Resear of the late 1970s and early
1980s tested the plausibility of [a sociocultural] theoretical framework. It …
focused on a discussion around the relationship between cognition and
cognitive tools … su as counting systems, and how these were
appropriated and used as cognitive tools” (p. 411) within indigenous
cultures. In the next period, “the framework was broadened to pay
aention to processes of social mediation” (p. 411). is featured a shi in
aention of resear in “sool mathematics … from cross-cultural
comparisons to social practices within the Western societies” (p. 411). e
third turn in this ﬁeld has focused resear in a poststructural direction “on
the person as a participant in multiple mathematical practices. In this
perspective discontinuity is a starting point, and resear explores
trajectories of participation, aempting to make sense of the processes that
result in a person experiencing discontinuity in practices over time and

across practices, and processes that enable ange and facilitate continuity”
(p. 411). Overall, de Abreu and Craer regard these shiing foci of resear
as oﬀering complementary analyses of what contributes to experiencing
continuities and discontinuities across diﬀerent mathematical practices. e
new phase does not erase or discredit what came before.
Complementing English and Gainsburg’s perspectives on 21st century
problem solving, Davis and Simmt (Chapter 17) explore the increasing
prevalence and impact of complex systems in our world, and ultimately on
mathematics teaing and learning. ere is no readily acceptable and
uniﬁed deﬁnition of complexity; rather Davis and Simmt explore it from a
variety of viewpoints: historically; mathematically as a digitally enabled,
modeling-based bran of mathematics; theoretically as the study of
learning systems; and pragmatically as a means to nurture emergent
possibility. Mathematics education is rily implicated at the nexus of
complex interactions among social conditions, cultural tools, and
mathematical content that can enri the development of curriculum and
teaing approaes. Unfortunately, the mathematical aﬀordances of our
complex and interlinked world, including availability and rapid
communication of large data sources, are oen not adequately reﬂected in
today’s mathematics curricula.
Davis and Simmt (and others, e.g., Lesh, 2010) provide a vital service in
recommending and explicating complexity as a core foundation for
curriculum. Complexity arises for mathematics educators not only as an
important subject maer of disciplinary mathematics, widely applied in
STEM disciplines (science, tenology, engineering and mathematics), but
increasingly as a source of insight into the functioning of social systems,
including the social system of mathematics education resear and social
systems of classroom mathematics.
As the resear of English (e.g., 2008, 2013) has shown, even young
learners are capable of dealing with complexity in solving modeling

problems. Incorporating complexity and complex systems within the
mathematics curriculum remains an issue in need of urgent aention,
especially given the increasing demands of complex, data-driven problems
in the work place and society in general.
Section IV: Advances in Research Methodologies
We turn in the fourth section to advances in the methods of resear, with a
particular focus on the relation of theory to method. ompson (Chapter
18) opens the section with a critical analysis of the construct of
“knowledge” as a driver for mu of our resear into the learning and
teaing of mathematics. Knowledge—in the declarative sense of knowing
about—he argues, is separate from the mental semes that underlie our
actions in the world. As an alternative, he proposes a focus on meaning that
reﬂects the inherently subjective constructive process. Consider a boy who
has appended a fourth meter sti to three that are lying end-to-end, and
then declares that the total length has been increased by a meter: “e ild
knows that he added a meter. But what did it mean to him? Did he mean
that he added one more sti called ‘a meter’? Or did he mean that he
added a meter in length that is constituted by centimeters, whi in turn are
constituted by millimeters, whi in turn are constituted by (and so on)” (p.
457). In the apter, ompson outlines a method for developing items and
instruments that focus on teaers’ mathematical meanings for teaing
mathematics, and examines how to link resear and assessment more
intimately than simply using the results of each in the activities of the other.
In Chapter 19, Callingham addresses the allenges of aieving reliable
and trustworthy resear designs within a heterogeneous theoretical
environment. To explore this terrain, she introduces the constructs of
environmental and instrumental context. Environmental context presents

the kinds of allenges to generalizability that stem from the diversity of
contexts in whi mathematics education is practiced, including divisions
across national boundaries, cultural seings, social classes, race and gender
divisions, etc. ough formidably complex, the nature of these allenges
are well understood through the methodological traditions that education
inherits from the various supporting sciences. Instrumental context concerns
the context of the researer, including “the inﬂuence of prior experiences,
previous resear understandings, and personal preferences” (p. 467). ese
allenges are the more daunting in that what we think of as shared
terminologies actually are adapted to one’s personal constraints. For
instance, as Callingham discusses, the notion of Pedagogical Content
Knowledge has been operationalized in very diﬀerent ways in studies in the
United States, Australia, and Europe owing to the cultures of resear
shaping each research team’s interpretive frameworks.
In Chapter 20, Cobb, Jason, and Dunlap make a notable eﬀort toward
institutionalization of design resear methodology by providing an
authoritative guide that gives an account of its essential features, explores
two major forms in detail (classroom instructional design and professional
development), delineates the resear process, and considers limitations.
e most serious of su limitations is what Kelly (2004) described as
absence of an “argumentative grammar” that explains the logic “link[ing]
resear questions to data, data to analysis, and analysis to ﬁnal claims and
assertions” (p. 489), the result being that “design studies la a basis for
warrant for their claims” (Kelly, 2004, p. 119). Cobb, Jason, and Dunlap
offer in this chapter some initial steps toward such a grammar.
Cusi and Malara (Chapter 21) take up the allenge of the
theory/practice gap indicated by “a widespread prejudice about theory
among teaers and practitioners, who oen conceive it as irrelevant for
practice” (p. 504). Aer surveying many dimensions of the problem, they
sele on the quality of teaers’ awareness of their practice as a critical

focus point for engaging them in theoretical exploration. eir apter
recounts Cusi and Malara’s use of a new tool, Multi-commented
Transcripts, for engaging teaers-as-experimenters in serious theoretical
co-reﬂection on their teaing: “e transcripts … are sent by
experimenters-teaers, together with their own comments and reﬂections,
to mentors-researers, who make their own comments and send them
ba to the authors…. Oen, the authors make further interventions in this
cycle, commenting on comments or inserting new ones” (p. 508). is co-
reﬂective process as a kind of apprenticeship in the art of understanding
practice through theory is a promising and provocative vehicle for healing
the theory/practice split.
Concluding this section, Ruthven and Goodild (Chapter 22) link the
domains of solarly knowledge and cra knowledge of teaing through a
“dialogic cycle of knowledge creation” introduced in Ruthven (2002): “In
one phase … solarly knowledge is (re)contextualized and activated within
teaing, stimulating (re)construction of cra knowledge. In the
complementary phase … cra knowledge is elicited and codiﬁed through
researing, stimulating (re)construction of solarly knowledge” (p. 528).
eir apter explores various meanisms—“boundary-spanning didactical
apparatus”—to facilitate this mutual engagement, but with the caution that
these “approaes tend to privilege particular aspects of knowledge
creation and conversion within the dialogic cycle” (p. 537).
Section V: Influences of Advanced Technologies
e ﬁnal section of the Handbook is devoted to the inﬂuences of advanced
tenologies, a theme that was addressed in previous editions. With the
evolution of the digital era, numerous tenologies are emerging and
becoming more ubiquitous in our lives. As Hegedus and Tall ( Chapter 23)

illustrate, these tenologies are aﬀording exciting opportunities for
students to be fully immersed in the learning experiences, enabling them to
connect with ea other, share their ideas and creations, and have ready
access to numerous and diverse resources. Yet the common question
featured in this section is how su ubiquitous and highly usable
tenologies can be used in classrooms in mathematically meaningful ways.
As Hegedus and Tall stress, the potential of tenology as a ange agent
appears unfulfilled.
In addressing the allenge that mathematics educators face in
capitalizing on these tenological advances, Hegedus and Tall investigate
the potential of multimodal tenologies as core foundations for learning
mathematics now and in the future. With a focus on the younger grades,
the authors describe how recent developments in multimodal learning
environments using haptic and multitou tenologies can facilitate
greater access to core mathematical ideas and oﬀer ri insights into long-
term mathematical learning. In doing so, Hegedus and Tall build on strong
theoretical foundations for learning to think mathematically. Speciﬁcally,
they draw upon the well-established work of Tall (2013) and consider the
important role of the fundamental processes of perception, operation, and
reason.
Watson and Fitzallen (Chapter 24) consider technological affordances of a
diﬀerent kind, namely, those of computer soware that target the learning
of statistics. ese aﬀordances, whi scaﬀold and support student learning,
are determined by the inherent features, capabilities, and ﬂexibility of the
soware. Using the soware program TinkerPlots, the authors illustrate
how these aﬀordances can facilitate student learning and assessment across
levels, as well as promote teaer learning. e associated constraints are
also explored, given that some of the soware’s features may hinder
student learning and therefore need to be taken into account when
designing learning experiences. In essence, Watson and Fitzallen move

beyond what soware applications promise to do by highlighting what
students can learn from using soware, in contrast to what they might not
learn, or not learn as easily, without it. At the same time, the authors
consider the associated aﬀordances for teaers as they plan for and
subsequently assess student learning.
Adopting a diﬀerent perspective, Moreno-Armella and Santos-Trigo
(Chapter 25) oﬀer suggestions for reconciling traditional and emerging
approaes to tenology use in mathematics learning. In particular, the
mediating inﬂuence of the sool culture is taken into consideration in
eﬀorts to capitalize on the aﬀordances of new digital tenologies to
enhance students’ access to more powerful mathematical ideas. e authors
point out the tensions between traditional approaes to learning su as
pencil and paper, and the innovative learning opportunities oﬀered by
tenology. Focusing on ideas from geometry and calculus, Moreno-
Armella and Santos-Trigo discuss the design of dynamic teaing models
and activities where new forms of reasoning can emerge.
Extending their work from that reported in the second edition of this
Handbook (English, 2008), Hershkowitz, Taba, and Dreyfus ( Chapter 26)
target the resear processes that were central to the development and
implementation of a large-scale project for a computerized learning
environment at the junior high sool level. Speciﬁcally, the authors
targeted open tenological tools (graphical tools, spreadsheets, dynamic
geometry soware, computer algebra systems) with their ri features
having the potential to enhance students’ learning.
Hershkowitz et al. point out how their resear commenced as design
studies but ultimately yielded basic questions concerning teaing and
learning in a tenological environment. ey illustrate how computerized
environments produce new dilemmas in developing learning experiences in
regular mathematical topics, su as linear equations and geometrical proof
and proving. One of the issues they address in this regard is the role of

students as agents in shis of knowledge between small groups and the
whole class community. Addressing these questions generated a number of
broad theoretical and methodological outcomes, su as creating an
operational deﬁnition of abstraction. is need for su a deﬁnition arose
from asking in the later stages of the project, “What did students learn and
consolidate, and how?” (p. 627)
A diﬀerent, potentially transformative perspective on how tenology
can advance mathematical learning is oﬀered by Pepin, Gueudet,
Yerushalmy, Troue, and Chazan in Chapter 27. Exploring how e-
textbooks can enhance the teaing and learning of mathematics, the
authors initially identify three models: the integrative e-textbook, whi is
basically a digital version of a paper textbook; the evolving or “living e-
textbook,” whi is continuously developing due to input from several
stakeholders; and the interactive e-textbook, whi adopts the form of a
“toolkit model” based on a set of connecting learning objects (tasks,
diagrams, tools) (p. 640). e nature of student-teaer interactions in using
these diﬀerent models is explored, with a particular focus on quality and
coherence considered as central to the design of e-textbooks and hence
subsequent research.
e authors make the important point that is applicable to most
developments in tenology for classroom use: their presence alone is not
suﬃcient. e usual expansive expectations of tenology for educational
advantages have not materialized to produce sustained anges in
education. Nevertheless, there are several examples of where modiﬁcations
to the nature of the tenological object have lead to the development of
new teaing paradigms. A case in point that the authors provide is the
picture album that was transformed into a digital folder, enabling pictures
to perform a totally new visual, social, and semiotic role.
e ﬁnal apter in the section on advanced tenologies explores the
increasing opportunities aﬀorded by digital tenologies in the early

primary sool years (K-2). With a particular focus on the two broad
content domains of number and geometry, in Chapter 28 Sinclair and
Baccaglini-Frank provide an overview of some of the major theoretical
developments from resear on tenology use in these domains. In doing
so, they identify aﬀordances of the tools and the tasks that appear to most
eﬀectively support young ildren’s mathematical engagement. To beer
facilitate the identiﬁcation of these aﬀordances, the authors untangle the
range of tools that are broadly categorized as digital tenologies including
“multipurpose computer-based soware programs, web-based applets,
virtual 
manipulatives, 
programming languages, CD-ROMs, games,
calculators, tou-screen applications and interactive whiteboards” (p. 662).
As Sincalir and Baccaglini-Frank note, the distinction between these various
types is not always apparent. By presenting useful distinguishing features of
these various tenologies, the authors oﬀer a means for teaers to beer
evaluate and select among them in their mathematics planning.
Despite the vast range of digital tools from whi educators and
researers can oose, there is limited information on how particular
design oices might impact ildren’s learning, including how they use
manipulative materials in the classroom. In considering this issue, Sinclair
and Baccaglini-Frank highlight speciﬁc themes that they consider likely to
emerge as signiﬁcant areas of resear, including the aﬀective dimension of
learning, the impact of diﬀerent types of feedba given by the tools and
teaers, and dealing with the constraints these tools present in addition to
the aﬀordances. e last issue is a particularly salient one that has been
emphasized in several apters in this section. As Sinclair and Baccaglini-
Frank stress, in order to fully appreciate the potential of digital tenologies
and their impact on students’ learning, the nature and consequences of su
constraints need to be taken into consideration. is calls for improved
communication among tenology designers, researers, and teaers,
and, we would add, feedback from the students themselves.

e Handbook concludes with a wry reﬂection by Hugh Burkhardt—
winner of the 2013 Excellence in Educational Design prize of the
International Society for Design and Development in Education—on why
“our [research] work on what happens in classrooms at large usually travels
a long path where any causal eﬀect is far from clear” (p. 689). His particular
viewpoint highlights the atomization of the research effort, the tendency for
there to be an imbalance of too many independent research strands, and not
enough sustained, large-scale, multi-researer programs of resear:
“Individual researers, mostly university staﬀ and their graduate students,
make autonomous decisions as to what to work on next” (p. 691). e
problem, he argues, is not the absence of excellent candidate programs that
are strong and deep enough to warrant the focus he is calling for. Rather, he
traces the paucity of large-scale resear initiatives to the infrastructure of
resear support, the reward system for university-based resear, and
what he calls, “the academic value system” (p. 692). is is a summative
critique of mathematics education resear we would do well to reﬂect on
as a community.

References
Arbaugh, F., Herbel-Eisenmann, B., Ramirez, N., Knuth, E., Kranendonk, H., & Reed ander, J.
(2010). Linking resear and practice: e NCTM Resear Agenda Conference Report . Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Bauer, K., & Fisher, F. (2007). e education resear—practice interface revisited: A scripting
perspective. Educational Research and Evaluation, 13, 221–236.
Bridges, D., Smeyers, P., & Smith, R. (2008). Educational resear and the practical judgment of
policy makers. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 42, 5–14.
Broekkamp, H., & Van Hout-Wolters, B. (2007). e gap between educational resear and practice:
A literature review, symposium and questionnaire. Educational Resear and Evaluation, 13,
203–220. Retrieved from http://dare.uva.nl/document/2/52865.
Burkhardt, H., & Soenfeld, A.H. (2003) Improving educational resear: Toward a more useful,
more influential, and better-funded enterprise. Educational Researcher 32(9), 3—14.
California State Department (2014). Science, tenology, engineering, & mathematics (STEM)
information. Retrieved from www.cde.ca.gov/PD/ca/sc/stemintrod.asp (December 16, 2014).
Chafouleas, S. M., & Riley-Tillman, T. C. (2005). Accepting the gap: An introduction to the special
issue on bridging research and practice. Psychology in the Schools, 42, 455–458.
Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy (2002). Bringing evidence-driven progress to education. Report
for the US Department of Education. Washington, DC, Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy.
De Vries, B., & Pieters, J. (2007). Knowledge sharing at conferences. Educational Resear Evaluation,
13, 237–247.
Edwards, A., Sebba, J., & Riinson, M. (2007). Working with users: Some implications for
educational research. British Educational Research Journal, 33, 647–661.
English, L. D. (Ed.) (2008). Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd
Edition). New York: Routledge.
English, L. D. (2013). Complex modelling in the primary and middle sool years: An
interdisciplinary approa. In G. Stillman, G. Kaiser, W. Blum, and J. Brown (Eds.),
Mathematical modelling: Connecting to practice—Teaing practice and the practice of applied
mathematicians (pp. 491–505). New York: Springer.

English, L. D., & King, D. (2015). Integrating STEM Learning through Engineering Design: Fourth-
Grade Students’ Investigations in Aerospace. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Gore, J. M., & Gitlin, A.D. (2004). [Re]Visioning the academic–teaer divide: Power and knowledge
in the educational community. Teachers and Teaching, 10, 35–58.
Hammersley, M. (2002). Educational research, policy making and practice. London: Paul Chapman.
Heid, M. K. (2012). Editorial: Some thoughts on the importance of the community and on the
allenge of identifying great resear allenges in mathematics education. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 43(5), 502–508.
Honey, M., Pearson, G., & Sweingruber, H. (Eds.). (2014). STEM integration in K-12 Education:
Status, prospects, and an agenda for research. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Kelly, A. E. (2004). Design resear in education: Yes, but is it methodological? Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 13, 115–128.
Kennedy, M. M. (1997). e connection between resear and practice. Educational Researer,
26(7), 4–12.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). e structure of scientiﬁc revolutions  (enlarged edition). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Laapelle, C. P., & Cunningham, C. M. (2014). Engineering in elementary sools. In S. Purzer, J.
Stroble, & M. Cardella (Eds.). Engineering in pre-college seings: Resear in synthesizing
research, policy, and practices (pp. 61–88). Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.
Lesh, R. (2010). e importance of complex systems in K–12 mathematics education. In B. Sriraman
& L. D. English (Eds.), eories of mathematics education: seeking new frontiers (pp. 563–566).
Berlin: Springer.
Levin, J. R., & O’Donnell, A.M. (1999). What to do about educational resear’s credibility gaps?
Issues in Education, 5(2), 177–229.
Lumley, T., & Mendelovits, J. (2012). How well do young people deal with contradictory and
unreliable information on line? What the PISA digital reading assessment tells us. Paper
presented at the Annual Conference of the American Educational Resear Association,
Vancouver, WA.
Marginson, S., Tytler, R., Freeman, B., & Roberts, K. (2013). STEM: Country comparisons:
International comparisons of science, tenology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)

education. Melbourne: Australian Academy of Learned Academies.
Mortimore, P. (2000). Does educational resear maer? British Educational Research Journal, 26, 5–
24.
National Council for Accreditation of Teaer Education. (2002). Professional standards for the
accreditation of schools, colleges, and departments of education. Washington DC: Author.
National Resear Council. (2002). Scientiﬁc resear in education. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
National Resear Council. (2014). STEM learning is everywhere: Summary of a convocation on
building learning systems. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Science and Tenology Council (May, 2013). Federal science, tenology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education: 5-year strategic plan. A report from the Commiee on STEM
Education. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President of the United States.
Nuthall, G., (2004). Relating classroom teaing to student learning: A critical analysis of why
resear has failed to bridge the theory-practice gap. Harvard Educational Review,74(3), 273–
306. Retrieved from http://her.hepg.org/content/e08k1276713824u5/fulltext.pdf.
OECD (2013). PISA 2012 Results: What students know and can do: Student performance in
mathematics, reading and science. Retrieved from www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-
results.htm.
Oﬃce of the Chief Scientist (2013). Science, tenology, engineering and mathematics in the
national interest: A strategic approach. Canberra: Australian Government.
Oﬃce of the Chief Scientist (2014). Benmarking Australian science, tenology, engineering and
mathematics. Canberra: Australian Government.
Onderwijsraad. (2003). Kennis van onderwijs: Ontwikkeling en benuing [Knowledge about
education: development and utilization]. The Hague: Author.
Purzer, S., Stroble, J., & Cardella, M. E. (Eds.). (2014). Engineering in pre-college seings: Synthesizing
research, policy, and practices. Purdue, IN: Purdue University.
Ruthven, K. (2002). Linking researing with teaing: Towards synergy of solarly and cra
knowledge. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education
(pp. 581–598). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ruthven, K., & Goodild, S. (2008). Linking researing with teaing: Towards synergy of

solarly and cra knowledge. In L. D. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in
mathematics education (2nd Ed.) (pp. 565–592). New York: Routledge.
STEM Task Force Report (2014). Innovate: A blueprint for science, tenology, engineering, and
mathematics in California public education. Dublin, CA: Californians Dedicated to Education
Foundation.
Tall, D. O. (2013). How humans learn to think mathematically: Exploring the three worlds of
mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vanderlinde, R., & van Braak, J. (2010). e gap between educational resear and practice: Views of
teaers, sool leaders, intermediaries and researers. British Educational Resear Journal,
36(2), 
299–316. 
doi:10.1080/01411920902919257. 
Retrieved 
from
www.academia.edu/526808/The_gap_between_educational_research_and_practice_views_of_teac
Walkington, C., Nathan, M., Wolfgram, M., Alibali, M., & Srisurian, R. (2014). Bridges and barriers
to constructing conceptual cohesion across modalities and temporalities: Challenges of STEM
integration in the pre-college engineering classroom. In S. Purzer, J. Strobel, & M. Cardella (Eds.).
Engineering in pre-college seings: Resear into practice (pp. 183—210). West Lafayee, IN:
Purdue University Press.
Was, T., Duncan, G., Siegler, R., & Davis-Kean, P. (2014). What’s past is prologue: Relations
between early mathematics knowledge and high sool aievement. Educational Researer, 43
(7), 352–360.

2 Perspectives on Priority Mathematics
Education
Unpacking and Understanding a Complex
Relationship Linking Teacher Knowledge,
Teaching, and Learning
Charalambos Y.Charalambous and Demetra
Pitta-Pantazi
University of Cyprus
In the 1960s and early 1970s, two seminal reports (Coleman et al., 1966;
Jens et al., 1972) questioned the contribution of teaers and sools to
student learning. Since then, heated debates have ensued, trying to prove
that teaers and sools do maer for what students learn. Several studies
undertaken since the 1970s have repeatedly documented the teaers’ role
in student learning (Coran-Smith, 2003; Nye, Konstantopoulos, & Hedges,
2004; Rowan, Correnti, & Miller, 2002). Teaer eﬀects, in particular, have
been found to explain a higher percentage of variance in student
aievement compared to sool-level or system-level eﬀects (see Luyten,
2003; Muijs & Reynolds, 2000; Seerens & Bosker, 1997). Teaer eﬀects
have also been found to be cumulative and to last over a sequence of years
(Konstantopoulos & Chung, 2011; Rivers & Sanders, 2002). Aempting to
understand what contributes to student learning, several studies over the
past four decades have suggested that what maers most is what teaers
do in the classroom (Brophy & Good, 1986; Gallagher, 2004; Muijs &

Reynolds, 2000; Stronge, Ward, & Grant, 2011)—that is teaing per se—
rather than diﬀerent teaer aributes, su as their beliefs or job
satisfaction (see Bori, 1992; Creemers & Kyriakides, 2008), their
baground qualiﬁcations (Palardy & Rumberger, 2008), or the resources
made available to them (Cohen, Raudenbush, & Ball, 2003). Despite these
encouraging results, as Hiebert and Grouws (2007) remind us, the core
question in educational resear lingers: “What is it, exactly, about teaing
that influences student learning?” (p. 371).
In this apter, we engage with this question, aempting to understand
what resear has suggested about the link between teaing and learning.
Broadening our focus, we also add another link to the ain—teaer
knowledge—thus, 
considering the complex association among teaer
knowledge, instructional quality, and student learning . By adding teaer
knowledge to the mix, we do not underestimate several other personal
resources that teaers bring to the equation of teaing and learning (see
Kennedy, 2010). We, however, consider teaer knowledge not only
because of the signiﬁcant work that has been accrued during the last decade
in this arena, but also because Mewborn’s (2003) argument about “a
complicated relationship [that] exists among teaers’ knowledge, their
teaing practices, and student learning [and whi] resear has yet to
untangle” (p. 47) is, by and large, still pertinent. In fact, notwithstanding the
several advancements that have been made during the last decade in beer
conceptualizing 
and 
measuring 
the 
three 
components 
of 
the
aforementioned ain, a range of open issues remain to be addressed if we
are to beer understand how the resources that teaers bring to
instruction can inform their practice, and how their practice, in turn, can
inform student learning. In doing so, a stronger link between resear and
practice—a still unfulﬁlled demand (see Arbaugh et al., 2010; Langrall, 2014)
—could be forged.
Developing a beer understanding of this relationship is both crucial and

timely. In an era of intense economic crisis during whi the accountability
pressure exercised on teaers is intensiﬁed (Koretz, 2008; Papay, 2012) and
the role and contribution of teaer education programs is severely debated
(Grossman, 2008), unpaing and understanding this relationship can oﬀer
signiﬁcant insights for teaer preparation and ongoing professional
development. is becomes even more critical for mathematics, given that
during the last decade the mathematics curricula in many countries have
undergone notable reforms that impose increased demands on teaers and
students alike.
To examine what has been accomplished over the past decade with
respect to understanding this complex relationship and sket priorities for
future resear, in this apter we ﬁrst parse the ain into its three
constituent components and examine advancements made with respect to
ea link. We then bring these three links together and explore connections
between and among them. To engage in this work, we started our
exploration by ﬁrst examining review studies in handbook apters (e.g.,
Handbook of Resear on Mathematics Teaing and Learning, Handbook
of International Resear in Mathematics Education, Handbook of Resear
on Teaing, Handbook of Resear on the Psyology of Mathematics
Education, 
and e International Handbook of Mathematics Teaer
Education). Reviewing these works helped identify both what has been
accomplished in the past and what have been considered as open issues. We
then reviewed studies published during the last decade in mathematics
education journals (e.g., Educational Studies in Mathematics, Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, Journal for Mathematics Teaer Education,
Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, Mathematical inking and
Learning, and ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics Education),
and teaching education journals (e.g., American Education Research Journal,
Cognition and Instruction, Learning and Instruction, and Teaing and
Teacher Education). Our goal in reviewing these works was threefold: ﬁrst,

to identify trends with respect to studying ea of the three ain
components separately or combinations thereof; second, to explore whether
open issues, as highlighted in handbook review apters, have been
addressed; and third, to identify lingering questions and priorities for future
studies.
We hasten to note, however, that our review is neither comprehensive
nor exhaustive—and it could not be, given that ea link in the ain could
comprise a review apter in and of itself. What is reported here should be
seen as a Janus-faced approa to look baward—and delineate
advancements and trends in the ﬁelds of teaer knowledge, teaing, and
student learning—and, by looking forward, consider directions for future
work. In essence, we present what we consider to be key ﬁndings and
developments as a basis for discussion, and for further resear and
development. As happens with any su approa, our approa in
reviewing these studies might have constrained both what we have been
able to sket for the past or present and the priorities we oﬀer for the
future.
In this context, this apter is organized into four sections. Ea of the
ﬁrst three sections focuses on one link in the ain: teaer knowledge,
teaing, and student learning, respectively. Within ea of these sections,
we ﬁrst delineate advancements made at both theoretical and
methodological fronts. We also examine conceptual and methodological
trends observed during the past 10 years, and conclude with open issues.
Considering the ain as a uniﬁed whole, in the last section we identify
trends observed during the last decade with respect to exploring the
conglomerate of the three components, and outline priorities for future
research.

Teacher Knowledge: Understanding a Key Teacher
Resource
at teaer knowledge maers for student learning is neither a novel nor
a particularly counterintuitive idea. In fact, thousands of years ago, the
philosopher and scientist Aristotle distinguished between someone who just
learns and possesses the subject matter—whom he called a knower—and the
person who does not only know the content, but learns it in su a way so
as to be equipped to tea it—whom he called a master (see Mason, 2008).
e layperson opinion also holds that “you cannot learn from a teaer that
does not know.” However, during the 20th century, empirical evidence
corroborating the role of teaer knowledge in student learning has been
mixed at best and inconclusive at worst. For example, in his meta-analysis
of studies conducted between 1960 and 1976 examining the eﬀects of
teaer knowledge on student performance, Begle (1979) concluded that
these eﬀects “seem to be far less powerful than most of us had realized” (p.
54), and urged for a redirection of the resear foci away from teaers and
their personal characteristics.
Solarly interest in teaers’ knowledge was revitalized aer Shulman’s
(1986) seminal work. Shulman not only called for increased aention to the
subject maer itself, but also set the stage for beer conceptualizing the
knowledge needed for the work of teaing. Whereas most educational
production function studies (e.g., Monk, 1994) were concerned solely with
exploring proxies of teaer knowledge, su as the courses taken or the
credentials held, Shulman talked about teaer knowledge as comprising
seven diﬀerent components. e most crucial among them were Subject-
Maer Knowledge (SMK), General Pedagogical Knowledge (PK), and
Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK)—with the laer component
aracting amassed solarly interest during the last three decades (see Ball,
ames, & Phelps, 2008; Depaepe, Versaﬀel, & Keltermans, 2013;

Graeber & Tirosh, 2008). Capitalizing on or motivated by Shulman’s work,
solars during the last decade have made signiﬁcant advancements in both
conceptualizing and measuring the knowledge needed to tea
mathematics. In what follows, we consider these advancements while at the
same time discuss open issues.
Conceptualizing the Knowledge Needed to Teach
Mathematics
Talking about the unresolved problem of teaers’ mathematical
knowledge, at the dawn of the 21st century, Ball, Lubienski, and Mewborn
(2001) called for studying teaer knowledge in the context of teaing.
ey maintained that to beer understand this knowledge, we need to
explore not only how teaers know the content, but also “what they are
able to mobilize mathematically in the course of teaing” (p. 451). It was,
therefore, not a coincidence that during the last decade, largely following a
practice-based approa (see Ball & Bass, 2003), several solars have
oﬀered diﬀerent conceptualizations about this knowledge. In this section
we review selected conceptualizations that have been advanced and/or
reﬁned during the last decade, then engage in a discussion on pressing
questions and issues for further elaboration in the years to come.1
Analyzing 24 videotaped lessons oﬀered by prospective teaers during
their practicum training, and following a grounded-theory approa,
Rowland and colleagues (Rowland, 2008a; Rowland, Hustep, & waites,
2005) developed a four-dimensional framework to capture the knowledge
needed to tea mathematics. Identiﬁed as Knowledge artet (KQ), this
framework organizes the 17 components that these solars came up with
into four dimensions: foundations, whi includes knowledge, beliefs, and
understanding acquired during preservice teaing; transformations, whi

corresponds to oice and use of examples, representations, and
demonstrations; connections, that captures the knowledge displayed when
teaers draw connections between ideas; and contingency, whi pertains
to the knowledge needed to respond to unanticipated events that occur
during instruction. Instead of paying particular emphasis to distinguishing
between diﬀerent knowledge components—as was the case in Shulman’s
framework and the framework considered next—the developers of KQ
gave more aention to instances in whi knowledge surfaces during
instruction.
Largely analyzing lessons taught by Deborah Ball while teaing a third-
grade class for an entire year, solars at the University of Miigan have
advanced the notion of mathematical knowledge for teaing (MKT, see
Ball et al., 2008). Building on, reﬁning, and extending Shulman’s distinction
between SMK and PCK, this resear group proposed a six-domain
framework, with the three former components corresponding to SMK, and
the laer three to PCK: common content knowledge, whi captures
mathematical knowledge and skills possessed by professionals outside of
teaing; specialized content knowledge, whi pertains to knowledge and
skills unique to teaing mathematics; horizon knowledge, whi enables
teaers to see how the content being taught is situated in and connected to
the broader disciplinary territory; knowledge of content and students,
whi 
requires 
familiarity 
with 
both 
mathematics 
and 
student
mathematical thinking and misconceptions; knowledge of content and
teaching, whi requires mathematical knowledge of the design of
instruction; and knowledge of content and the curriculum, whi largely
builds on Shulman’s knowledge of instructional materials and programs.
While the prior two frameworks might be considered to aend to more
personal aspects of knowledge, Davis and colleagues’ (Davis & Simmt,
2006) mathematics for teaing pays particular aention to the dynamic
and collective aspect of teaer knowledge—not only as something to be

possessed and held, but also as something to be developed through
interacting with other colleagues. More recently, building on Ma’s (1999)
idea of profound understanding of fundamental mathematics, Davis and
Renert (2013) coined the term profound understanding of emergent
mathematics to denote the dynamic, evolving, complex, and distributed
aracter of this knowledge,2 whi is seen as a learnable participatory
disposition, rather than as a fixed body of knowledge to be mastered.
Other conceptualizations of teaer knowledge have also been advanced
during the last decade, including mathematics for teaing (Adler & Davis,
2006; Adler & Huillet, 2008), and knowledge for teaing mathematics
proposed in the context of the international TEDS-M study (Tao et al.,
2012). Frameworks speciﬁcally developed to capture the knowledge needed
to tea particular content strands have also been developed (e.g., in
algebra, the Knowledge of Algebra for Teaing  framework proposed by
McCrory, Floden, Ferrini-Mundy, Reckase, & Senk, 2012).
e availability of all these diﬀerent theoretical frameworks is a
signiﬁcant asset not only for studying the nature of teaer knowledge, but
also for exploring its relationship with teaing quality and student learning
(a topic we consider later). At the same time, however, the existence of
several 
theoretical 
frameworks 
and 
the 
rate 
at 
whi 
su
conceptualizations appear to accumulate raise a set of issues that are worth
considering in the coming years:
To what extent and in what particular ways do these frameworks offer
diﬀerent perspectives for studying the knowledge needed for teaing
the subject maer eﬀectively? Are these frameworks complementary?
If so, how?
To what extent are they compatible with and synergistic to ea other,
especially when it comes to frameworks that emphasize either the
individual nature or the collective/social aspect of teacher knowledge?

To what degree could/should these frameworks be combined to oﬀer
a beer understanding of the knowledge that teaers need to possess
and develop to effectively teach mathematics?
Aempts to address su questions have been undertaken by diﬀerent
solars in several venues and occasions, including a resear forum
conducted during the 33rd Conference of the International Group for the
Psyology of Mathematics Education (see Ball, Charalambous, ames, &
Lewis, 2009; Even, 2009; Neubrand, 2009), a working session in the 8th
Congress of European Resear in Mathematics Education (e.g., Clivaz,
2013), and a review book apter that compared and synthesized diﬀerent
theoretical conceptualizations (Petrou & Goulding, 2011). Pointing to
similarities across the frameworks proposed and discussing their
aﬀordances and limitations, these solars have suggested that, despite
some overlaps, these frameworks are complementary to a certain degree.
Nevertheless, mu more work is needed to more comprehensively and
convincingly address the aforementioned questions, given the limitations of
the aempts already undertaken toward this direction (see Ruthven, 2011,
pp. 85–86).
Despite the accumulating work related to theorizing and conceptualizing
the knowledge needed to tea mathematics, studies empirically validating
the theoretical constructs or frameworks proposed thus far are relatively
scarce. For example, in their review of studies on PCK conducted in
mathematics, Depaepe et al. (2013) list only a handful of studies that
aempted to validate the distinction between PCK and SMK. Interestingly,
one of the few large-scale studies conducted toward this direction (Krauss,
Brunner, et al., 2008) showed that PCK and SMK are distinguishable for
non-Gymnasium rather than for Gymnasium teaers, thus casting serious
doubts about the distinguishability of diﬀerent components of teaer
knowledge. Similarly, empirical studies on MKT yielded mixed results

about the extent to whi the diﬀerent MKT components are clearly
distinct from ea other (Hill, 2007, 2010; Hill, Ball, & Silling, 2008; Hill,
Silling, & Ball, 2004). ese equivocal ﬁndings, alongside the la of
studies that empirically support the construct validity of other theoretical
frameworks, su as KQ, and the fact that doubts are cast about the
multidimensionality of teaer knowledge at both theoretical (see Bednarz
& Proulx, 2009; Huillet, 2009) and empirical levels (e.g., Beswi,
Callingham, & Watson, 2012), raise another set of pressing questions
warranting consideration:
To what extent is teaer knowledge multidimensional, as suggested
by diﬀerent theoretical frameworks and conceptualizations? Can this
multidimensionality be empirically supported?
If teaer knowledge is multidimensional, how are the diﬀerent
components connected to each other?
What are the implications of a multidimensional vs. a unidimensional
construct of teaer knowledge for teaer initial preparation and
teaer ongoing professional development and learning? To eo
Graeber and Tirosh (2008), are some components of teaer
knowledge more suitable for initial teaer education and others more
appropriate for later stages of teachers’ professional development?
Closely related to the conceptualization of teaer knowledge are the issues
of applicability and transferability. By applicability, we refer to the extent
to whi the diﬀerent conceptualizations generated to capture teaer
knowledge also apply to content domains and educational levels beyond
those in whi they were developed. e reader is reminded that several of
the frameworks discussed so far were developed boom-up by considering
teaing mathematics in elementary grades, and mostly with respect to
number sense and operations. By transferability, we consider the degree to

whi these conceptualizations transfer across borders and are applicable to
educational seings other than those in whi they were initiated.
Considering issues of transferability is not trivial, given that most of the
frameworks discussed above have been developed and elaborated in
Western countries. During the past decade signiﬁcant advancements have
been made at both fronts.
With respect to applicability, whereas earlier works were mostly
focusing on number sense and operations (e.g., fractions, multiplication, and
division), solars have increasingly aended to other subject strands,
including advanced algebra (e.g., Bair & Ri, 2011; McCrory et al., 2012;
Yakes & Star, 2011; Zaariades, Christou, & Pia-Pantazi, 2013);
measurement (e.g., Murphy, 2012), geometry (Herbst & Kosko, 2012; Nason,
Chalmers, & Yeh, 2012; Yanik, 2011), and statistics (Groth & Bergner, 2006,
2013). Although not all of these works necessarily examine the applicability
of the aforementioned frameworks to diﬀerent content strands, the very
fact that researers have expanded their foci to also include these topics
highlights a trend that appears to be beneﬁcial in the future—especially
when combined with aempts to explore teaer knowledge in these
content strands by employing diﬀerent theoretical conceptualizations.
Another trend pertains to shiing emphasis from merely elementary
education to also considering secondary education. Largely missing from
the picture are, however, studies that explore teaer knowledge for
teaing pre-primary grades or tertiary education, with only some minor
exceptions (e.g., Tsamir, Tirosh, Levenson, Taba, & Barkai, 2014; Wagner,
Speer, & Rossa, 2007; Zazkis & Zazkis, 2011). Given that a recent
exploration that compared the knowledge needed to tea mathematics to
elementary and secondary students (Rowland, 2012) has pointed to different
demands imposed on teaers, investigating the applicability of diﬀerent
frameworks and constructs to diﬀerent educational levels seems
inescapable. In this respect, addressing the following questions appears to

be consequential:
How applicable are the theoretical frameworks developed to examine
teaer knowledge to diﬀerent content strands and to various levels of
sooling (pre-primary, primary, lower secondary, higher secondary,
and tertiary education)?
To what degree can our insights about the knowledge needed to tea
mathematics be broadened by considering less-emphasized topics
(su as geometry, statistics, data, and probability) or less-investigated
educational levels?
With respect to transferability, recently we have witnessed aempts to
explore whether diﬀerent theoretical frameworks (and measurement tools)
are applicable to European (Delaney, Ball, Hill, Silling, & Zopf, 2008; Ng,
Mosvold, & Fauskanger, 2012), Asian (Kwon, ames, & Pang, 2012; Ng,
2012), and African countries (Cole, 2012). ese and other studies (e.g.,
Andrews, 2011; Pepin, 2011; Tao et al., 2012) have shown the importance
of exploring issues of transferability, since diﬀerences were found not only
in speciﬁc items used to measure teaer knowledge, but also with respect
to diﬀerent teaing practices themselves. For example, as Pepin’s (2011)
work revealed, an apparently global practice—that of listening to student
ideas—was manifested in dissimilar ways across educational systems, thus
imposing diﬀerent knowledge demands on teaers across systems. From
this respect, the following questions that have started aracting resear
interest (see Stylianides & Delaney, 2011) should continue engaging
scholarly attention:
To what extent are the theoretical constructs and frameworks
discussed earlier generic, in the sense that they travel across diﬀerent
educational settings, systems, and cultures?

What aspects of them might be more culture-speciﬁc and why might
this be the case? What might this suggest about the frameworks
themselves and what implications could it have for teaer education
in particular contexts?
Before departing from issues of theorizing and conceptualizing teaer
knowledge, another trend observed during recent years merits discussion.
Earlier works on teaer knowledge—especially those conducted in the
1990s (e.g., Cohen, 1990; Wilson, 1990) as well as more recent ones (e.g.,
Charalambous, Hill, & Mitell, 2012; Lewis & Blunk, 2012; Lo & Luo, 2012;
Rowland et al., 2005; Sleep & Eskelson, 2012)—seem to view teaer
knowledge from a more static perspective, examining the knowledge
possessed by teaers or la thereof. More recently, there seems to be a
tendency toward also examining how teaer knowledge can be enhanced,
thus viewing teaer knowledge from a more dynamic perspective, whi
is more consonant with the idea of ongoing teaer development. Key in
these studies is the structuring of an arena that can facilitate the
development of teaers’ learning, be it in the context of preservice
education courses (e.g., Buholtz & Kaiser, 2013; Nason et al., 2012; Steele,
Hillen, & Smith, 2013), in the context of ﬁeld placement (Philipp et al.,
2007), or through teaer professional development that can take diﬀerent
forms and formats, ranging from Japanese “open lessons” (e.g., Miyakawa
& Winsløw, 2013), to “problem-solving cycles” (e.g., Koellner et al., 2007),
to guided reﬂection on practice using certain theoretical conceptualizations
(Bell, Wilson, Higgins, & McCoa, 2010; Boston, 2013; Turner, 2012), or
alternative certiﬁcation programs (e.g., Lannin et al., 2013). Given recent
studies documenting the differential effect that the same course can have on
the development of teaers’ knowledge (Lannin et al., 2013), but also
given the promising results yielded from the aforementioned studies, in the
years to come, solars could devote concerted eﬀorts to address inquiries

such as:
What speciﬁc aspects of teaer initial preparation/ongoing education
endeavors facilitate (or constrain) the development of teaer
knowledge?
If teaer knowledge is multidimensional, how do the diﬀerent
components (co-)develop? Are some components prerequisites for the
development of others?
How does teaer knowledge evolve? Are there distinct trajectories in
the development of teaers’ learning and how might these be
aﬀected by other teaer personal resources (beliefs, identities, etc.) or
other instructional and contextual resources (e.g., curriculum
materials)?
e list of these questions is by no means exhaustive. It, however, points to
what we regard a fruitful arena for directing resear on teaer
knowledge, and one that can help link resear and practice. With that in
mind, we now turn to issues pertaining to measuring teacher knowledge.
Measuring the Knowledge Needed to Teach
Mathematics
During the 1990s, a widely employed approa to measure the knowledge
needed to tea mathematics was to investigate teaers’ practice. By
observing teaers’ lessons, solars were drawing inferences about the
presence or absence of teaer knowledge. e last decade has seen a
movement toward more and more complex approaes for measuring this
knowledge (see Hill, Sleep, Lewis, & Ball, 2007).
For example, the Learning Mathematics for Teaing group has

developed and validated a set of paper-and-pencil multiple-oice
instruments designed to capture diﬀerent manifestations of teaers’ MKT.
To a large extent these instruments were found to capture knowledge
entailed in teaing the subject maer rather than other personal
competencies (see Hill, Ball, Blunk, Goﬀney, & Rowan, 2007; Silling,
Blunk, & Hill, 2007). Other groups have used open-ended questions
describing diﬀerent scenarios to whi teaers are asked to respond (e.g.,
Baumert et al., 2010; Tao et al., 2012). For instance, in the context of the
Cognitive Activation project (Baumert et al., 2010; Krauss, Baumert, et al.,
2008), teaer knowledge was measured by a paper-and-pencil test asking
teaers 
to 
identify 
multiple 
solution 
paths, 
recognize 
student
misconceptions, and oﬀer explanations, etc. Using these instruments—either
those comprising closed-ended questions or those involving open-ended
prompts—has enabled researers to conduct large-scale studies, whi
marks a signiﬁcant departure from the single or multiple case-studies
carried out during the 1990s.
Beyond the typical paper-and-pencil tests, during the last decade several
other approaes have been employed to gauge teaer knowledge. ese
include, for instance, using video clips of mathematics lessons as stimuli to
elicit teaer knowledge (Kersting, 2008; Kersting et al., 2010); employing
simulations of teaing, whi invite teaers to comment on the
interactions of animated teaer cartoon aracters with students
(Charalambous, 2008); immersing teaers in post-lesson reﬂections on
their lesson plans and practice (I˙mre & Akkoç, 2012); and engaging
teachers in video-based prediction assessments (Norton et al., 2011).
As has been the case with diﬀerent conceptualizations of teaer
knowledge, aempts have recently been observed to juxtapose these
diﬀerent measurement approaes and examine their relative contribution.
For example, Kersting and colleagues (Kersting, Givvin, ompson,
Santagata, & Stigler, 2012) showed that a classroom-video analysis measure

of teaers’ knowledge, although moderately related to a paper-and-pencil
multiple oice test measuring this knowledge (r = .41), was more
predictive in terms of both instructional quality and student learning.
Examining gains in teaers’ MKT during a K–8 mathematics
content/pedagogy hybrid course and a general mathematics content course,
Copur-Gencturk and Lubienski (2013) showed that two diﬀerent paper-
and-pencil tests captured diﬀerent aspects of the growth in teaers’
learning. Whereas the former seemed to be more conducive to gauging
growth in teaers’ common content and specialized content knowledge,
the laer lent itself to tapping anges only in teaers’ common content
knowledge.
Other scholarly attempts have also been directed to examining the extent
to whi certain measures of teaer knowledge (or items thereof) are
culturally sensitive, providing evidence that this is a legitimate concern. For
instance, an international comparative study that examined teaers’
knowledge across seven countries suggested that diﬀerences in the format,
content, and the cognitive demands of the items used in the test had an
impact on teachers’ performance (Blömeke, Suhl, & Döhrmann, 2013).
e work that has been pursued during the last years in the arena of
measuring teaer knowledge, as brieﬂy delineated earlier, raises a gamut
of questions that are worth considering in the future. Some of these
questions have already aracted solarly interest, but, by and large,
remain partly addressed; others have not received the level of aention
they deserve:
What are the aﬀordances and limitations of diﬀerent approaes in
measuring teacher knowledge?
Given the dynamic aracter of teaer knowledge, as postulated by
diﬀerent theoretical frameworks, what approaes (or combinations
thereof) can better capture teacher knowledge?

How sensitive are the measures of teaer knowledge to the
measurement approaes employed? To what extent are certain
measures of teaer knowledge culturally sensitive and what might
contribute to this sensitivity?
If teaer knowledge is multidimensional, can certain aspects of
teaer knowledge be captured by certain approaes? Could a
combination of approaes help beer portray teaers’ knowledge,
and more importantly changes thereof?
If teaer knowledge is distributed across teaers, how can this
knowledge best be measured (e.g., through collaborative planning,
through collectively analyzing and reﬂecting on instruction, etc.)?
What inferences can be drawn from such measurements?
Measuring teaer knowledge is, of course, not a goal in and of itself, since
solarly interest lies in examining the contribution of teaer knowledge
to instructional quality and student learning—an issue we elaborate in the
last section of this apter. However, for the time being, it is worth
mentioning that su aempts need to take into consideration whether the
knowledge measures are aligned with the aspects of instructional quality
under consideration and student learning. is is not trivial given recent
ﬁndings showing teaers’ performance in more “local” knowledge items
(i.e., items related to the content of instruction) to be more highly
associated with teaers’ instructional performance, as compared to other
items that capture teaer knowledge more holistically (e.g., Hill &
Charalambous, 2012). is raises another question that ought to be
considered in the years to come, if more progress is to be made in exploring
associations between teaer knowledge, instructional quality, and student
learning:
At what level of granularity should we measure teaer knowledge to

ensure its predictive validity, but at the same time maintain the
generalizability of the inferences that can be drawn from su
explorations?
e list of questions with respect to both conceptualizing and measuring
teaer knowledge, as discussed earlier, should be considered as sketing
venues for future explorations rather than as oﬀering an exhaustive
mapping of the terrain. Even so, to eo Askew (2008), “It seems there is
plenty to keep researers in this ﬁeld going for many more years yet” (p.
32). Keeping that in mind, we now turn to the next link of the ain:
teaching and instructional quality.

Teaching and Instructional Quality: Looking
Inside Another Complex Terrain
If teaer knowledge is hard to conceptualize and measure, deﬁning,
studying, and measuring teaing and its quality is mu more complicated.
In fact, although there is wide consensus that teaers and teaing do
maer for student learning, what comprises teaing—and especially
quality teaing—and how it can be measured constitutes one of the biggest
conundrums faced by educational researers (see Coran-Smith, 2003;
Croninger, Valli, & Chambliss, 2012; Franke, Kazemi, & Baey, 2007;
Hiebert & Grouws, 2007). As Coran-Smith (2003) aptly puts it, “Although
there is great consensus that teaing quality maers, there is lile
consensus about most other maers related to teaing quality” (p. 97). In
this context, we contemplate two fundamental issues: ﬁrst, we consider
what teaing is (and consequently how we can deﬁne and study teaing
quality); second, we explore the advancements made in measuring teaing
and its quality.
Conceptualizing and Studying Teaching and
Teaching Quality
According to Hiebert and Grouws (2007), the ﬁrst step in exploring any
connections of teaing quality to its contributors and outcomes is to define
teaing. Synthesizing prior deﬁnitions, Hiebert and Grouws (2007)
delineate teaing as consisting “of classroom interactions among teaers
and students around content directed toward facilitating students’
aievement of learning goals” (p. 372). To this, we add that these
interactions occur in and are shaped by certain contexts.
e two components of this deﬁnition—interactions and learning goals—

capture 
the 
essence 
of 
Fenstermaer 
and 
Riardson’s 
(2005)
conceptualization of quality teaing. For these solars, quality teaing is
the synthesis of good and successful teaching. When defining good teaching,
they refer to the teaer-students interactions around the content. ey
maintain:
B y good teaing we mean that the content taught accords with disciplinary standards of
adequacy and completeness, and that the methods employed are age appropriate, morally
defensible, and undertaken with the intention of enhancing the learner’s competence with
respect to the content studied.
(p. 192)
e successful component accords with the idea of promoting certain
learning goals and bringing about speciﬁc learning outcomes. Otherwise
stated, “successful teaing is the teaing that produces results, it ‘leads to
learning’” (Fenstermacher & Richardson, 2005, p. 192).
By integrating good and successful teaing, the abovementioned
deﬁnition could oﬀer a good starting point for studying teaing. However,
su a deﬁnition in and of itself does not suﬃce for understanding the
complex work of teaing. In contrast, to eﬀectively unpa and
understand this work, solars are in need of theoretical frameworks that
decompose teaing into its constituent components and explore the
meanisms through and the conditions under whi these components can
contribute to student learning. Unfortunately, despite more than a century
of resear on specifying and studying eﬀective teaing, perhaps with only
some exceptions, as a ﬁeld we still la speciﬁc theories and established
theoretical frameworks that stipulate what teaing is, let alone detail how
it is connected to student learning (see Ball & Rowan, 2004; Hiebert &
Grouws, 2007; Nuthall, 2004).
e role of su theories in improving our ability to understand teaing,
predict its determinants and consequences, and through that improve

teaing and learning is indisputable (Gage, 2009). Why, then, is developing
su theories and theoretical frameworks so diﬃcult to accomplish? Part of
the answer lies in that there is not a single way through whi teaing can
inﬂuence learning. is was revealed by diﬀerent studies—especially
international comparative studies (Hiebert et al., 2003; Stigler & Hiebert,
1999)—that documented diﬀerent approaes to teaing and showed that
the presence or absence of certain instructional aspects alone does not
suﬃce for inducing learning. In this sense, what we need is not theories or
frameworks that promote one or the other approa or component, but
theoretical tools that will enable us to examine how constellations of
diﬀerent components can advance our thinking and understanding of
teaing and its eﬀects (see Hiebert et al., 2005). In fact, this is another key
challenge that researchers are expected to face in the years to come.
Mapping the terrain of teaing is, according to Grossman and
McDonald (2008), a pivotal step for engaging in this work and another way
through whi theories and theoretical frameworks of teaing can be
developed. For, as these solars opine, despite decades of work and the
plethora of resear papers that have been produced so far, the ﬁeld of
teaing still comprises an unarted terrain; it still las a common
language and analytic tools for parsing and decomposing instruction in
ways that could help describe, analyze, and improve teaing. Grossman
and McDonald (2008) go on to oﬀer some guidelines for successfully
decomposing this terrain. ey suggest that our approa be agnostic to the
type of instruction; that it be directed to identifying the underlying
grammar of the practice of teaing; that it establish common and precise
language in describing teaing and its constituent parts; and that it be
informed by several research paradigms.
A recent promising line of resear and thought that builds on these
guidelines pertains to identifying core practices of teaing mathematics
(see Ball, Sleep, Boerst, & Bass, 2009; Grossman, Hammerness, &

McDonald, 2009; Lampert, 2010; McDonald, Kazemi, & Kavanagh, 2013).
Although initially solars had somewhat diﬀerent conceptualizations as to
what exactly these practices are, during the recent American Educational
Resear Association (AERA) 2014 conference held in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, they came up with the following definition:
Core Practices are identiﬁable components fundamental to teaing that teaers enact to
support learning. [These] practices consist of strategies, routines, and moves that can be unpacked
and learned by teachers. Core Practices can include both general and content specific practices.
(Core Practice Consortium, 2014)
Su practices can occur with high frequency in teaing and can be
learned and enacted by even novice teaers to support student learning.
us, a key allenge that lies ahead for researers in the next decade—
and one that was also alluded by Franke et al. (2007)—concerns taling the
following inquires:
Whi practices are core for teaing mathematics? How can these
practices be identiﬁed? Can consensus be reaed on what comprises
such practices?
To what extent are these practices culturally sensitive, given prior
works documenting diﬀerences across educational systems in the
teaching of mathematics?
What is the underlying grammar of these practices—to use Grossman
and McDonald’s (2008) words?
rough whi meanisms and under what conditions can these
practices support student learning?
To contribute toward the eﬀort of mapping the terrain of teaing by
considering certain practices that resonate with the deﬁnition given earlier,
in what follows we draw on two broad lines of resear, whi, by and
large, seem to have moved along parallel paths. In doing so, we abide by

Grossman and McDonald’s (2008) guidelines to capitalize on diﬀerent
resear paradigms. Along with their recommendation to be agnostic to the
teaing approa considered, in our review we refrain from endorsing
certain teaing approaes. Also, because of space limitations, we avoid
considering the role of certain curricula or tenological tools in shaping
instruction, given that these resources in and of themselves are not self-
enacting.
e ﬁrst line of work pertains to teaer eﬀectiveness resear (TER). In
contrast to TER, whi uses mathematics as a content and context for
studying eﬀective teaing, the second line of work pertains to resear
that foregrounds the content of mathematics and the disciplinary demands
it imposes on teaers. As su, our review resonates with the last sentence
in the Core Practices deﬁnition, according to whi we need to aend to
both generic and content-speciﬁc practices: the ﬁrst line of resear
reviewed reﬂects more generic practices, while the second is closer to
content-specific practices.
Both older (e.g., Brophy & Good, 1986; Creemers, 1994) and more recent
(e.g., Klieme, Pauli, & Reusser, 2009; Kyriakides & Creemers, 2008; Pianta,
Belsky, Vandergri, Houts, & Morrison, 2008; Stronge et al., 2011)
individual TER studies, but more so, a set of meta-analyses (Haie, 2009;
Kyriakides, Christoforou, & Charalambous, 2013; Kyriakides, Creemers,
Antoniou, & Demetriou, 2010; Seerens & Bosker, 1997; Seidel &
Shavelson, 2007) point to a gamut of observable teaing behaviors that
have consistently been found to contribute to student learning. ese
studies, and especially the meta-analyses, have also shown these practices
to be more signiﬁcant determinants of student learning than other teaer
baground aracteristics (see Haie, 2009; Muijs & Reynolds, 2000).
Although stemming from studies focusing on mathematics, these behaviors
are generic in the sense that they cut across diﬀerent subject maers; in
other words, their applicability transcends the subject maer in whi these

studies have been conducted. Considering the TER state-of the-art and
synthesizing the results of studies conducted over the past 35 years, in a
recent review article, Muijs et al. (2014) catalogue several su generic
teaing practices. At the top of the list of those practices are the
opportunity to learn and the time students are on task. Structuring of
information and soliciting student thinking through eﬀective questioning
that consists of both lower- and higher-level questions, as well as giving
timely and relevant feedba to students, are also included in the list.
Classroom management and creating a positive learning environment
through productive student-student, and teaer-student interactions has
also been found to contribute signiﬁcantly to student learning (Bell et al.,
2012; Kane, Taylor, Tyler, & Wooten, 2011). Other generic practices include
using advanced organizers, employing concept mapping, exposing students
to worked examples, and giving students opportunities for practice and
application (see Creemers & Kyriakides, 2008; Hattie, 2009).
Absent from the list of the practices is a close scrutiny of the subject
maer per se and the demands that teaing mathematics imposes on
teaers—a lacunae that Shulman (1986) identiﬁed when referring to the
missing paradigm of the then-existing body of resear. As a result of the
increased emphasis given to the content since then, and especially during
the last two decades, a wealth of studies have been conducted that focus on
(composites of) practices that are more content-speciﬁc for mathematics.
ese practices include, for example, using and linking representations to
highlight the meaning of certain mathematical concepts or procedures (e.g.,
Huang & Cai, 2011; Izsák, Tillema, & Tunç-Pekkan, 2008; Mitell,
Charalambous, & Hill, 2014; Murata, Boﬀerding, Pothen, Taylor, &
Wisnia, 2012); drawing connections between mathematical ideas and
real-world situations (e.g., Gainsburg, 2008); engaging in proving and
reasoning (e.g., Bieda, 2010; Stylianides, 2007); and identifying paerns and
developing generalizations (e.g., Ellis, 2011).

Although applicable to other subject maers beyond mathematics, other
practices are particularly pertinent to teaing mathematics, since their
enactment can take particular forms and formats because of the disciplinary
demands the subject maer imposes. ese include, for instance, providing
explanations (Charalambous, Hill, & Ball, 2011; Gil & Ben-Zvi, 2011);
steering classroom discussions toward the mathematical point that ea
lesson is designed to make (e.g., Sleep, 2012; see also the concept of
directionality in Hill, Blunk, et al., 2008); selecting and using appropriate
examples and counterexamples to reinforce student understanding of
mathematical concepts and processes (e.g., Mills, 2014; Rowland, 2008b;
Zazkis & Chernoﬀ, 2008; Zodik & Zaslavsky, 2008); seing and maintaining
the cognitive demand of tasks through student engagement in complex
tasks (e.g., Boston & Smith, 2009; Jason, Garrison, Wilson, Gibbons, &
Shahan, 2013; Stein, Smith, Henningsen, & Silver, 2000); carefully
monitoring student responses during seatwork, and selecting and
purposefully ordering responses to be displayed and shared during whole-
group discussions (e.g., Cengiz, Kline, & Grant, 2011; Jason et al., 2013;
Nathan & Kim, 2009; Stein, Engle, Smith, & Hughes, 2008); and, in general,
supporting discourse for doing and learning mathematics (see Chapin,
O’Connor, & Anderson, 2003; Franke et al., 2007). Following
recommendations to not only identify these practices and explore how they
play out in teaing, but also to unpa and decompose them into their
constituent components, in some of the studies listed earlier solars have
also gone into more depth, identifying the underlying components and
grammar of these practices.
To summarize, an increasing body of studies has zoomed in on either
generic or content-speciﬁc teaing practices. Beyond extending this work
to beer unpa and understand what is entailed in teaing mathematics,
the following resear inquiries seem to pose productive directions for
future research:

Are the practices considered thus far suﬃcient for capturing teaing
quality in mathematics? If not, what other practices might be
important and how can they be identified?
What manifestations of these practices deﬁne teaing quality and
what are the underlying meanisms through whi ea of these
practices contributes to student learning?
Are these practices equally eﬀective for diﬀerent student populations?
Given that most of these studies have been conducted in primary or
secondary grades, are these practices equally eﬀective for pre-primary
grades or even tertiary education? More generally, under what
conditions and for whi student populations are these practices
effective in terms of promoting student learning?
Are these practices equally eﬀective for promoting noncognitive
learning outcomes? To what degree are they conducive to promoting
higher-order thinking skills?
Can a hierary of practices be developed that rank orders these
practices in terms of their relative contribution to teaing quality and
student learning? What might the implications of su a hierary be
for the preparation of prospective teaers and the ongoing
development of practicing teachers?
Given the importance of considering constellations of practices, and given
that for years researers in the two aforementioned lines of inquiry have
largely been working in parallel, at least an equally productive path of
resear and a key priority for researers and practitioners alike during
the next decade pertains to searing for synergies between generic and
content-speciﬁc practices. Exploring su synergies has been underlined by
solars working in either of the two domains (e.g., Brophy, 1986;
Grossman & McDonald, 2008; Hamre et al., 2013). A recent study
(Charalambous, Komitis, Papaaralambous, & Stefanou, 2014) has also

shown that su integration is supported by teaers as well, given that
they do not rate the two types of practices as distinctly important or
feasible to implement in their instruction. In this respect, the following
inquiries also seem important to be considered:
To what extent can combinations of generic and content-speciﬁc
teaching practices help better explain student learning?
Whi are these combinations and what is their nature? Do generic
and content-speciﬁc teaing practices contribute individually to
instruction or is their eﬀect synergistic/interactive? To what degree
could practices of one type mediate the eﬀect of practices of the other
type?
Are some combinations of su practices prerequisite for others? In
other words, does eﬀective enactment of certain combinations of
practices set the bedro for eﬀective engagement in other practices?
If so, what implications might this have for teacher education?
Given the complexity of teaing and the diﬃculties that inhere in studying
it, combining diﬀerent practices and diﬀerent perspectives seems both a
legitimate and a promising way to tale complexity. Having discussed
issues of conceptualizing and studying teaing, we next turn to aspects of
measuring teaing quality, whi are equally allenging and productive
to explore.
Measuring Teaching and Teaching Quality
Writing about measuring teaing and its quality almost three decades ago,
Shavelson, Webb, and Burstein (1986) concluded: “e domain of the
measurement in resear on teaing is enormous […] ea topic within
this domain is terribly complex” (p. 86). e rapidly accumulating work on

measuring teaing (quality) over the past 30 years could not have aested
more convincingly to the legitimacy of this argument. Indeed, signiﬁcant
progress has been made both in terms of the approaes pursued and the
tools developed to measure instructional quality. is progress
notwithstanding, solars interested in measuring instruction are still faced
with several allenges. In reviewing some of these allenges—whi, in
fact, point to directions for future resear in this arena—we also consider
diﬀerent ways advanced to measure instructional quality. We pay particular
aention to classroom observation, whi has recently aracted a lot of
attention.
Taking into account how complex teaing is, the ﬁrst allenge in
measuring its quality concerns determining and deﬁning the aspects of
teaing to be measured. Correnti and Martínez (2012) put this very nicely
by pointing out that when it comes to teaing, “there are diﬀerent aspects
[…] we may oose to measure, and ea represents a complex entity that
may be deﬁned and described in diﬀerent ways and with diﬀerent
languages” (p. 55). Part of this allenge resides in the la of a clear and
widely agreed-upon conceptualization as to what comprises teaing
quality (see Ball & Hill, 2009; Gage, 2009; Hiebert & Grouws, 2007). Without
well-deﬁned theoretical frameworks about teaing and its relationship
with learning, aempts to measure instructional quality might not be
particularly productive, since explorations might not be guided by sound
hypotheses linking teaching to its antecedents and outcomes/consequences.
A second, closely related, challenge pertains to attending to constellations
of diﬀerent aspects of teaing. As discussed earlier, teaing is something
more than the summation of its individual components. Although it might
be important to examine the quality of, say, the connections that the
teaer draws when using representations, or the type of questions she or
he poses, mu more value resides in investigating and measuring
combinations of su practices. e predicament, however, lies in

determining what to include and what to exclude, especially taking into
consideration the multitude of components assumed to deﬁne quality
teaing in mathematics. Hopefully, as we explain, when considering
classroom observations, videotaping of classroom interactions enables
researers to aend to more components than what would have been
feasible to observe through live classroom observations alone.
A third allenge relates to the fact that teaing and learning do not
happen in a vacuum, and thus, both are aﬀected by multiple other factors.
at makes detecting the eﬀect of teaing—and the eﬀectiveness of
diﬀerent teaing components—hard to identify. Speaking to this idea,
Gitomer (2009) argues that although in several cases a signal (i.e., teaing
quality) exists, this signal is lost amidst a very noisy environment. He
claims,
[O]ur analytic models are aempting to detect a consistent signal in an exceedingly noisy
environment. And the fact that weak signals are oen detected does not necessarily mean that
the signal is weak, only that the other noise is so overwhelming. An alarm clo just does not
sound as loud in the subway.
(p. 229)
Hence, the real bet for solars immersed in measuring teaing quality
and linking this to student learning lies in figuring out ways to eliminate the
noise and beer capture the signal. Notable steps are made toward this
direction both by using diﬀerent tools to measure instruction and by
combining su tools. at brings us to the last allenge to be discussed in
this section.
e fourth allenge relates to developing appropriate instruments to
gauge instructional quality and using them to measure this quality at scale
(Ball & Hill, 2009; Chester & Zelman, 2009). In their review apter, Hiebert
and Grouws (2007) contend that developing su instruments is harder than
developing measures of learning, both because of the complexity of

teaing and because of the relatively less aention that teaing has
received, compared to learning. Hopefully, during the last decade there
seems to be increased aention to teaing and its measurement, as
indicated both by the several methods that have been advanced and
pursued to study teaing and the ongoing discussions about improving the
ways employed to tap instructional quality. Apart from classroom
observations—whi we consider in more depth later—these methods
include teaer (e.g., Kunter & Baumert, 2006; Mayer, 1999) or student
ratings (e.g., Fauth, Decristan, Rieser, Klieme, & Büner, 2014; Kunter &
Baumert, 2006); interviews with teaers about their instructional practice
(e.g., Murphy, 2012); teaer logs (e.g., Rowan, Harrison, & Hayes, 2004);
instructional artifacts, su as assignments and student homework (e.g.,
Baumert et al., 2010; Boston, 2012; Martínez, Borko, Steer, Luskin, &
Kloser, 2012); and structured classroom vignees that engage teaers in
reﬂections about how they would react in diﬀerent teaing situations (e.g.
Stecher et al., 2006).
Because all these methods have their own aﬀordances and limitations
(see Ball & Rowan, 2004; Croninger, Buese, & Larson, 2012), there is
growing consensus about the need of mixing approaes, measures, and
tools to beer capture and understand teaing quality. During the next
decade, aempts should also be directed at detailing the aﬀordances and
limitations of diﬀerent combinations of approaes and instruments. Given
that diﬀerent combinations of instruments and approaes might be more
cost eﬀective for studying particular aspects of teaing, solars are
encouraged to be more explicit as to whi combinations lend themselves
beer to studying teaing and its association with learning, and the
conditions under whi this occurs. For example, are classroom
observations and student survey ratings equally eﬀective for studying the
quality of instruction in teaing second-grade number sense and
operations as they might be for studying teaing algebra in eighth grade?

Are some combinations of instruments beer than others in capturing
instructional quality when it comes to more subtle aspects of teaing, su
as the level of cognitive demand at whi students are asked to work or the
quality of the explanations oﬀered by teaers? We envision that the “one-
combination-ﬁts-all” approa might be counterproductive to advancing
our understanding of teaing quality and its eﬀects. is hypothesis is
reinforced by recent ﬁndings suggesting that measuring certain aspects of
instruction—especially the more content-speciﬁc ones—is harder than
measuring more generic teaing aspects (e.g., Praetorius, Pauli, Reusser,
Rakoczy, & Klieme, 2014).
We close this section by focusing on an approa that has received
increased aention and interest, especially during the last decade, partly
because of the accountability pressure exercised on teaers (see McClellan,
Donoghue, & Park, 2013; Papay, 2012), and partly because of the
tenological advancements that have reduced the cost of videotaping and
analyzing videotaped instruction (see Tomás & Seidel, 2009): classroom
observations, be they live or videotaped. Oen considered the gold
standard of studying instructional quality (Rowan & Correnti, 2009),
classroom observations are becoming a key tool for investigating the
quality of teaing, despite being a costly method. is is indicated by the
fact that during the last decade a rapidly increasing number of observation
instruments have been developed and validated, including both more
generic instruments, su as the Framework for Teaing (Danielson, 2007),
the Dynamic Model of Educational Eﬀectiveness (Creemers & Kyriakides,
2008), and the Classroom Assessment Scoring System, or CLASS (Hamre et
al., 2013), as well as more content-speciﬁc instruments, su as the
Mathematical ality of Instruction (e.g., Learning Mathematics for
Teaing Project, 2011), the UTea Observation Protocol (see Kane &
Staiger, 2012), the Mathematics-Scan (Walkowiak, Berry, Meyer, Rimm-
Kaufman, & Omar, 2014), and the Reformed Teaing Observation

Protocol, or RTOP (Sawada et al., 2002).
e use of classroom observations is, however, not without limitations
and complexities. In fact, a growing number of solarly works published
during the last few years point to a conglomerate of allenges that
researers need to tale if classroom observations are to yield reliable
and valid estimates of teaing quality. Talking about these complexities,
Hill, Charalambous, and Kra (2012) referred to teaer observation
systems, to emphasize that estimates of instructional quality are inﬂuenced
by a gamut of elements that include the observational instrument itself, the
recruitment and training of raters, and the scoring design employed. e
scoring design pertains to decisions su as the number and the length of
observation to be conducted, the time of the year/sool day during whi
observations are carried out, the number or raters that code ea
observation, and the sequence in which the observations are rated.
Recent studies have provided empirical evidence suggesting that all these
decisions have a signiﬁcant impact on the estimates yielded for instructional
quality. For instance, the oice of observation instrument maers, since
diﬀerent instruments—although seemingly similar—capture diﬀerent
aspects of instructional quality (see McClellan et al., 2013). Studies have also
shown that there is more variability in content-speciﬁc rather than generic
teaing aspects; thus, more classroom observations are needed to capture
the former rather than the laer instructional aspects (Praetorius et al.,
2014). In contrast, with more generic instruments su as CLASS, even
smaller observation lengths might suﬃce for yielding valid and reliable
estimates of instructional quality (Mashburn, Meyer, Allen, & Pianta, 2014).
Furthermore, from recent studies we know that diﬀerent coding methods
(e.g., observing lessons on one versus multiple days, aending to whole-
class interactions only versus also considering small-group work) cause
ﬂuctuations in the aracterizations of the instructional quality yielded by
using a given observation instrument (Ing & Webb, 2012); that raters might

not rate lessons consistently across the year and that their ratings might
ange as they become more experienced over time (Casabianca et al.,
2013); and that even training raters might not suﬃce for reliably capturing
certain aspects of instruction or identifying eﬀective teaers (see
Praetorius, Lenske, & Helmke, 2012; Strong, Gargani, & Hacifazliog˘lu,
2011). ese and other associated ﬁndings forcefully suggest that more
concerted eﬀorts are needed in the future to beer understand the
conditions under whi reliable and valid estimates of instructional quality
can be obtained. Addressing this issue becomes even more consequential
given the recent shi from considering teaer observation instruments
solely as tools for evaluating teaing to also regarding them as key levers
for improving teaching quality (see Hill & Grossman, 2013).

Student Mathematical Learning
To explore the priorities regarding student mathematical learning, we felt
that categorizing where the emphasis lies by various studies in this domain
would lead to a clearer discussion. us, studies that fall under this domain
were organized into three subsections. e ﬁrst subsection considers trends
and open issues related to conceptualizing student mathematical learning.
Zooming in on the components of mathematics and students, in the next
two subsections we identify trends with respect to ea of these
components and discuss additional issues that warrant consideration in the
coming years. Like the previous sections, this section closes by
contemplating measurement issues regarding student learning.
Conceptualizing Student Mathematical Learning
Just like studying teaer knowledge and the quality of teaing, the issue
of theoretical perspectives3 on students’ mathematical learning is crucial
and aracted signiﬁcant solarly aention. Su perspectives allow
researers to more clearly express hypotheses of how complex
phenomena work and communicate their understanding of these
phenomena to other solars. In the past, researers claimed that there
was a la of theoretical perspectives of mathematics learning, and that
mathematics education resear needed to build its own theories and
resear paradigms (see Hiebert & Grouws, 2007). Nowadays, su
theoretical conceptualizations are mu more prominent in mathematics
education. Important steps toward this direction have been, among others,
the publication of the book eories of Mathematics Education: Seeking
New Frontiers by Sriraman and English (2010) and the establishment of a
working group on eoretical Perspectives and Approaes in Mathematics

Education Resear, initially set by Artigue, Bartolini-Bussi, Dreyfus, Gray,
and Prediger (2005) and run in the context of the European Society for
Resear in Mathematics Education. As Lesh, Sriraman, and English (2014)
recently stated, there is clearly “a shi beyond theory-borrowing toward
theory-building in mathematics education; the relevant theories draw on far
more than psychology” (p. 615).
Some theoretical perspectives on student learning that have been used
quite extensively are rather global, since they are applicable to discussing
student mathematics thinking and learning about various mathematical
concepts (e.g., Biggs & Collis, 1991; Chevallard, 1999; Cobb & Yael, 1996;
Davis & Maher, 1990; Dubinsky, 1992; Freudenthal, 1968; Kruteski, 1976;
Lakoﬀ & Nuñez, 2000; Pirie & Kieren, 1989; Presmeg, 1985; Sfard, 1991;
Siegler, 2000; Tall, 2013; Tall & Vinner, 1981; Tirosh & Stavy, 1999;
Vergnaud, 1990). Given that, as Lesh et al. (2014) note, drawing on Begle
(1979), a large part of what was presented as theories in mathematics
education was (and still continues to be) dogma, a ﬁrst resear priority
pertains to empirically validating these theoretical conceptualizations on
student learning. e reader is reminded that this relative scarcity of studies
that empirically validate various theories was also an open issue for teaer
knowledge, as well.
Carrying out large-scale studies to conﬁrm the results of small-scale
studies is also warranted. Some aempts have been made towards this
direction, leading either to the conﬁrmation or negation of the proposed
theoretical perspectives. On the one hand, Vergnaud’s (2009) theory of
conceptual ﬁelds was used by Griﬃths (2013) as well as Caddle and
Brizuela (2011) to analyze students’ work on the fundamental theorem of
arithmetic and linear graphs, respectively. On the other hand, Christou,
Pia-Pantazi, Souyoul, and Zaariades (2005) explored Tall’s three-world
theory in the context of functions, while Pantziara and Philippou (2012)
used Sfard’s (1991) theory to assess students’ understanding of fractions.

ese examples are indicative of a trend observed during recent years to
empirically explore various concepts based on theoretical frameworks
developed in the past—an approa that seems productive to continue
pursuing and extending in the future.
Other theories employed over the past years are more topic speciﬁc,
since they deal with particular mathematical concepts su as fractions
(Lamon, 1999; Olive, 1999; Post, Cramer, Behr, Lesh & Harel, 1993; Steﬀe,
2001), number sense (Steﬀe, Cobb, & von Glaserfeld, 1988; Steﬀe, von
Glasersfeld, Riards, & Cobb, 1983), algebra (Kaput, 1998; Kieran, 1996),
functions and limits (Corill et al. 1996), or geometry (Baista, 2007;
Baista & Clements, 1996; Clements & Sarama, 2007; Fishbein, 1993; Van
Hiele, 1985). Studies conducted during the past decade have aempted to
empirically test and substantiate su theories. is includes, for example,
testing Steﬀe’s claims on fraction semes (Norton & Wilkins, 2009; Wilkins
& Norton, 2011), empirically validating Behr, Lesh, Post, and Silver’s (1983)
model on diﬀerent fractional constructs (Charalambous & Pia-Pantazi,
2007), or examining Steﬀe et al.’s (1988) model of numerical development
(Biddlecomb & Carr, 2011). Building on various theoretical perspectives,
other studies have aempted to expand existing theoretical works in
various directions. For instance, Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen and colleagues
(Kolovou, Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, & Köller, 2013; Van den Heuvel-
Panhuizen, Kolovou, & Robitzsch, 2013) investigated how upper-elementary
students worked in an online environment to solve early algebra problem,
while Chrysostomou, Pia-Pantazi, Tsingi, Cleanthous, and Christou (2013)
investigated individuals’ procedural and conceptual understanding of
number sense and algebra by relating this understanding to their cognitive
styles.
Besides focusing on diﬀerent mathematical topics, researers over the
past decade have also been increasingly aending to and investigating
students’ mathematical processes. ese aempts have been informed by

theoretical frameworks and conceptualizations developed in the previous
century, su as those pertaining to reasoning or problem solving (Polya,
1954; Schoenfeld, 1992), problem posing (Silver, 1997; Stoyanova & Ellerton,
1996), modeling (Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007), argumentation (Toulmin,
1958), conjecturing and developing generalizations (Burton, 1984), engaging
in proof and proving (Harel & Sowder, 1998), and visualization (Baista,
2007). For instance, Levenson (2013) explored the diﬀerent forms that
students’ explanations may take at diﬀerent ages, as well as how students
perceive the nature of mathematical explanations under diﬀerent
circumstances. Using Silver’s (1997) ideas of problem posing, Cai et al.
(2013) investigated how problem posing can contribute to student learning.
Along the same lines, but seing oﬀ from a diﬀerent framework, Van
Harpen and Presmeg (2013) explored the relationship between students’
mathematical problem-posing abilities and their mathematical content
knowledge. Similar aempts have been observed with other mathematical
processes, su as reasoning and engaging in paern generalization (e.g.,
Ellis, 2011; Jurdak & Mouhayar, 2014; Nilssona & Juter, 2011), problem
solving (e.g., Muir, Beswi, & Williamson, 2008; Stein & Burartz, 2006),
proving (e.g., Bieda, 2010; Inglis & Alco, 2012; Stylianides & Stylianides,
2009), and argumentation (Hollebrands, Conner, & Smith, 2010).
Interestingly, a number of researers have also started aending to how
gestures can scaﬀold students’ engagement in the processes discussed, and
in general, support their thinking and learning (see, for instance, Bjuland,
Cestari, & Borgersen, 2008; Kim, Roth, & om, 2011; Zurina & Williams,
2011).
Further pursuing and extending the line of thinking advanced in the
previous century, during the last decade researers have continued
conceptualizing student learning as more than just student cognitive
development. Hence, drawing on theories not necessarily conﬁned to the
domain of mathematics, researers have explored several facets of

learning, including student creativity (e.g., Leikin & Pia-Pantazi, 2013);
metacognition (e.g., Kim, Park, Moore, & Varma, 2013; Modestou &
Gagatsis, 2010; Sneider & Artelt, 2010; Yang, 2012); and aﬀective aspects
su as emotions, aitudes, and beliefs (e.g., Hemmings, Grootemboer, &
Kay, 2011; Schorr & Goldin, 2008; Sumpter, 2013).
In sum, during the last decade, solars have not only tried to beer
conceptualize student learning and consider its multiple facets, but they
have also capitalized on diﬀerent theoretical frameworks—while
empirically validating them—to examine student learning of diﬀerent topics
and engagement in diﬀerent practices. Still, a lot more needs to be done
toward fully unloing what is involved in student learning. For example,
the novelties observed in the mathematics curricula and/or anges in
teaing practices that may accompany them, su as the development of
STEM programs, or the implementation of more inquiry-based, and
modeling-oriented environments (see English, 2013; Ministry of Education
of Singapore, 2013) call for the investigation of how we may best combine
theories to beer understand student learning in su complex seings.
Discussing this need, Bikner-Ashbahs and Prediger (2010) coined the term
networking theories to describe how constellations of theories can support
unpaing and beer understanding student learning in more complex
situations. Su theories could aend to the multiple facets of learning, as
discussed earlier. New theories may also need to be developed to address
and encompass these complexities, as well as the fact that learning should
not be seen from a static perspective, but rather from a more dynamic
viewpoint. us, questions that may be important to answer in the future
include:
Whi theories or combinations thereof may best describe student
learning in the environments listed earlier?
How do diﬀerent facets of student learning interact with ea other

and how might anges in one aspect of learning contribute to
changes in another?
One of the factors accentuating the complexity of the learning
environments, and hence the theoretical perspectives that need to describe
them, is the incorporation of new tenologies (e.g., Drijvers, Godino,
Fornt, & Troue, 2013). e functionalities, representations, and
possibilities oﬀered by new tenological tools and media also suggest that
solars need to continue exploring and describing the impact that these
tools may have on student thinking and learning processes (e.g.,
Hollebrands, 2007; Pia-Pantazi, & Christou, 2009; Taba, Hershkowitz, &
Dreyfus, 2013) and aspects of student aﬀective domain (e.g., Sorr &
Goldin 2008). In this context, a number of questions that still, by and large,
remain unresolved concern the following:
What is the impact of tenological advances on students’ thinking
processes, visualization/communication/and representational skills,
abilities to resear and solve problems, mathematical understanding,
mathematical aievements, self-awareness, and abilities to interact
productively with one another, with teachers, and with data?
What theoretical frameworks are needed to describe and explain the
phenomena identified?
Having brieﬂy considered student mathematical learning in general, we
now focus on ea of its constituent components to identify additional
trends within each and suggest priorities for future work.
Mathematics
When referring to the component of mathematics, the literature review we
have conducted has revealed that not all mathematical concepts share an

equal proportion of solarly aention. In particular, we are still witnessing
a disproportional emphasis of studies on number sense and operations, as
well as on algebra, and fewer studies on space and geometry, statistics,
measurement, and probabilities. We detected a similar trend during our
literature review in the domain of teaer knowledge. For example,
although recently there has been an increased aention to statistics (e.g.,
Lavigne, Salkind, & Yan, 2008; Makar, Bakker, & Ben-Zvi, 2011; Sharma,
2006; Watson, 2007), work in this domain is still negligible compared to
studies conducted on numbers and algebra. Some renewed interest has also
been observed in geometry, especially due to the use of various
tenological environments—and this was mainly focused on studies
conducted in secondary education (Hollebrands, 2007). Resear studies on
measurement (e.g., Barre, Clements, Klanderman, Pennisi, & Polaki, 2006;
Kamii & Kysh, 2006; Szilágyi, Clements, & Sarama, 2013) and probability
(Rubel, 2007) are still quite sparse. erefore, the following question seems
to provide fruitful ground for further work:
Can coherent learning trajectories for speciﬁc mathematical concepts
be identiﬁed, especially for content areas that have not been well
represented over the past decade? What similarities and diﬀerences
might trajectories for different content areas have?
A word of caution is, however, in order here. By aempting to consider the
aforementioned issues, one should not lose sight of the fact that
mathematical concepts are not developed in isolation, but rather co-occur
with other concepts in speciﬁc contexts. erefore, the development of
mathematical concepts should not only be examined linearly, but also in
more complex situations where the development occurs in certain contexts
(see Jurdak, 2006; Murata & Kaubadi, 2012) and through social interactions
(Dekker, Elshout-Mohr, & Wood, 2006; Wood, Williams, & McNeal, 2006).

Furthermore, we feel that mathematics education researers need to
reexamine whi mathematical concepts are currently being taught and
therefore deserve being investigated, but foremost whi mathematics is
needed for the 21st century (see English, 2006; English & Gainsburg,
Chapter 1 in this volume). is takes us to a diﬀerent approa as to what
mathematics we feel students should learn in sool. As Lesh et al. (2014)
observe, the national curricula in many countries were wrien mainly by
mathematicians and educators, whereas other groups of experts, su as
(social) scientists, economists, and engineers were not consulted. As a result,
according to these solars, the mathematics probably needed by future
citizens goes far beyond what is typically presented in these documents.
is view oﬀers additional perspectives as to whi questions mathematics
educators ought to contemplate in the coming years:
What mathematics do students of the 21st century need for success in
life? To what extent do diﬀerent curricula promote student learning of
these types of mathematics?
Apart from the mathematics content itself, how may we develop,
document, and assess higher-order thinking skills needed for the 21st
century? Whi theories may allow us to best describe or examine
students’ higher-order thinking skills?
In what ways does the incorporation of new tenologies ange the
mathematics that contemporary students need to learn in order to
adequately function in tomorrow’s world?
Students
Our literature review revealed that most of the resear in mathematics
education investigated student learning in primary and secondary grades.
Recently, however, increasing interest has been observed toward studying

student learning in early years (Clements, Sarama, Spitler, Lange & Wolfe,
2011; English & Mulligan, 2013; Levenson, Tirosh, & Tsamir, 2011; Papic,
Mulligan & Mitlmore, 2011; Sarama & Clements, 2009). In fact, several
researers are interested in investigating younger students’ understanding
of various concepts that were oen taught at later stages. Examples include
introducing kindergarteners to pre-algebra (Carraher, Sliemann, Brizuela,
& Earnest, 2006; Papic et al., 2011), fractions (Brizuela, 2006), and even
functions (Francisco & Hahkioniemi, 2012). Studies have also investigated
the eﬀect of presool mathematics curricula on ildren’s short-and long-
term aievement (e.g., Clements & Sarama, 2007). Resear on university
students’ understanding in tertiary mathematics education and their abilities
in various processes is also underrepresented, and ought to receive more
aention (Mesa, 2012; Tall, 2013). As the reader might recall, this trend also
became apparent among resear studies on teaer knowledge. erefore,
some of the questions that need further attention are:
What are younger students’ and university students’ understanding
and abilities in mathematics?
Can the focus on speciﬁc topics or processes in early years promote (or
hinder) students’ mathematical thinking and learning later on?
What can we learn from longitudinal studies about the development of
students’ mathematical understandings, processes, and aﬀective
learning?
Increasingly realizing that one size does not ﬁt all, researers in
mathematics education are also steadily aending to the needs,
aracteristics, and aievements of diverse groups of students (Gilleece,
Cosgrove, & Sofroniou, 2010). This includes, for example, students from low
socioeconomic bagrounds (e.g., Baker, Street, & Tomlin, 2006; Balfanz,
Mac Iver, & Byrnes, 2006; Tirosh, Tsamir, Levenson, Taba, & Barkai,

2013), students who are struggling with various mathematical constructs
(e.g., Yerushalmy, 2006) or with learning disabilities (e.g., Newton, Star, &
Lyn, 2010; Peltenburg, Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, & Robitzs, 2012),
high-aieving students (e.g., Alsawaie, 2012; Leikin & Lev, 2013; Pia-
Pantazi, Christou, Kontoyianni, & Kaou, 2011), or bilingual students
(Ambrose & Molina, 2014; Dominguez, LópezLeiva, & Khisty, 2014; Verzosa
& Mulligan, 2013). In pursuing this approa, caution should be exercised so
that researers not end up restricting the types of treatments oﬀered to
students to those assumed to be eﬀective for particular groups of students
(see Lesh et al., 2014). In this context, the following questions seem to oﬀer
productive paths for further exploration:
In what ways can we facilitate the learning of diverse groups of
students?
What are the beneﬁts and drawbas of various instructional
approaches for these groups of students?
What kind of environments and tools are needed to develop and test
various groups of students’ mathematics learning?
We close this section by briefly considering measurement issues.
Measuring Student Mathematical Learning
Like teaing, whi comprises a multifaceted phenomenon, student
learning is also multidimensional. Consequently, developing appropriate
measurement tools to tap student learning becomes particularly convoluted
(see, Lesh et al., 2014), especially when trying to capture diﬀerent aspects of
it. As a case in point, consider the ﬁve strands identiﬁed in the Adding It Up
(Kilpatri, Swaﬀord, & Findell, 2001) framework to conceptualize
proﬁciency in learning mathematics: conceptual understanding, procedural

ﬂuency, strategic competence, adaptive reasoning, and productive
disposition. For su a proﬁciency to be aieved, considerable eﬀorts
should be devoted to developing tasks that lend themselves to measuring
the integration of these strands, given that measuring ea strand
separately might yield an inconclusive picture of student learning.
Furthermore, measurement approaes and tools that lend themselves to
tapping student creative, critical, and complex thinking abilities, as well as
collaborative skills in mathematics are needed. Although some aempts
have been undertaken toward this direction (e.g. Leikin, 2013; Lesh, 2010),
the ﬁeld still seems to be in a rather nascent state with respect to
developing su instruments. In fact, the main means employed to explore
student mathematical learning have been tests or questionnaires (e.g.,
Jurdak & El Mouhayar, 2014; Modestou & Gagatsis, 2010; Norton & Wilkins,
2009; Wilkins & Norton, 2011) or task-based interviews (e.g. Kamii & Kysh,
2006; Muir et al., 2008; Verzosa & Mulligan, 2013). Although combinations
of these methods have also been employed (e.g., Hollebrands, 2007; Papic et
al., 2011; Van Harpen & Presmeg, 2013), the ﬁeld does not seem to have
reaed consensus as to whi (combinations of) instruments and/or
methods are more appropriate for exploring diﬀerent types of learning. All
these taken into consideration, the following resear inquiries seem to
suggest productive directions for further research:
How can we measure mathematical proﬁciency as a whole? How can
we measure these outcomes both at micro-level (to understand
underlying mechanisms) and at macro-level?
What instruments and approaes are more conducive to gauging (the
development of) student learning, especially when it comes to less
frequently explored aspects of it, su as creative, critical, complex
thinking processes and collaborative skills in mathematics?
What are the costs and beneﬁts of combining diﬀerent measurement

tools to explore student learning, conceived of as both processes and
final outcomes?
What methodological advancements are needed to obtain more
explicit, valid, and reliable results of student learning?
How can the ﬁeld of exploring student learning beneﬁt from the
methodological and statistical advancements made in other related
fields? (See, e.g., Creemers, Kyriakides, & Sammons, 2010.)
e last question brings to the fore another key area related to measuring
student mathematical learning—as a means of determining teaer
eﬀectiveness—that has received paramount aention during the past
decade: value-added models. Initially developed and introduced by Sanders
and colleagues (Sanders & Horn, 1994), value-added models are currently
widely used as a way to examine teaer contribution to student learning.
Although diﬀerent ways have been developed to capture this contribution,
value-added models are typically based on some variant of calculating the
diﬀerence 
between 
students’ 
end-of-year 
and 
beginning-of-year
performance and making adjustments to account for diﬀerences in student
baground aracteristics and/or sool-wide factors. Despite their
widespread use, value-added models have both supporters and critics
(Baker et al., 2010; Glazerman et al., 2010). Advocates, for example, point
out that, although not perfect, value-added models can control for selection
bias; they also provide a mu beer tool for measuring student learning
and ultimately teaer eﬀectiveness compared to other more subjective
approaes, su as principal ratings (see Harris, 2009). Sceptics, however,
point to the instability of value-added estimates across statistical models,
years, classes that teaers tea, and diﬀerent tests (McCaﬀrey, Sass,
Lowood, & Mihaly, 2009; Newton, Darling-Hammond, Haertel, &
omas, 2010; Papay, 2011; Sass, 2008). Methodological concerns about the
use of these models (e.g., Amrein-Beardsley, 2008) along with more

substantive concerns related to factors beyond teaers’ control (e.g., out-
of-sool learning experiences, tutoring, etc.) that can aﬀect student
learning (see Baker et al., 2010) have also been raised. Additionally,
although observation measures of teaing eﬀectiveness were found to
signiﬁcantly relate to student learning, as captured through value-added
models (e.g., Kane et al., 2011), other studies (e.g., Hill, Kapitula, & Umland,
2011) point to noticeable discrepancies between these two measures for a
signiﬁcant proportion of teaers. As the solarly community increasingly
realizes the potentials and limitations of value-added models (Harris, 2011),
more work will be needed in the coming years to determine how these
models can beer capture diﬀerent manifestations of student learning—as
conceptualized and discussed earlier—and to link these types of learning to
teaer eﬀectiveness. ese aempts, we argue, can greatly beneﬁt from
also incorporating considerations of instructional quality, since marrying
value-added models with explorations of the quality of teaing can help
beer understand what aspects of student learning might be easier or
harder to measure and how these relate to teachers’ actions and interactions
with students during instruction.
Finally, our literature review showed that longitudinal studies conducted
thus far are quite limited. Hence, longitudinal studies that identify the long-
term eﬀects of various conditions on student learning are highly needed. As
a ﬁeld, we are also in need of meta-analyses, whi at the moment seem to
be rather limited, with only some exceptions (e.g., Gilmore & Papadatou-
Pastou, 2009). Both longitudinal studies and meta-analyses will enable
drawing causal inferences about what contributes to student learning. is
is an issue to whi we now turn by juxtaposing all three components of
the chain.

Aggravating Complexity: Bringing Together the
Three Components
In the previous three sections, we considered ea of the three links of the
ain in isolation. Our review has suggested that over the past decades
signiﬁcant progress has been made in all three domains, although in
varying degrees and shades. We argue, however, that the real allenge—
and, in our view, the core priority of resear for the coming years—
pertains to considering the ain as a whole. e proverbial Indian story of
the blind men ea studying a diﬀerent part of the elephant speaks to this
idea. Although exploring diﬀerent segments of the ain has been both
productive and useful—as suggested by our review—we cannot fully fathom
the process of teaing and learning, and its relationship to teaer
knowledge, unless we bring all constituent components together. erefore,
this last section is devoted to reviewing works undertaken toward this
direction. Following the structure of the previous sections, we ﬁrst consider
more conceptual issues when it comes to studying the entire ain and then
conclude with methodological advancements and challenges.
Conceptualizing the Entire Chain of Interactions
Although during the past years researers have mostly been preoccupied
with studying parts of the ain, during the last decade the ﬁrst signiﬁcant
steps toward considering all components of the ain in tandem were
witnessed. In what follows, we brieﬂy review works that have considered
parts of the associations in this ain, and then we focus on studies that
have aended to all associations encompassed in the ain. However, in
contrast to previous sections, we start by identifying the two main
conceptual allenges in studying the entire ain. We present these

allenges ﬁrst to orient the reader to the work that has been pursued in
this domain and the opportunities that lie ahead of us in the coming years.
A close examination of the studies and associated frameworks advanced
so far suggests that, as a resear ﬁeld, we la a comprehensive theoretical
framework that brings together all pieces considered so far, let alone
explains the underlying meanisms through whi ea part of the ain
contributes to the others. To clarify: several theoretical frameworks or
conceptualizations have been developed to capture teaer knowledge,
teaing, or student learning. As the preceding literature suggested,
compared to some decades ago, we now have a beer understanding of
issues related to ea of the three components reviewed in this apter.
Laing, however, is a theoretical framework that brings all three together
and examines (i) the particular ways and the conditions under whi
teaer knowledge contributes to the quality of instruction and through
that to student learning, and (ii) how the quality of instruction, in turn,
informs student learning. It is also still an open question whether teaer
knowledge might have a direct eﬀect on student learning, beyond the
indirect eﬀect it is assumed to have through teaing quality. Su a
framework needs to consider the chain of associations not only from a static
perspective—to capture these associations at a ﬁxed point in time—but also
from a more dynamic perspective. is implies that su a framework
needs to detail how anges in ea of these three components might
contribute to anges in the other components of the ain, as well as how
(phases of) stagnation in one component might impede progress in the
other components.4 e need of su frameworks is imperative, given that
the mixed and inconclusive ﬁndings related to the associations discussed
herein might be a byproduct of weak theory, not necessarily of weak
measurement alone (see Shetman, Roselle, Haertel, & Knudsen, 2010).
We agree with Sriraman and English (2010), however, that aempts to
develop su a framework should not be geared toward generating grand

theories, since generating su theories could lead into surface delineations
of the complexity inherent in the ain, as captured in the previous three
sections.
Developing su a framework would be a particularly arduous task and
one that would require concerted eﬀorts from solars in diﬀerent domains,
probably across diﬀerent resear groups and projects. Several questions
need to be addressed when aempting to develop su a framework:
Would it apply to diﬀerent mathematical topics or should it be more
centered on particular topics (e.g., geometry or algebra)? Would it be
applicable to diﬀerent educational levels or should it be more pertinent to
particular grades (e.g., for kindergarten)? Would it “‘travel” across diﬀerent
educational systems or should it mostly be concerned with the educational
systems in whi it will be given birth? As the reader might recall, these
and other related issues were considered when examining ea of the links
of the ain in isolation. Su issues, however, merit mu closer
consideration when it comes to considering the entire chain of associations.
e studies we review here were not driven by su a framework, but
were based on theoretical considerations that linked diﬀerent parts of the
ain. As su, they can provide insights about the work that has already
been pursued in this terrain and sket areas where more work can be done
in the future. In this context, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review studies that explored
two components of this ain and then give more emphasis to studies that
investigated the entire chain.
A set of studies have been devoted to exploring the link between teaer
knowledge and teaing quality. Although this link was investigated in the
1990s as well, studies conducted during the last decade have approaed
this inquiry with a renewed emphasis. Instead of (simply) considering this
issue from either an aﬀordance or constraint perspective—whi was
central in the explorations in the early 1990s—solars in the current decade
have also invested in understanding how teaer knowledge can support

the work of teaing. As a result, we now know that teaer knowledge5
can support teaers in planning and implementing their lessons (e.g.,
Tanase & Wang, 2013); deciding whi ideas to pursue when interacting
with students during whole-class discussions (e.g., Cengiz et al., 2011);
providing instruction that is ri in mathematical connections between
diﬀerent ideas and is based on mathematically appropriate language and
notation (e.g., Hill, Blunk, et al., 2008; Hill, Umland, Litke, & Kapitula, 2012);
using 
representations 
appropriately 
and 
capitalizing 
on 
student
mathematical contributions (Izsák, 2008); maintaining the level of cognitive
demands in whi students engage by keeping emphasis on the underlying
meaning of mathematical procedures (e.g., Charalambous, 2010);
cognitively allenging and supporting students during instruction (e.g.,
Baumert et al., 2010); and appropriately responding to student errors and
capitalizing on their work to address their misconceptions (e.g., Bray, 2011;
Ding, 2008). In contrast to previous studies that explored the association
between teaer knowledge and teaing from a static perspective, other
studies—admiedly, mu fewer than the previous body of resear—
explored how changes in teaers’ knowledge were reﬂected in the quality
of their instruction. ese studies have shown, for example, that supporting
teaers to enhance their knowledge of comparing and contrasting multiple
solutions can help teaers materialize this practice in their teaing (Yakes
& Star, 2011) or that engaging teaers with allenging tasks can enhance
their PCK, whi, in turn, can aid teaers in identifying and comparing
multiple student solutions during their practice (Tirosh, Tsamir, Levenson,
& Tabach, 2011).
Other studies have investigated the association between teaing quality
and student learning. Su studies have suggested, for instance, that
diﬀerent teaing paerns have diﬀerential impact on dimensions of
students’ aﬀective domain (Hugener et al., 2009) or that the total number of
distinct mathematics activities in whi students engage has signiﬁcant

potential in supporting student cognitive performance (Clements et al.,
2011). An experimental study using teaer random assignment to students
(Kane, McCaffrey, Miller, & Staiger, 2013) has also empirically corroborated
this association by showing several teaing practices to signiﬁcantly
predict student learning.
Large-scale studies have also pointed to moderate associations (at best)
between teaer knowledge and student learning. For example, in Rooﬀ,
Jacob, Kane, and Steiger’s study (2011), teaers’ MKT was the only
signiﬁcant predictor of student performance along with teaers’ personal
and general eﬃcacy. Similarly, in Hill, Rowan, and Ball’s work (2005),
students taught by teaers with high levels of MKT experienced gains in
their scores equivalent to about two weeks of instruction compared to their
counterparts taught by average MKT teaers. Krauss, Baumert, and Blum
(2008) also found that ninth grade students taught by teaers with higher
PCK scores performed signiﬁcantly beer in mathematics in tenth grade,
compared to their counterparts taught by less PCK-knowledgeable
teachers.
In sum, the studies considered here paint a more promising and
encouraging picture compared to that sketed at the beginning of this
century by Ball and colleagues (Ball et al., 2001), who found that only 5% of
the 354 papers they reviewed explored how teaers’ mathematical
understanding affected their practice, and only 2% examined how it affected
student learning. Although we have not generated analogous statistics, the
studies that we reviewed suggest that signiﬁcant work has been carried out
in this domain during the past decade—yet, Ball and colleagues’ plea for
more work in this terrain is still pertinent.
What is particularly interesting, however, is that the last few years have
also seen studies that bring together all three components under
consideration—something largely missing in the 1990s, perhaps with a
notable exception (Sowder, Philipp, Armstrong, & Sappelle, 1998).

Although focusing on the same ain of associations, these studies have
notable diﬀerences. First, they diﬀer in the constructs they employ. For
example, in terms of teaer knowledge, some studies focused on the
distinction between SMK and PCK (Baumert et al., 2010; Kunter et al.,
2013); others drew on the MKT or diﬀerent manifestations of it (Cantrell &
Kane, 2013; Shetman et al., 2010); still others employed author-developed
conceptualizations (Toshanov, 2011) or used a combination of theoretical
perspectives (Kersting et al., 2012). Diﬀerences were also observed in the
aspects of instructional quality under consideration and the ways in whi
those were measured, ranging from aending to teaers’ instructional
decisions captured in teaer logs (Shetman et al., 2010), to considering
limited aspects of instruction (e.g., Baumert et al., 2010; Kersting et al., 2012;
Kunter et al., 2013), to aending to a conglomerate of instructional aspects
included in diﬀerent observation instruments (Cantrell & Kane, 2013). Most
of the studies also focused on student cognitive outcomes, with only one
exception (Kunter et al., 2013) that also considered student motivation.
Second, these studies diﬀered in scale, with some employing no more than
50 teaers (Kersting et al., 2012) and others recruiting more than 1,300
teaers (Cantrell & Kane, 2013). ird, with only one exception
(Shetman et al., 2010), all other studies examined the focal ain of
associations from a static perspective; even the study that comprised the
exception, however, limited its aention to only considering anges in the
first link of the chain.
ese diﬀerences notwithstanding, these studies as a whole have yielded
promising ﬁndings about the association among teaer knowledge,
teaing quality, and student learning. With only two exceptions (Cantrell
& Kane, 2013; Shetman, Haertel, Roselle, Knudsen, & Singleton, 2013),
all other studies showed aspects of teaer knowledge to relate to aspects
of instructional quality. With no exception, all studies suggested that
instructional quality contributes positively to student learning, although the

eﬀects of these contributions ranged. Interestingly, more complicated
interactions among the three links of the ain were also documented,
showing, for instance, instructional quality to mediate the eﬀect of teaer
knowledge on student learning (Kersting et al., 2012). As a collective, then,
these studies not only suggest that investigating the entire ain is feasible,
but they also point to the signiﬁcant beneﬁts that can be accrued by
bringing together the three components under consideration. What remains,
however, a key allenge for researers in the years to come is exploring
the entire ain of associations from a dynamic perspective and at scale,
given that su a dynamic exploration was already undertaken in the 1990s
with only four teaers (Sowder et al., 1998). is is not only a conceptual
allenge, but also a methodological one that we envision will face
researers in the years to come. We conclude by considering other related
methodological challenges.
Methodological Challenges in Considering the
Entire Chain of Interactions
Several of the methodological issues inherent in exploring the entire ain
of associations have already been discussed in previous sections. Instead of
recapitulating these issues, here we brieﬂy consider four additional
methodological allenges that become more pertinent when considering
all three components of the chain together.
e ﬁrst issue relates to the design of a study that lends itself to delving
deeper into this complex set of associations. Diﬀerent su designs have
been employed to study aspects of this ain, ranging from experimental
studies (e.g., Clements et al., 2011; Kane et al., 2013) to more qualitative
descriptive explorations (e.g., Izsák et al., 2008; Mitell et al., 2014). Given
how complex ea of the three constructs entailed in this association are,

and given that studying the entire ain further aggravates complexity,
solars are encouraged to be explicit about the resear design they
employ, and clearly discuss its aﬀordances and limitations in taling
complexity. Su explicitness is expected to accumulate collective
knowledge that is highly needed when it comes to investigating particularly
complicated phenomena.
e second methodological consideration pertains to exploring more
than linear eﬀects, whi have almost exclusively been considered thus far,
as our review of the literature suggests. With suﬃciently powered studies,
future works might point to curvilinear eﬀects as well. From a policy
perspective, su eﬀects can oﬀer invaluable guidelines for supporting
student learning through inducing anges in certain aspects of teaing
quality or dimensions of teaer knowledge. For example, instead of
exploring only interactions between the mathematical riness of the
environment in whi students are engaged and the cognitive level at
which students experience the subject matter, as Hiebert and Grouws (2007)
suggested, researers could also determine optimal levels of riness and
cognitive complexity through exploring curvilinear effects.
e third and equally critical consideration relates to the optimal level of
alignment that needs to be obtained in su studies. Alignment “designates
the similarity [and] congruence between the content taught and the
assessments of aievement in that content area” (Gage, 2009, p. 59). If we
extend this deﬁnition to also include teaer-knowledge performance, then,
alignment refers to the degree to whi the three components examined in
this apter are congruent with ea other. Ensuring satisfactory levels of
alignment is necessary if the true eﬀects entailed in this ain are to be
revealed. For it does not make mu sense to measure, say, teaer
knowledge in statistics, explore the quality of their instructional approaes
in geometry, and gauge student performance in numbers and operations,
unless we are convinced that the topic does not really maer—something

that is not supported by a number of studies reviewed throughout this
apter. Aending to issues of alignment was a key aracteristic of one of
the few studies that brought together all three components under
consideration. In this study (Kersting et al., 2012), all measures obtained
focused on the content of fractions, something that helped minimize the
noise introduced by aending to diﬀerent content areas for diﬀerent parts
of the ain. As a consequence, the eﬀects of teaer knowledge on
teaing quality (Cohen’s f 2 = .54) and of teaing quality on student
learning (Cohen’s f2 = .22) or of teaer knowledge on student learning
(Cohen’s f2 = .16) appeared to be stronger than those typically observed in
similar studies. Establishing a satisfactory level of alignment appears to be a
sine qua non design aspect of studies aiming to shed more light on how the
three components considered herein interact with ea other. A caveat is,
however, in order: Erring too mu on the side of alignment can yield
results that might have limited generalizability. To bring this idea home, let
us consider a hypothetical design that explores teaers’ knowledge in
teaing a nonconventional whole-number multiplication algorithm to
third graders, examines teaers’ practices in teaing this content, and
explores students’ corresponding performance. By securing a high degree of
alignment, this study has the potential to further minimize the noise
discussed earlier and beer capture the signal of the eﬀects. But what is this
signal really about? How applicable might the results of such an exploration
be to other situations? Although a rather extreme case, this hypothetical
scenario suggests another key priority for future resear: devoting energy
and thought to determine optimal levels of alignment that would help
capture the real eﬀects of the associations examined, on the one hand, and
on the other, ensure the applicability and generalizability of these findings.
Finally, studies that employ a more dynamic perspective in exploring the
associations at hand, as suggested earlier, lend themselves to investigating
issues of growth and stability. Writing almost 30 years ago, Shavelson et al.

(1986) lamented that solars are aending to the association between
teaing and learning from a static perspective. As they noted, this
approa is deﬁcient in the sense that both teaers and students grow and
ange as they interact with ea other and the content throughout the
year(s). Although our review in this apter suggests that some steps have
been made toward considering the phenomena at hand from a more
dynamic perspective, more work will deﬁnitely be needed to engage with
su issues and to examine both teaer and student learning trajectories,
exploring how these trajectories intersect and inform ea other. Su
investigations will require longitudinal studies that follow teaers and
students for an entire sool year at least. Recent measurement and
statistical advancements (see Creemers et al., 2010) oﬀer handy mainery
that researchers can employ in pursuing such endeavors.

In Lieu of Conclusion: In Challenges Lies
Opportunity
We initiated this apter by pointing out that, aer almost four decades of
signiﬁcant solarly work, we have by now accumulated suﬃcient
empirical evidence suggesting that teaers make a diﬀerence in student
learning. However, questions regarding the interactions among teaer
knowledge, teaing quality, and student learning—as well as the particular
ways in whi these interactions are manifested—remain open. Our review
has suggested that during the past decade signiﬁcant work has been carried
out to understand ea of the three components of the ain, and to a mu
smaller extent, the ain as a whole. As we have discussed, signiﬁcant
advancements have been made at both theoretical and methodological
fronts that oﬀer the bedro for future explorations. However, there still
exist a lot of unanswered questions. Fully unpaing and understanding the
complex relationship we have sketed in this apter is neither
inconsequential nor easily tractable. To aggravate complexity, it is
important to keep in mind that this ain of associations is only partially
represented here, given that additional teaer personal resources (e.g.,
beliefs, identities, etc.), as well as several resources within the instructional
milieu (e.g., curricula, tenological tools, time and other constraints) might
contribute to instructional quality and student learning (see Kennedy, 2010).
However, to eo Walter Cole, an American politician of the 19th century,
in allenges really lies the opportunity, as long as we are not paralyzed at
the thought of allenge that rests in every opportunity. Hopefully, the
advancements made so far offer a springboard for moving forward.
We close by considering an issue that has been alluded to in several parts
of this apter—the implications of understanding this complex relationship
for policy and practice. Developing a clearer understanding of this
relationship, alongside a clear vision of the learning we aspire to for

students in the 21st century, can help create those conditions that will
maximize the possibilities of securing this learning. By understanding how
teaing quality can contribute to student learning, solars and
practitioners can work together to develop teaing interventions that will
oﬀer students the opportunities to experience mathematics in ways that
lead to powerful learning. At the same time, developing more insights into
the meanisms through whi teaer knowledge contributes to
instructional quality can help cra preservice teaing education programs
and in-service teaing professional development programs that can help
teaers develop the knowledge and the skills to eﬀectively enact certain
teaing practices that contribute to the desired learning outcomes. In this
respect, working on unpaing and understanding this complex relationship
creates an arena for forging fruitful and productive collaborations between
researers, policy makers, and practitioners—whi comprises a still
unfulfilled demand in the field of mathematics education and beyond.

Notes
1. Because of space constraints and our decision to focus on frameworks oﬀered during the last
decade, we omied other important conceptualizations, e.g., Ma’s work (1999) on profound
understanding of fundamental mathematics or Fennema and Franke’s earlier work (1992) on
teacher knowledge.
2. is situated, social, and distributed aracter of teaer knowledge is also reﬂected or
emphasized in other works, as well (e.g., Askew, 2008; Hodgen, 2011).
3. Although we are aware of the debate between theories, theoretical perspectives, approaes, and
models, in this apter we refrain from entering this discussion; therefore, we simply refer to
theoretical perspectives as a matter of convenience.
4. Although some frameworks detailing the development in diﬀerent components have been
proposed (e.g., for teaer knowledge, see Silverman and ompson, 2008), no frameworks that
examine changes in the three components considered herein are available.
5. For the sake of brevity, here we consider teaer knowledge as a uniﬁed whole, without geing
into discussions about different types of knowledge, as we did in the first section.

References
Adler, J., & Davis, Z. (2006). Opening another bla box: Researing mathematics for teaing in
mathematics teaer education. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 37(4), 270–296.
doi:10.2307/30034851
Adler, J., & Huillet, D. (2008). e social production of mathematics for teaing. In P. Sullivan & T.
Wood (Eds.), Knowledge and beliefs in mathematics teaing and teaing development  (Vol. 1,
pp. 195–221). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Alsawaie, O. N. (2012). Number sense-based strategies used by high-aieving sixth grade students
who experienced reform textbooks. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education,
10(5), 1071–1097. doi:10.1007/s10763-011-9315-y
Ambrose, R., & Molina, M. (2014). Spanish/English bilingual students’ comprehension of arithmetic
story problem texts. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 12(6), 1469–
1496. doi:10.1007/s10763-013-9472-2
Amrein-Beardsley, A. (2008). Methodological concerns about the education value-added assessment
system. Educational Researcher, 37(2), 65–75. doi:10.3102/0013189X08316420
Andrews, P. (2011). e cultural location of teaers’ mathematical knowledge: Another hidden
variable in mathematics education resear? In T. Rowland & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical
knowledge in teaching (pp. 99–118). New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9766-8_7
Arbaugh, F., Herbel-Eisenmann, B., Ramirez, N., Knuth, E., Kranendonk, H., & ander, J. R. (2010).
Linking resear and practice: e NCTM resear agenda conference report . Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Artigue, M., Bartolini-Bussi, M., Dreyfus, T., Gray, E., & Prediger, S. (2005). Diﬀerent theoretical
perspectives and approaes in resear in mathematics education. In M. Bos (Ed.), Proceedings
of the Fourth Congress of the European Society for Resear in Mathematics Education (pp.
1239–1244). Barcelona: Fundemi IQS.
Askew, M. (2008). Mathematical discipline knowledge requirements for prospective primary teaers,
and the structure and teaing approaes of programs designed to develop that knowledge. In
P. Sullivan & T. Wood (Eds.), Knowledge and beliefs in mathematics teaing and teaing
development (Vol. 1, pp. 13–35). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.

Bair, S. L., & Ri, B. S. (2011). Characterizing the development of specialized mathematical content
knowledge for teaing in algebraic reasoning and number theory. Mathematical inking and
Learning, 13(4), 292–321. doi:10.1080/10986065.2011.608345
Baker, E. L., Barton, P. E., Darling-Hammond, L., Haertel, E., Ladd, H. F., Linn, R. L., … Shepard, L.
A. (2010, August). Problems with the use of student test scores to evaluate teaers (Brieﬁng
Paper No. 278). Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Baker, D., Street, B., & Tomlin, A. (2006). Navigating sooled numeracies: Explanations for low
aievement, in mathematics of UK ildren from low SES baground. Mathematical inking
and Learning, 8(3), 287–307. doi:10.1207/s15327833mtl0803_5
Balfanz, R., Mac Iver, D. J., & Byrnes, V. (2006). e implementation and impact of evidence-based
mathematics reforms in high-poverty middle sools: A multi-site, multi-year study. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 37(1), 33–64. doi:10.2307/30035051
Ball, D. L., & Bass, H. (2003). Toward a practice-based theory of mathematical knowledge for
teaing. In E. Simmt and B. Davis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2002 Annual Meeting of the
Canadian Mathematics Education Study Group (pp. 3–14). Edmonton, AB: CMESC/GCEDM.
Ball, D. L., Charalambous, C. Y., Thames, M. H., & Lewis, J. (2009). Teacher knowledge and teaching:
Viewing a complex relationship from three perspectives. In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, & C.
Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 121–125). Thessaloniki, Greece: PME.
Ball, D. L., & Hill, H. C. (2009). Measuring teaer quality in practice. In D. H. Gitomer (Ed.),
Measurement issues and assessment for teaching quality (pp. 80–98). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ball, D. L., Lubienski, S. T., & Mewborn, D. S. (2001). Resear on teaing mathematics: e
unsolved problem of teaers’ mathematical knowledge. In V. Riardson (Ed.), Handbook of
research on teaching (4th ed., pp. 433–456). Washington, DC: American Research Association.
Ball, D. L., & Rowan, B. (2004). Introduction: Measuring instruction. e Elementary Sool Journal,
105(1), 3–10.
Ball, D. L., Sleep, L., Boerst, T. A., & Bass, H. (2009). Combining the development of practice and the
practice of development in teaer education. e Elementary Sool Journal, 109 (5), 458–474.
doi:10.1086/596996
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it

special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389–407. doi:10.1177/0022487108324554
Barre, J. E., Clements, D. H., Klanderman, D., Pennisi, S. J., & Polaki, M. V. (2006). Students’
coordination of geometric reasoning and measuring strategies on a ﬁxed perimeter task:
Developing mathematical understanding of linear measurement. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 37(3), 187–221.
Baista, M. T. (2007). e development of geometric and spatial thinking. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second
handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 843–908). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Baista, M. T., & Clements, D. H. (1996). Students’ understanding of three-dimensional rectangular
arrays 
of 
cubes. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 27(3), 258–292.
doi:10.2307/749365
Baumert, J., Kunter, M., Blum, W., Brunner, M., Voss, T., Jordan, A., … Tsai, Y. M. (2010). Teaers’
mathematical knowledge, cognitive activation in the classroom, and student progress. American
Educational Research Journal, 47(1), 133–180. doi:10.3102/0002831209345157
Bednarz, N., & Proulx, J. (2009). Knowing and using mathematics in teaing: Conceptual and
epistemological clarifications. For the Learning of Mathematics, 29(3), 11–17.
Begle, E. G. (1979). Critical variables in mathematics education: Findings from a survey of the
empirical literature. Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Behr, M., Lesh, R., Post, T., & Silver E. (1983). Rational number concepts. In R. Lesh & M. Landau
(Eds.), Acquisition of mathematics concepts and processes (pp. 91–125). New York: Academic
Press.
Bell, C. A., Wilson, S., Higgins, T., & McCoa, D. B. (2010). Measuring the eﬀects of professional
development on teaer knowledge: e case of developing mathematical ideas. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 41(5), 479–512.
Beswi, K., Callingham, R., & Watson, J. (2012). e nature and development of middle sool
mathematics teaers’ knowledge. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 15(2), 131–157.
doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9177-9
Biddlecomb, B., & Carr, M. (2011). A longitudinal study of the development of mathematics
strategies and underlying counting semes. International Journal of Science and Mathematics
Education, 9(1), 1–24. doi:10.1007/s10763-010-9202-y

Bieda, K. N. (2010). Enacting proof-related tasks in middle sool mathematics: Challenges and
opportunities. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(4), 351–382.
Biggs, J. B., & Collis, K. F. (1991). Multimodal learning and the quality of intelligent behavior. In
H.A.H. Rowe (Ed.), Intelligence: Reconceptualisation and measurement (pp. 57–75). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Bikner-Ahsbahs, A., & Prediger, S. (2010). Networking of theories —An approa for exploiting the
diversity of theoretical approaes. In B. Sriraman & L. English (Eds.), eories of mathematics
education: Seeking new frontiers (pp. 483–506). London, UK: Springer.
Bjuland, R., Cestari, M. L., & Borgersen, H. E. (2008). e interplay between gesture and discourse as
mediating devices in collaborative mathematical reasoning: A multimodal approa.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 10(3), 271–292. doi:10.1080/10986060802216169
Blömeke, S., Suhl, U., & Döhrmann, M. (2013). Assessing strengths and weaknesses of teaer
knowledge in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Western countries: Diﬀerential item functioning in
TEDS-M. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 11(4), 795–817.
doi:10.1007/s10763-013-9413-0
Borich, G. D. (1992). Effective teaching methods (2nd ed.). New York: Macmillan.
Boston, M. D. (2012). Assessing instructional quality in mathematics. e Elementary Sool
Journal, 113(1), 76–104. doi:10.1086/666387
Boston, M. D. (2013). Connecting anges in secondary mathematics teaers’ knowledge to their
experiences in a professional development workshop. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education ,
16(1), 7–31. doi:10.1007/s10857-012-9211-6
Boston, M. D., & Smith, M. S. (2009). Transforming secondary mathematics teaing: Increasing the
cognitive demands of instructional tasks used in teaers’ classrooms. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 40(2), 119–156.
Bray, W. S. (2011). A collective case study of the inﬂuence of teaers’ beliefs and knowledge on
error-handling practices during class discussion of mathematics. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 42(1), 2–38.
Brizuela, B. M. (2006). Young ildren’s notations for fractions. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
62(3), 281–305. doi:10.1007/s10649-005-9003-3
Brophy, J. (1986). Teaing and learning mathematics: Where resear should be going. Journal for

Research in Mathematics Education, 17(5), 323–346. doi:10.2307/749326
Brophy, J., & Good, T. (1986). Teaer behavior and student aievement. In M. C. Wiro (Ed.),
Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp. 328–375). New York: Macmillan.
Buholtz, N., & Kaiser, G. (2013). Improving mathematics teaer education in Germany: Empirical
results from a longitudinal evaluation of innovative programs. International Journal of Science
and Mathematics Education, 11(4), 949–977. doi:10.1007/s10763-013-9427-7
Burton, L. (1984). Mathematical thinking: e struggle for meaning. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 15(1), 35–49. doi:10.2307/748986
Caddle, M. C., & Brizuela, B. M. (2011). Fih graders’ additive and multiplicative reasoning:
Establishing connections across conceptual ﬁelds using a graph. e Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 30(3), 224–234. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2011.04.002
Cai, J., Moyer, J. C., Wang, N., Hwang, S., Nie, B., & Garber, T. (2013). Mathematical problem posing
as a measure of curricular eﬀect on students’ learning. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
83(1), 57–69. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9429-3
Cantrell, S., & Kane, T. J. (2013). Ensuring fair and reliable measures of eﬀective teaing:
Culminating ﬁndings from the MET project’s three-year study. Seale, WA: Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation. Retrieved from www.metproject.org/reports.php.
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A.D., Brizuela, B. M., & Earnest, D. (2006). Arithmetic and algebra in
early mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(2), 87–115.
Casabianca, J. M., McCaﬀrey, D. F., Gitomer, D. H., Bell, C. A., Hamre, B. K., & Pianta, R. C. (2013).
Eﬀect of observation mode on measures of secondary mathematics teaing. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 73(5), 757–783. doi:10.1177/0013164413486987
Cengiz, N., Kline, K., & Grant, T. J. (2011). Extending students’ mathematical thinking during
whole-group 
discussions. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 14(5), 355–374.
doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9179-7
Chapin, S. H., O’Connor, C., & Anderson. N. C. (2003). Classroom discussions: Using math talk to
help students learn. Sausalito, CA: Math Solutions Publications.
Charalambous, C. Y. (2008). Preservice teaers’ Mathematical Knowledge for Teaing and their
performance in selected teaing practices: Exploring a complex relationship. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Charalambous, C. Y. (2010). Mathematical knowledge for teaing and task unfolding: An
exploratory study. The Elementary School Journal, 110(3), 247–278. doi:10.1086/648978
Charalambous, C. Y., Hill, H. C., & Ball, D. L. (2011). Prospective teaers’ learning to provide
instructional explanations: How does it look and what might it take? Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 14(6), 441–463. doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9182-z
Charalambous, C. Y., Hill, H. C., & Mitell, R. N. (2012). Two negatives don’t always make a
positive: Exploring how limitations in teaer knowledge and the curriculum contribute to
instructional 
quality. Journal 
of 
Curriculum 
Studies, 
44(4), 
489–513.
doi:10.1080/00220272.2012.716974
Charalambous, C. Y., Komitis, A., Papaaralambous, M., & Stefanou, A. (2014). Using generic and
content-speciﬁc teaing practices in teaer evaluation: An exploratory study of teaers’
perceptions. Teaching and Teacher Education, 41, 22–33. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2014.03.001
Charalambous, C. Y., & Pia-Pantazi, D. (2007). Drawing on a theoretical model to study students’
understandings 
of 
fractions. Educational 
Studies 
in 
Mathematics, 
64(3), 
293–316.
doi:10.1007/s10649-006-9036-2
Chester, M., & Zelman, S. (2009). Approximations of teaer quality and eﬀectiveness: View from
the state education agency. In D. H. Gitomer (Ed.), Measurement issues and assessment for
teaching quality. (pp. 131–149). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chevallard, Y. (1999). L’analyse des pratiques enseignantes en théorie anthropologique du
didactique. Recherches en Didactique des Mathématiques, 19(2), 221–265.
Christou, C., Pia-Pantazi, D., Souyoul, A., & Zaariades, T. (2005). e embodied, proceptual and
formal worlds in the context of functions. Canadian Journal of Science, Mathematics and
Technology Education, 5(2), 241–252. doi:10.1080/14926150509556656
Chrysostomou, M., Pia-Pantazi, D., Tsingi, C., Cleanthous, E., & Christou, C. (2013). Examining
number sense and algebraic reasoning through cognitive styles. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 83(2), 205–223. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9448-0
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2007). Eﬀects of a presool mathematics curriculum: Summative
resear on the building blos project. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 38(2),
136–163. doi: 10.2307/30034954
Clements, D. C., Sarama, J., Spitler, M. A., Lange, A. A., & Wolfe, C. B. (2011). Mathematics learned

by young ildren in an intervention based on learning trajectories: A large-scale cluster
randomized trial. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 42(2), 127–166.
Clivaz, S. (2013). Teaing multidigit multiplication: Combining multiple frameworks to analyse a
class episode. In B. Ubuz, Ç. Haser, & M. A. Marioi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th Congress of
European Resear in Mathematics Education (pp. 2995–3004). Ankara, Turkey: Middle East
Technical University.
Cobb, P., & Yael, E. (1996). Constructivist, emergent, and sociocultural perspectives in the context
of 
developmental 
resear. Educational 
Psyologist, 
31(3–4), 
175–190.
doi:10.1080/00461520.1996.9653265
Coran-Smith, M. (2003). Teaing quality maers. Journal of Teaer Education, 54 (2), 95–98.
doi:10.1177/0022487102250283
Cohen, D. K. (1990). A revolution in one classroom: The case of Mrs. Oublier. Educational Evaluation
and Policy Analysis, 12(3), 311–329. doi:10.3102/01623737012003311
Cohen, D. K., Raudenbush, S. W., & Ball, D. L. (2003). Resources, instruction, and resear.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(2), 119–142. doi:10.3102/01623737025002119
Cole, Y. (2012). Assessing elemental validity: e transfer and use of mathematical knowledge for
teaing measures in Ghana. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 44(3),
415–426. doi:10.1007/s11858-012-0380-7
Coleman, J. S., Campbell, E. Q., Hobson, C. J., McPartland, J., Mood, A.M., Weinfeld, F. D., & York, R.
L. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Copur-Gencturk, Y., & Lubienski, S. T. (2013). Measuring mathematical knowledge for teaing: A
longitudinal study using two measures. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 16(3), 211–
236. doi:10.1007/s10857-012-9233-0
Core Practice Consortium (2014, April). Enriing resear and innovation through the speciﬁcation
of professional practice. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
Research Association, Philadelphia, PA.
Correnti, R., & Martínez, J. F. (2012). Conceptual, methodological, and policy issues in the study of
teaing: Implications for improving instructional practice at scale. Educational Assessment,
17(2–3), 51–61. doi:10.1080/10627197.2012.717834

Corill, J., Dubinsky, E., Niols, D., Swingendorf, K., omas, K., & Vidakovic, D. (1996).
Understanding the limit concept: Beginning with a coordinated process seme. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 15(2), 167–192. doi:10.1016/S0732-3123(96)90015-2
Creemers, B.P.M. (1994). The effective classroom. London: Cassell.
Creemers, B.P.M., & Kyriakides, L. (2008). e dynamics of educational eﬀectiveness: A contribution
to policy, practice and theory in contemporary schools. London & New York: Routledge.
Creemers, B.P.M., Kyriakides, L., & Sammons, P. (2010). Methodological advances in educational
effectiveness research. London & New York: Routledge.
Croninger, R. G., Buese, D., & Larson, J. (2012). A mixed-methods look at teaing quality:
Challenges and possibilities from one study. Teachers College Record, 114(4), 1–36.
Croninger, R. G., Valli, L., & Chambliss, M. J. (2012). Researing quality in teaing: Enduring and
emerging challenges. Teachers College Record, 114(4), 1–15.
Danielson, C. (2007). Enhancing professional practice: A framework for teaing (2nd ed.).
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Davis, R. B., & Maher, C. A. (1990). What do we do when we “do mathematics”? (Monograph).
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 4, 65–78. doi:10.2307/749913
Davis, B., & Renert, M. (2013). Profound understanding of emergent mathematics: Broadening the
construct of teaers’ disciplinary knowledge. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(2), 245–
265. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9424-8
Davis, B., & Simmt, E. (2006). Mathematics-for-teaing: An ongoing investigation of the
mathematics that teaers (need to) know. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 61(3), 293–319.
doi:10.1007/s10649-006-2372-4
Dekker, R., Elshout-Mohr, M., & Wood, T. (2006). How ildren regulate their own collaborative
learning. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 62(1), 57–79. doi:10.1007/s10649-006-1688-4
Delaney, S., Ball, D. L., Hill, H. C., Silling, S. G., & Zopf, D. (2008). “Mathematical knowledge for
teaing”: Adapting US measures for use in Ireland. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education ,
11(3), 171–197. doi:10.1007/s10857-008-9072-1
Depaepe, F., Versaﬀel, L., & Keltermans, G. (2013). Pedagogical content knowledge: A systematic
review of the way in whi the concept has pervaded mathematics educational resear.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 34, 12–25. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2013.03.001

Ding, M. (2008). Teaer knowledge necessary to address student errors and diﬃculties about
equivalent fractions. In G. Kulm (Ed.), Teaer knowledge and practice in middle grades
mathematics (pp. 147–171). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Dominguez, H., LópezLeiva, C. A., & Khisty, L. L. (2014). Relational engagement: Proportional
reasoning with bilingual Latino/a students. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 85(1), 143–160.
doi:10.1007/s10649-013-9501-7
Drijvers, P., & Godino, J. D., Font, V., & Troue, L. (2013). One episode, two lenses: A reﬂective
analysis of student learning with computer algebra from instrumental and onto-semiotic
perspectives. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(1), 23–49. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9416-8
Dubinsky, E. (1992). A learning theory approa to calculus. In Z. Karian (Ed.), Symbolic
computation in undergraduate mathematics education (MAA Notes No. 24, pp. 48–55).
Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Ellis, A. B. (2011). Generalizing-promoting actions: How classroom collaborations can support
students’ mathematical generalizations. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 42(4),
308–345.
English, L. D. (2006). Mathematical modeling in the primary sool: Children’s construction of a
consumer guide. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63(3), 303–323. doi:10.1007/s10649-005-
9013-1
English, L. D. (2013). Complex modelling in the primary and middle sool years: An
interdisciplinary approa. In G. A. Stillman, G. Kaiser, W. Blum, & J. P. Brown (Eds.), Teaching
mathematical modelling: Connecting to resear and practice (Vol. 16, pp. 491–505). Dordret:
Springer.
English, L. D., & Mulligan, J. (Eds.). (2013). Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Even, R. (2009). Teaer knowledge and teaing: Considering the connections between perspectives
and ﬁndings. In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, & H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp.
147–148). Thessaloniki, Greece: PME.
Fauth, B., Decristan, J., Rieser, S., Klieme, E., & Büner, G. (2014). Student ratings of teaing
quality in primary sool: Dimensions and prediction of student outcomes. Learning and

Instruction, 29, 1–9. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2013.07.001
Fennema, E., & Franke, M. L. (1992). Teaers’ knowledge and its impact. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.),
Handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning: A project of the National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics (pp. 147–164). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Fenstermaer, G. D., & Riardson, V. (2005). On making determinations of quality in teaing.
Teachers College Record, 107(1), 186–213.
Fishbein, E. (1993). e theory of ﬁgural concepts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 24(2), 139–
162. doi:10.1007/BF01273689
Francisco, J. M., & Hähkiöniemi, M. (2012). Students’ ways of reasoning about nonlinear functions
in guess-my-rule games. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 10(5),
1001–1021. doi:10.1007/s10763-011-9310-3
Franke, M. L., Kazemi, E., & Baey, D. (2007). Mathematics teaing and classroom practice. In F. K.
Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 225–256).
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishers.
Freudenthal, H. (1968). Why to tea mathematics so as to be useful. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 1(1–2), 3–8. doi:10.1007/BF00426224
Gage, N. L. (2009). A conception of teaching. New York: Springer.
Gainsburg, J. (2008). Real-world connections in secondary mathematics teaing. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 11(3), 199–219. doi:10.1007/s10857-007-9070-8
Gallagher, H. A. (2004). Vaughn elementary’s innovative teaer evaluation system: Are teaer
evaluation scores related to growth in student aievement? Peabody Journal of Education,
79(4), 79–107. doi:10.1207/s15327930pje7904_5
Gil, E., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2011). Explanations and context in the emergence of students’ informal
inferential 
reasoning. Mathematical 
inking 
and 
Learning, 
13(1–2), 
87–108.
doi:10.1080/10986065.2011.538295
Gilleece, L., Cosgrove, J., & Sofroniou, N. (2010). Equity in mathematics and science outcomes:
Characteristics associated with high and low aievement on PISA 2006 in Ireland. International
Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 8(3), 475–496. doi:10.1007/s10763-010-9199-2
Gilmore, C. K., & Papadatou-Pastou, M. (2009). Paerns of individual diﬀerences in conceptual
understanding and arithmetical skill: A meta-analysis. Mathematical inking and Learning,

11(1–2), 25–40. doi:10.1080/10986060802583923
Gitomer, D. H. (2009). Crisp measurement and messy context: A clash of assumptions and metaphors
—Synthesis of section III. In D. H. Gitomer (Ed.), Measurement issues and assessment for teaing
quality (pp. 223–233). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Glazerman, S., Loeb, S., Goldhaber, D., Staiger, D., Raudenbush, S., & Whitehurst, G. (2010).
Evaluating teaers: e important role of value-added  (Report No. 6829). Washington, DC:
Brown Center on Education Policy, Brookings.
Graeber, A., & Tirosh, D. (2008). Pedagogical content knowledge: Useful concept or elusive notion? In
P. Sullivan & T. Wood (Eds.), Knowledge and beliefs in mathematics teaing and teaing
development (Vol. 1, pp. 117–132). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Griﬃths, M. (2013). Intuiting the fundamental theorem of arithmetic. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 82(1), 75–96. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9410-1
Grossman, P. (2008). Responding to our critics: From crisis to opportunity in resear on teaer
education. Journal of Teacher Education, 59(1), 10–23. doi:10.1177/0022487107310748
Grossman, P., Hammerness, K., & McDonald, M. (2009). Redeﬁning teaing, re-imagining teaer
ed u ca t ion . Teaers 
and 
Teaing: 
eory 
and 
Practice , 
15(2), 
273–289.
doi:10.1080/13540600902875340
Grossman, P., & McDonald, M. (2008). Ba to the future: Directions for resear in teaing and
teaer education. American Educational Resear Journal, 45(1), 184–205. doi:10.3102/0002
831207312906
Groth, R. E., & Bergner, J. A. (2006). Preservice elementary teaers’ conceptual and procedural
knowledge of mean, median, and mode. Mathematical inking and Learning, 8(1), 37–63.
doi:10.1207/s15327833mtl0801_3
Groth, R. E., & Bergner, J. A. (2013). Mapping the structure of knowledge for teaing nominal
categorical 
data 
analysis. Educational 
Studies 
in 
Mathematics, 
83(2), 
247–265.
doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9452-4
Hamre, B. K., Pianta, R. C., Downer, J. T., DeCoster, J., Mashburn, A. J., Jones, … Hamagami, A.
(2013). Teaing through interactions: Testing a developmental framework of teaer
eﬀectiveness in over 4,000 classrooms. e Elementary Sool Journal, 113 (4), 461–487.
doi:10.1086/669616

Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (1998). Students’ proof semes: Results from an exploratory study. In A. H.
Soenfeld, J. Kaput, & E. Dubinsky (Eds.), Resear in collegiate mathematics education (Vol. 3,
pp. 234–283). Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.
Harris, D. N. (2009). e policy uses and policy validity of value-added and other teaer quality
measures. In D. H. Gitomer (Ed.), Measurement issues and assessment for teaing quality (pp.
99–130). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Harris, D. N. (2011).Value-added measures in education: What every educator needs to know.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Haie, J. (2009). Visible learning. A synthesis of over 800 meta-analyses relating to aievement.
London: Routledge.
Hemmings, B., Grootenboer, P., & Kay, R. (2011). Predicting mathematics aievement: e
inﬂuence of prior aievement and aitudes. International Journal of Science and Mathematics
Education, 9(3), 691–705. doi:10.1007/s10763-010-9224-5
Herbst, P., & Kosko, K. W. (2012). Mathematical knowledge for teaing high sool geometry. In L.
R. Van Zoest, J. J. Lo, & J. L. Kratky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (pp.
438–444). Kalamazoo, MI: Western Michigan University.
Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., Garnier, H., Givvin, K. B., Hollingsworth, H., Jacobs, J., … Stigler, J. (2003).
Teaing mathematics in seven countries: Results from the TIMSS 1999 video study .
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.
Hiebert, J., & Grouws, D. A. (2007). e eﬀects of classroom mathematics teaing on students‘
learning. In F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and
learning (pp. 371–404). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishers.
Hiebert, J., Stigler, J. W., Jacobs, J. K., Givvin, K. B., Garnier, H., Smith, M., … Gallimore, R. (2005).
Mathematics teaing in the United States today (and tomorrow): Results from the TIMSS 1999
video 
study. Educational 
Evaluation 
and 
Policy 
Analysis, 
27(2), 
111–132.
doi:10.3102/01623737027002111
Hill, H. C. (2007). Mathematical knowledge of middle sool teaers: Implications for the No Child
Le Behind policy initiative. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 29(2), 95–114.
doi:10.3102/0162373707301711

Hill, H. C. (2010). e nature and predictors of elementary teaers’ mathematical knowledge for
teaching. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41(5), 513–545.
Hill, H. C., Ball, D. L., Blunk, M., Goﬀney, I. M., & Rowan, B. (2007). Validating the ecological
assumption: e relationship of measure scores to classroom teaing and student learning.
Measurement: 
Interdisciplinary 
Resear 
and 
Perspectives, 
5(2–3), 
107–118.
doi:10.1080/15366360701487138
Hill, H. C., Ball, D. L., & Silling, S. G. (2008). Unpaing pedagogical content knowledge:
Conceptualizing and measuring teaers’ topic-speciﬁc knowledge of students. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 372–400.
Hill, H. C., Blunk, M. L., Charalambous, C. Y., Lewis, J. M., Phelps, G. C., Sleep, L., & Ball, D. L.
(2008). Mathematical knowledge for teaing and the mathematical quality of instruction: An
exploratory study. Cognition and Instruction, 26(4), 430–511. doi:10.1080/07370000802177235
Hill, H. C., & Charalambous, C. Y. (2012). Teaing (un)Connected Mathematics: Two teaers’
enactment 
of 
the 
Pizza 
problem. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 44(4), 467–487.
doi:10.1080/00220272.2012.716972
Hill, H. C., Charalambous, C. Y., & Kra, M. A. (2012). When rater reliability is not enough teaer
observation systems and a case for the generalizability study. Educational Researcher, 41(2), 56–
64. doi:10.3102/0013189X12437203
Hill, H. C., & Grossman, P. (2013). Learning from teaer observations: Challenges and opportunities
posed by new teacher evaluation systems. Harvard Educational Review, 83(2), 371–384.
Hill, H. C., Kapitula, L., & Umland, K. (2011). A validity argument approa to evaluating teaer
value-added 
scores. American 
Educational 
Resear 
Journal, 
48(3), 
794–
831.doi:10.3102/0002831210387916
Hill, H. C., Rowan, B., & Ball, D. L. (2005). Eﬀects of teaers’ mathematical knowledge for teaing
on student aievement. American Educational Resear Journal 42(2), 371–406. doi:10.3102/
00028312042002371
Hill, H. C., Silling, S. G., & Ball, D. L. (2004). Developing measures of teaers’ mathematics
knowledge for teaching. The Elementary School Journal, 105(1), 11–30. doi:10.1086/428763
Hill, H. C., Sleep, L., Lewis, J. M., & Ball, D. L. (2007). Assessing teaers’ mathematical knowledge:
What knowledge maers and what evidence counts? In F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of

resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 111–155). Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishers.
Hill, H. C., Umland, K., Litke, E., & Kapitula, L. R. (2012). Teaer quality and quality teaing:
Examining the relationship of a teaer assessment to practice. American Journal of Education,
118(4), 489–519.
Hodgen, J. (2011). Knowing and identity: A situated theory of mathematics knowledge in teaing.
In T. Rowland & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical knowledge in teaing (pp. 27–42). London,
UK: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9766-8_3
Hollebrands, K. F. (2007). e role of a dynamic soware program for geometry in the strategies
high sool mathematics students employ. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
38(2), 164–192.
Hollebrands., K., Conner, A., & Smith, R. C. (2010). e nature of arguments provided by college
geometry students with access to tenology while solving problems. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 41(4), 324–350.
Huang, R., & Cai, J. (2011). Pedagogical representations to tea linear relations in Chinese and US
classrooms: Parallel or hierarical? e Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 30(2), 149–165.
doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2011.01.003
Hugener, I., Pauli, C., Reusser, K., Lipowsky, F., Rakoczy, K., & Klieme, E. (2009). Teaing paerns
and learning quality in Swiss and German mathematics lessons. Learning and Instruction, 19(1),
66–78. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2008.02.001
Huillet, D. (2009). Mathematics for teaing: An anthropological approa and its use in teaer
training. For the Learning of Mathematics, 29(3), 4–10.
I˙mre, S. Y., & Akkoç, H. (2012). Investigating the development of prospective mathematics teaers’
pedagogical content knowledge of generalising number paerns through sool practicum.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 15(3), 207–226. doi:10.1007/s10857-012-9203-6
Ing, M., & Webb, N. M. (2012). Characterizing mathematics classroom practice: Impact of observation
and 
coding 
oices. Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice, 31(1), 
14–26.
doi:10.1111/j.1745-3992.2011.00224.x
Inglis, M., & Alco, L. (2012). Expert and novice approaes to reading mathematical proofs. Journal
for Research in Mathematics Education, 43(4), 358–390.

Izsák, A. (2008). Mathematical knowledge for teaing fraction multiplication. Cognition and
Instruction, 26(1), 95–143. doi:10.1080/07370000701798529
Izsák, A., Tillema, E., & Tunç-Pekkan, Z. (2008). Teaing and learning fraction addition on number
lines. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 39(1), 33–62. doi:10.2307/30034887
Jason, K., Garrison, A., Wilson, J., Gibbons, L., & Shahan, E. (2013). Exploring relationships between
seing up complex tasks and opportunities to learn in concluding whole-class discussions in
middle-grades mathematics instruction. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 44(4),
646–682.
Jens, C., Smith, M., Acland, H., Bane, M. J., Cohen, D., Gintis, H., … Mielson, S. (1972).
Inequality: A reassessment of the eﬀects of family and sooling in America. New York: Basic
Books.
Jurdak, M. E. (2006). Contrasting perspectives and performance of high sool students on problem
solving in real world situated and sool contexts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63(3),
283–301. doi:10.1007/s10649-005-9008-y
Jurdak, M. E., & El Mouhayar, R. R. (2014). Trends in the development of student level of reasoning
in paern generalization tasks across grade level. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 85(1), 75–
92. doi:10.1007/s10649-013-9494-2
Kamii, C., & Kysh, J. (2006). e diﬃculty of “length×width”: Is a square the unit of measurement?
The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 25(2), 105–115. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2006.02.001
Kane, T. J., McCaﬀrey, D. F., Miller, T., & Staiger, D. O. (2013). Have we identiﬁed eﬀective
teaers? Validating measures of eﬀective teaing using random assignment . Seale, WA: Bill
& Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved from www.metproject.org/reports.php.
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2012). Gathering feedba for teaing: Combining high-quality
observations with student surveys and aievement gains. Seale, WA: Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation. Retrieved from www.metproject.org/reports.php.
Kane, T. J., Taylor, E. S., Tyler, J. H., & Wooten, A. L. (2011). Identifying effective classroom practices
using 
student 
aievement 
data. Journal 
of 
Human 
Resources, 
46(3), 
587–613.
doi:10.3386/w15803
Kaput, J. J. (1998). Transforming algebra from an engine of inequity to an engine of mathematical
power by “algebrafying” the K–12 curriculum. In S. Fennel (Ed.), e nature and role of algebra

in the K–14 curriculum: Proceedings of a National Symposium (pp. 25–26). Washington, DC:
National Research Council, National Academy Press.
Kennedy, M. M. (2010). Aribution error and the quest for teaer quality. Educational Researer,
39(8), 591–598. doi:10.3102/0013189X10390804
Kersting, N. (2008). Using video clips of mathematics classroom instruction as item prompts to
measure teaers’ knowledge of teaing mathematics. Educational and Psyological
Measurement, 68(5), 845–861. doi:10.1177/0013164407313369
Kersting, N. B., Givvin, K. B., Sotelo, F. L., & Stigler, J. W. (2010). Teaers’ analyses of classroom
video predict student learning of mathematics: Further explorations of a novel measure of
teaer 
knowledge. Journal 
of 
Teaer 
Education, 
61 (1–2), 
172–181.
doi:10.1177/0022487109347875
Kersting, N. B., Givvin, K. B., ompson, B. J., Santagata, R., & Stigler, J. W. (2012). Measuring
usable knowledge: Teaers’ analyses of mathematics classroom videos predict teaing quality
and 
student 
learning. American 
Educational 
Resear 
Journal, 
49(3), 
568–589.
doi:10.3102/0002831212437853
Kieran, C. (1996). e anging face of sool algebra. In C. Alsina, J. Alvarez, B. Hodgson, C.
Laborde, & A. Pérez (Eds.), 8th International Congress on Mathematical Education: Selected
lectures (pp. 271–290). Seville, Spain: S.A.E.M. Thales.
Kilpatri, J., Swaﬀord, J., & Findell, B. (Eds.). (2001). Adding it up: Helping ildren learn
mathematics. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Kim, M., Roth, W. M., & om, J. (2011). Children’s gestures and the embodied knowledge of
geometry. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 9(1), 207–238.
doi:10.1007/s10763-010-9240-5
Kim, Y. R., Park, M. S., Moore, T. J., & Varma, S. (2013). Multiple levels of metacognition and their
elicitation through complex problem-solving tasks. e Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 32 (3),
377–396. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2013.04.002
Klieme, E., Pauli, C., & Reusser, K. (2009). e Pythagoras study. In J. Tomás & T. Seidel (Eds.), The
power of video studies in investigating teaing and learning in the classroom (pp. 137–160).
Münster, Germany: Waxmann.
Koellner, K., Jacobs, J., Borko, H., Sneider, C., Piman, M. E., Eiteljorg, E., … Frykholm, J. (2007).

e problem-solving cycle: A model to support the development of teaers’ professional
k n o w l e d g e . Mathematical 
inking 
and 
Learning, 
9(3), 
273–303.
doi:10.1080/10986060701360944
Kolovou, A., Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., & Köller, O. (2013). An intervention including an
online game to improve grade 6 students’ performance in early algebra. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(3), 510–549.
Konstantopoulos, S., & Chung, V. (2011). e persistence of teaer eﬀects in elementary grades.
American Educational Research Journal, 48(2), 361–386. doi:10.3102/0002831210382888
Koretz, D. (2008). Measuring up: What educational testing really tells us. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Krauss, S., Baumert, J., & Blum, W. (2008). Secondary mathematics teaers’ pedagogical content
knowledge and content knowledge: Validation of the COACTIV constructs. ZDM—The
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 40(5), 873–892. doi:10.1007/s11858-008-0141-9
Krauss, S., Brunner, M., Kunter, M., Baumert, J., Blum, W., Neubrand, M., & Jordan, A. (2008).
Pedagogical content knowledge and content knowledge of secondary mathematics teaers.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(3), 716–725. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.100.3.716
Kruteski, V. A. (1976). e psyology of mathematical abilities in sool ildren . Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press
Kunter, M., & Baumert, J. (2006). Who is the expert? Construct and criteria validity of student and
teaer 
ratings 
of 
instruction. Learning 
Environments 
Resear, 
9(3), 
231–251.
doi:10.1007/s10984-006-9015-7
Kunter, M., Klusmann, U., Baumert, J., Riter, D., Voss, T., & Hafeld, A. (2013). Professional
competence of teaers: Eﬀects on instructional quality and student development. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 105(3), 805–820. doi:10.1037/a0032583
Kwon, M., ames, M. H., & Pang, J. (2012). To ange or not to ange: Adapting mathematical
knowledge for teaing (MKT) measures for use in Korea. ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 44(3), 371–385. doi:10.1007/s11858-012-0397-y
Kyriakides, L., Christoforou, C., & Charalambous, C. Y. (2013). What maers for student learning
outcomes: A meta-analysis of studies exploring factors of eﬀective teaing. Teaing and
Teacher Education, 36, 143–152. doi:10.1016/j.tate.2013.07.010

Kyriakides, L., & Creemers, B.P.M. (2008). Using a multidimensional approach to measure the impact
of classroom level factors upon student achievement: A study testing the validity of the dynamic
m o d e l . Sool 
Eﬀectiveness 
and 
Sool 
Improvement, 
19 (2), 
183–205.
doi:10.1080/09243450802047873
Kyriakides, L., Creemers, B., Antoniou, P., & Demetriou, D. (2010). A synthesis of studies searing
for sool factors: Implications for theory and resear. British Educational Resear Journal,
36(5), 807–830. doi:10.1080/01411920903165603
Lakoﬀ, G., & Nuñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Lamon, S. J. (1999). Teaing fractions and rations for understanding. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Lampert, M. (2010). Learning teaing in, from, and for practice: What do we mean? Journal of
Teacher Education, 61(1–2), 21–34. doi:10.1177/0022487109347321
Langrall, C. W. (2014). Linking resear and practice: Another call to action? Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 45(2), 154–156.
Lannin, J. K., Webb, M., Chval, K., Arbaugh, F., His, S., Taylor, C., & Bruton, R. (2013). e
development of beginning mathematics teaer pedagogical content knowledge. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 16(6), 403–426. doi:10.1007/s10857-013-9244-5
Lavigne, N. C., Salkind, S. J., & Yan, J. (2008). Exploring college students’ mental representations of
inferential 
statistics. e 
Journal 
of 
Mathematical 
Behavior, 
27 (1), 
11–32.
doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2007.10.003
Learning Mathematics for Teaing Project. (2011). Measuring the mathematical quality of
instruction. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 14 (1), 25–47. doi:10.1007/s10857-010-
9140-1
Leikin, R. (2013). Evaluating mathematical creativity: e interplay between multiplicity and
insight. Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling, 55(4), 385–400.
Leikin, R., & Lev, M. (2013). Mathematical creativity in generally gied and mathematically
excelling adolescents: What makes the diﬀerence? ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 45(2), 183–197. doi:10.1007/s11858-012-0460-8
Leikin, R., & Pia-Pantazi, D. (2013). Creativity and mathematics education: Overview on the state-

of-art. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (2), 159–166.
doi:10.1007/s11858-012-0459-1
Lesh, R. (2010). Tools, researable issues & conjectures for investigating what it means to
understand statistics (or other topics) meaningfully. Journal of Mathematical Modelling and
Application, 1(2), 16–48.
Lesh, R. A., Sriraman, B., & English, L. D. (2014). eories of learning mathematics. In S. Lerman
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Mathematics Education (pp. 615–623). New York: Springer. doi: 978-94-
007-4978-8.
Lesh, R., & Zawojewski, J. (2007). Problem-solving and modeling. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook
of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 763–804). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Levenson, E. (2013). Exploring one student’s explanations at diﬀerent ages: e case of Sharon.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 83(2), 181–203. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9447-1
Levenson, E., Tirosh, D., & Tsamir, P. (2011). Presool geometry: eory, resear, and practical
perspectives. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Lewis, J. M., & Blunk, M. L. (2012). Reading between the lines: Teaing linear algebra. Journal of
Curriculum Studies, 44(4), 515–536. doi:10.1080/00220272.2012.716975
Lo, J. J., & Luo, F. (2012). Prospective elementary teaers’ knowledge of fraction division. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 15(6), 481–500. doi:10.1007/s10857-012-9221-4
Luyten, H. (2003). e size of sool eﬀects compared to teaer eﬀects: An overview of the resear
l i t era t u re. Sool 
Eﬀectiveness 
and 
Sool 
Improvement, 
14 (1), 
31–51.
doi:10.1076/sesi.14.1.31.13865
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaing elementary mathematics: Teaers’ understanding of
fundamental mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Makar, K., Bakker, A., & Ben-Zvi, D. (2011). e reasoning behind informal statistical inference.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 13(1–2), 152–173. doi:10.1080/10986065.2011.538301
Martínez, J. F., Borko, H., Steer, B., Luskin, R., & Kloser, M. (2012). Measuring classroom
assessment practice using instructional artifacts: A validation study of the QAS notebook.
Educational Assessment, 17(2–3), 107–131. doi:10.1080/10627197.2012.715513
Mashburn, A. J., Meyer, J. P., Allen, J. P., & Pianta, R. C. (2014). e eﬀect of observation length and

presentation order on the reliability and validity of an observational measure of teaing
q u a l i t y . Educational 
and 
Psyological 
Measurement, 
74(3), 
400–422.
doi:10.1177/0013164413515882
Mason, J. (2008). PCK and beyond. In P. Sullivan & T. Wood (Eds.), Knowledge and beliefs in
mathematics teaing and teaing development  (Vol. 1, pp. 301–322). Roerdam, e
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Mayer, D. P. (1999). Measuring instructional practice: Can policymakers trust survey data?
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 21(1), 29–45. doi:10.3102/01623737021001029
McCaﬀrey, D. F., Sass, T. R., Lowood, J. R., & Mihaly, K. (2009). e intertemporal variability of
teaer 
eﬀect 
estimates. Education 
Finance 
and 
Policy, 
4(4), 
572–606.
doi:10.1162/edfp.2009.4.4.572
McClellan, C., Donoghue, J., & Park, Y. S. (2013, April). Commonality and uniqueness in teaing
practice observation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Council of
Measurement in Education, San Francisco, CA.
McCrory, R., Floden, R., Ferrini-Mundy, J., Rease, M. D., & Senk, S. L. (2012). Knowledge of
Algebra for Teaing: A framework of knowledge and practices. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 43(5), 584–615. doi:10.5951/jresematheduc.43.5.0584
McDonald, M., Kazemi, E., & Kavanagh, S. S. (2013). Core practices and pedagogies of teaer
education a call for a common language and collective activity. Journal of Teaer Education,
64(5), 378–386. doi:10.1177/0022487113493807
Mesa, V. (2012). Aievement goal orientation of community college mathematics students and the
misalignment of instructors’ perceptions. Community College Review, 40(1), 46–74. doi:10.1177/
0091552111435663
Mewborn, D. S. (2003). Teaing, teaers’ knowledge and their professional development. In J.
Kilpatri, W. G. Martin, & D. Sier (Eds.), A resear companion to principles and standards
for school mathematics (pp. 45–52). Reston, VA: NCTM.
Mills, M. (2014). A framework for example usage in proof presentations. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 33, 106–118. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2013.11.001
Ministry of Education of Singapore. (2013). Primary mathematics teaing and learning syllabus.
Singapore: 
Curriculum 
Planning 
and 
Development 
Division. 
Retrieved 
from

www.moe.gov.sg/education/syllabuses/sciences/.
Mitell, R., Charalambous, C. Y., & Hill, H. C. (2014). Examining the task and knowledge demands
needed to tea with representations. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 17(1), 37–60.
doi:10.1007/s10857-013-9253-4
Miyakawa, T., & Winsløw, C. (2013). Developing mathematics teaer knowledge: e paradidactic
infrastructure of “open lesson” in Japan. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 16(3), 185–
209. doi:10.1007/s10857-013-9236-5
Modestou, M., & Gagatsis, A. (2010). Cognitive and metacognitive aspects of proportional reasoning.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 12(1), 36–53. doi:10.1080/10986060903465822
Monk, D. H. (1994). Subject area preparation of secondary mathematics and science teaers and
student 
aievement. Economics of Education Review, 13(2), 125–145. doi:10.1016/0272-
7757(94)90003-5
Muijs, D., Kyriakides, L., van der Werf, G., Creemers, B., Timperley, H., & Earl, L. (2014). State of the
art—Teaer 
eﬀectiveness 
and 
professional 
learning. Sool Eﬀectiveness and Sool
Improvement, 25(2), 231–256. doi:10.1080/09243453.2014.885451
Muijs, D., & Reynolds, D. (2000). Sool eﬀectiveness and teaer eﬀectiveness in mathematics:
Some preliminary ﬁndings from the evaluation of the mathematics enhancement programme
(primary). School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 11(3), 273–303. doi:10.1076/0924-3453
Muir, T., Beswi, K., & Williamson, J. (2008). “I’m not very good at solving problems”: An
exploration of students’ problem solving behaviours. e Journal of Mathematical Behavior,
27(3), 228–241. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2008.04.003
Murata, A., Boﬀerding, L., Pothen, B. E., Taylor, M. W., & Wisnia, S. (2012). Making connections
among student learning, content, and teaing: Teaer talk paths in elementary mathematics
lesson study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 43(5), 616–650.
Murata, A., & Kaubadi, S. (2012). Grade 3 students’ mathematization through modeling: Situation
models and solution models with multi-digit subtraction problem solving. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 31(1), 15–28. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2011.07.004
Murphy, C. (2012). e role of subject knowledge in primary prospective teaers’ approaes to
teaing the topic of area. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 15(3), 187–206.
doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9194-8

Nason, R., Chalmers, C., & Yeh, A. (2012). Facilitating growth in prospective teaers’ knowledge:
Teaing geometry in primary sools. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 15(3), 227–
249. doi:10.1007/s10857-012-9209-0
Nathan, M. J., & Kim, S. (2009). Regulation of teaer elicitations in the mathematics classroom.
Cognition and Instruction, 27(2), 91–120. doi:10.1080/07370000902797304
Neubrand, M. (2009). Two lessons—three views—some comments. In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, &
H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 149–150). Thessaloniki, Greece: PME.
Newton, K. J., Star, J. R., & Lyn, K. (2010). Understanding the development of ﬂexibility in
struggling 
algebra 
students. Mathematical inking and Learning, 12 (4), 
282–305.
doi:10.1080/10986065.2010.482150
Newton, X. A., Darling-Hammond, L., Haertel, E., & omas, E. (2010). Value-added modeling of
teaer eﬀectiveness: An exploration of stability across models and contexts. Education Policy
Analysis Archives, 18(23), 1–27. doi:10.14507/epaa.v18n23.2010
Ng, D. (2012). Using the MKT measures to reveal Indonesian teaers’ mathematical knowledge:
Challenges and potentials. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 44(3),
401–413. doi:10.1007/s11858-011-0375-9
Ng, D., Mosvold, R., & Fauskanger, J. (2012). Translating and adapting the Mathematical Knowledge
for Teaing (MKT) measures: e cases of Indonesia and Norway. Montana Mathematics
Enthusiast, 9(1&2), 149–178.
Nilssona, P., & Juter, K. (2011). Flexibility and coordination among acts of visualization and analysis
in a paern generalization activity. e Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 30 (3), 194–205.
doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2011.07.002
Norton, A., McCloskey, A., & Hudson, R. A. (2011). Prediction assessments: Using video-based
predictions to assess prospective teaers’ knowledge of students’ mathematical thinking. Journal
of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14(4), 305–325. doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9181-0
Norton, A., & Wilkins, J. L. M. (2009). A quantitative analysis of ildren’s spliing operations and
fraction 
semes. e 
Journal 
of 
Mathematical 
Behavior, 
28(2–3), 
150–161.
doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2009.06.002
Nuthall, N. (2004). Relating classroom teaing to student learning: A critical analysis of why

resear has failed to bridge the theory-practice gap. Harvard Educational Review, 74(3), 273–
306.
Nye, B., Konstantopoulos, S., & Hedges, L. V. (2004). How large are teaer eﬀects? Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 26(3), 237–257. doi:10.3102/01623737026003237
Olive, J. (1999). From fractions to rational numbers of arithmetic: A reorganization hypothesis.
Mathematical thinking and learning, 1(4), 279–314. doi:10.1207/s15327833mtl0104_2
Palardy, G. J., & Rumberger, R. W. (2008). Teaer eﬀectiveness in ﬁrst grade: e importance of
baground qualiﬁcations, aitudes, and instructional practices for student learning.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 30(2), 111–140. doi:10.3102/0162373708317680
Pantziara, M., & Philippou, G. (2012). Levels of students’ “conception” of fractions. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 79(1), 61–83.doi:10.1007/s10649-011-9338-x
Papay, J. P. (2011). Diﬀerent tests, diﬀerent answers: e stability of teaer value-added estimates
across 
outcome 
measures. American Educational Resear Journal, 48(1), 
163–193.
doi:10.3102/0002831210362589
Papay, J. P. (2012). Refocusing the debate: Assessing the purposes and tools of teaer evaluation.
Harvard Educational Review, 82(1), 123–141.
Papic, M., Mulligan, J. T., & Mitelmore, M. C. (2011). Assessing the development of presoolers’
mathematical patterning. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 42(3), 237–268.
Peltenburg, M., Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., & Robitzs, A. (2012). Special education students’
use of indirect addition in solving subtraction problems up to 100: A proof of the didactical
potential of an ignored procedure. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 79(3), 351–369.
doi:10.1007/s10649-011-9351-0
Pepin, B. (2011). How educational systems and cultures mediate teaer knowledge: ‘Listening’ in
English, Fren, and German classrooms. In T. Rowland & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical
knowledge in teaing (pp. 119–137). London & New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-
9766-8_8
Petrou, M., & Goulding, M. (2011). Conceptualising teaers’ mathematical knowledge in teaing.
In T. Rowland & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical knowledge in teaing (pp. 9–25) London &
New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9766-8_2
Philipp, R. A., Ambrose, R., Lamb, L. L., Sowder, J. T., Sappelle, B. P., Sowder, L., … Chauvot, J.

(2007). Eﬀects of early ﬁeld experiences on the mathematical content knowledge and beliefs of
prospective elementary sool teaers: An experimental study. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 38(5), 438–476. doi:10.2307/30034961
Pianta, R. C., Belsky, J., Vandergri, N., Houts, R., & Morrison, F. J. (2008). Classroom eﬀects on
ildren’s aievement trajectories in elementary sool. American Educational Resear
Journal, 45(2), 365–397. doi:10.3102/0002831207308230
Pirie, S., & Kieren, T. (1989). A recursive theory of mathematical understanding. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 9(3), 7–11.
Pia-Pantazi, D., & Christou, C. (2009). Cognitive styles, dynamic geometry and measurement
performance. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(1), 5–26. doi:10.1007/s10649-008-9139-z
Pia-Pantazi, D., Christou, C., Kontoyianni, K., & Kaou, M. (2011). A model of mathematical
giedness: Integrating natural, creative and mathematical abilities. Canadian Journal of Science,
Mathematics and Technology Education, 11(1), 39–54. doi:10.1080/14926156.2011.548900
Polya, D. (1954). Induction and analogy in mathematics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Post, T. R., Cramer, K. A., Behr, M., Lesh, R., & Harel, G. (1993). Curriculum implications of resear
on the learning, teaing, and assessing of rational number concepts. In T. Carpenter, E.
Fennema, & T. Romberg (Eds.), Rational numbers: An integration of resear (pp. 327–362).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Praetorius, A. K., Lenske, G., & Helmke, A. (2012). Observer ratings of instructional quality: Do they
fulﬁll 
what 
they 
promise? Learning 
and 
Instruction, 
22(6), 
387–400.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2012.03.002
Praetorius, A. K., Pauli, C., Reusser, K., Rakoczy, K., & Klieme, E. (2014). One lesson is all you need?
Stability of instructional quality across lessons. Learning and Instruction, 31, 2–12.
doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2013.12.002
Presmeg, N. C. (1985). e role of visually mediated processes in high sool mathematics: A
classroom investigation. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cambridge University, England.
Rivers, J. C., & Sanders, W. L. (2002). Teaer quality and equity in educational opportunity:
Findings and policy implications. In L. T. Izumi & W. M. Evers (Eds.), Teaer quality  (pp. 13–
23). Stanford, CA: Hoover Press.
Rooﬀ, J. E., Jacob, B. A., Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2011). Can you recognize an eﬀective teaer

when you recruit one? Education Finance and Policy, 6(1), 43–74. doi:10.1162/EDFP_a_00022
Rowan, B., & Correnti, R. (2009). Studying reading instruction with teaer logs: Lessons from the
Study of Instructional Improvement. Educational Researer, 38 (2), 120–131. doi:10.3102/0013
189X09332375
Rowan, B., Correnti, R., & Miller, R. (2002). What large-scale survey resear tells us about teaer
eﬀects on student aievement: Insights from the Prospects Study of Elementary Sools.
Teachers College Record, 104(8), 1525–1567.
Rowan, B., Harrison, D. M., & Hayes, A. (2004). Using instructional logs to study mathematics
curriculum and teaing in the early grades. e Elementary Sool Journal , 105(1), 103–127.
doi:10.1086/428812
Rowland, T. (2008a). Researing teaers’ mathematics disciplinary knowledge. In P. Sullivan & T.
Wood (Eds.), Knowledge and beliefs in mathematics teaing and teaing development  (Vol. 1,
pp. 273–298). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Rowland, T. (2008b). e purpose, design and use of examples in the teaing of elementary
mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 69(2), 149–163. doi:10.1007/s10649-008-9148-
y
Rowland, T. (2012). Contrasting knowledge for elementary and secondary mathematics teaing.
For the Learning of Mathematics, 32(1), 16–21.
Rowland, T., Hustep, P., & waites, A. (2005). Elementary teaers’ mathematics subject
knowledge: e knowledge quartet and the case of Naomi. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 8(3), 255–281. doi:10.1007/s10857-005-0853-5
Rubel, L. H. (2007). Middle sool and high sool students’ probabilistic reasoning on coin tasks.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 38(5), 531–556.
Ruthven, K. (2011). Conceptualising mathematical knowledge in teaing. In T. Rowland & K.
Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical knowledge in teaing (pp. 83–96). London & New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9766-8_6
Sanders, W. L., & Horn, S. P. (1994). e Tennessee value-added assessment system (TVAAS): Mixed-
model methodology in educational assessment. Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education,
8(3), 299–311.doi:10.1007/BF00973726
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). Early ildhood mathematics education resear: Learning

trajectories for young children. New York: Routledge.
Sass, T. R. (2008). e stability of value-added measures of teaer quality and implications for
teaer compensation policy (Brief No. 4). Washington, DC: National Center for Analysis of
Longitudinal Data in Education Research.
Sawada, D., Piburn, M. D., Judson, E., Turley, J., Falconer, K., Benford, R., & Bloom, I. (2002).
Measuring reform practices in science and mathematics classrooms: e reformed teaing
observation protocol. Sool Science and Mathematics, 102(6), 245–253. doi:10.1111/j.1949-
8594.2002.tb17883.x
Seerens, J., & Bosker, R. J. (1997). e foundations of educational eﬀectiveness. Oxford, UK:
Pergamon.
Silling, S. G., Blunk, M., & Hill, H. C. (2007). Test validation and the MKT measures:
Generalizations and conclusions. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Resear and Perspectives, 5(2–
3), 118–128. doi:10.1080/15366360701487146
Sneider, W., & Artelt, C. (2010). Metacognition and mathematics education. ZDM—The
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 42(2), 149–161. doi:10.1007/s11858-010-0240-2.
Soenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, and
sense-making in mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook for resear on mathematics
teaching and learning (pp. 334–370). New York: MacMillan.
Sorr, R. Y., & Goldin, G. A. (2008). Students’ expression of aﬀect in an inner-city SimCalc
classroom. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68(2), 131–148. doi:10.1007/s10649-008-9117-5
Seidel, T., & Shavelson, R. J. (2007). Teaing eﬀectiveness resear in the past decade: e role of
theory and resear design in disentangling meta-analysis results. Review of Educational
Research, 77(4), 454–499. doi: 10.3102/0034654307310317
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reﬂections on processes and
objects as diﬀerent sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 22(1), 1–36.
doi:10.1007/BF00302715
Sharma, S. V. (2006). High sool students interpreting tables and graphs: Implications for resear.
International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 4(2), 241–268. doi:10.1007/s10763-
005-9005-8
Shavelson, R. J., Webb, N. M., & Burstein, L. (1986). Measurement of teaing. In M. C. Wiro

(Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp. 50–91). New York: MacMillan.
Shetman, N., Haertel, G., Roselle, J., Knudsen, J., & Singleton, C. (2013). Development of student
and teaer assessments in the scaling up SimCalc Project. In S. J. Hegedus & J. Roselle (Eds.),
e SimCalc vision and contributions (pp. 167–181). London & New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5696-0_10
Shetman, N., Roselle, J., Haertel, G., & Knudsen, J. (2010). Investigating links from teaer
knowledge, to classroom practice, to student learning in the instructional system of the middle-
sool 
mathematics 
classroom. Cognition 
and 
Instruction, 
28(3), 
317–359.
doi:10.1080/07370008.2010. 487961
Shulman, L. S. (1986). ose who understand: Knowledge growth in teaing. Educational
Researcher, 15(2), 4–14.
Siegler, R. S. (2000). e rebirth of ildren’s learning. Child development, 71(1), 26–35. doi:10.1111/
1467-8624.00115
Silver, E. A. (1997). Fostering creativity through instruction ri in mathematical problem solving
and problem posing. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 29(3), 75–80.
doi:10.1007/s11858-997-0003-x
Silverman, J., & ompson, P. W. (2008). Toward a framework for the development of mathematical
knowledge 
for 
teaing. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 11(6), 499–511.
doi:10.1007/s10857-008-9089-5
Sleep, L. (2012). The work of steering instruction toward the mathematical point: A decomposition of
teaing 
practice. American Educational Resear Journal, 49(5), 935–970. doi:10.3102/
0002831212448095
Sleep, L., & Eskelson, S. L. (2012). MKT and curriculum materials are only part of the story: Insights
from 
a 
lesson 
on 
fractions. Journal 
of 
Curriculum 
Studies, 
44(4), 
537–558.
doi:10.1080/00220272.2012.716977
Sowder, J. T., Philipp, R. A., Armstrong, B. E., & Sappelle, B. P. (1998). Middle-grade teaers’
mathematical knowledge and its relationship to instruction: A resear monograph. New York:
State University of New York Press.
Sriraman, B., & English, L. (2010). eories of mathematics education: Seeking new frontiers.
London & New York: Springer.

Steer, B., Le, V. N., Hamilton, L., Ryan, G., Robyn, A., & Lowood, J. R. (2006). Using structured
classroom vignees to measure instructional practices in mathematics. Educational Evaluation
and Policy Analysis, 28(2), 101–130. doi:10.3102/01623737028002101
Steele, M. D., Hillen, A. F., & Smith, M. S. (2013). Developing mathematical knowledge for teaing
in a methods course: e case of function. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 16 (6),
451–482. doi:10.1007/s10857-013-9243-6
Steﬀe, L. P. (2001). A new hypothesis concerning ildren’s fractional knowledge. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 20(3), 267–307. doi:10.1016/S0732-3123(02)00075-5
Steﬀe, L. P., Cobb, P., & von Glaserfeld, E. (1988). Construction of arithmetical meanings and
strategies. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Steﬀe, L. P., von Glasersfeld, E., Riards, J., & Cobb, P. (1983). Children’s counting types:
Philosophy, theory, and application. New York: Praeger.
Stein, M., & Burartz, B. (2006). e invisible wall project: Reasoning and problem solving processes
of primary and lower secondary students. Mathematical inking and Learning, 8 (1), 65–90.
doi:10.1207/s15327833mtl0801_4
Stein, M. K., Engle, R. A., Smith, M. S., & Hughes, E. K. (2008). Orestrating productive
mathematical discussions: Five practices for helping teaers move beyond show and tell.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 10(4), 313–340. doi:10.1080/10986060802229675
Stein, M. K., Smith, M. S., Henningsen, M. A., & Silver, E. A. (2000). Implementing standards-based
mathematics instruction: A casebook for professional development (2nd ed.). New York: Teaers
College Press.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). e teaing gap: Best ideas from the world’s teaers for
improving education in the classroom. New York: Free Press.
Stoyanova, E., & Ellerton, N. F. (1996). A framework for resear into students’ problem posing. In P.
Clarkson (Ed.), Tenology in Mathematics Education (pp. 518–525). Melbourne: Mathematics
Education Research Group of Australasia.
Strong, M., Gargani, J., & Hacifazliog˘lu, Ö. (2011). Do we know a successful teaer when we see
one? Experiments in the identiﬁcation of eﬀective teaers. Journal of Teaer Education , 62(4),
367–382. doi:10.1177/0022487110390221
Stronge, J. H., Ward, T. J., & Grant, L. W. (2011). What makes good teaers good? A cross-case

analysis of the connection between teaer eﬀectiveness and student aievement. Journal of
Teacher Education, 62(4), 339–355. doi:10.1177/0022487111404241
Stylianides, A. J. (2007). Proof and proving in sool mathematics. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 38(3), 289–321. doi:10.2307/30034869
Stylianides, A. J., & Delaney, S. (2011). e cultural dimension of teaers’ mathematical
knowledge. In T. Rowland & K. Ruthven (Eds.), Mathematical knowledge in teaing (pp. 179–
191). London, UK: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9766-8_11
Stylianides, G. J., & Stylianides, A. J. (2009). Facilitating the transition from empirical arguments to
proof. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 40(3), 314–352.
Sumpter, L. (2013). emes and interplay of beliefs in mathematical reasoning. International Journal
of Science and Mathematics Education, 11(5), 1115–1135. doi:10.1007/s10763-012-9392-6
Szilágyi, J., Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2013). Young ildren’s understandings of length
measurement: Evaluating a learning trajectory. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
44(3), 581–620.
Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., & Dreyfus, T. (2013). Learning beginning algebra in a computer-
intensive environment. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (3), 377–
391. doi:10.1007/s11858-012-0458-2.
Tall, D. (2013). How humans learn to think mathematically: Exploring the three worlds of
mathematics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tall, D., & Vinner, S. (1981). Concept image and concept deﬁnition in mathematics with particular
reference to limits and continuity. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 12(2), 151–169.
doi:10.1007/BF00305619
Tanase, M., & Wang, J. (2013). Knowing students as mathematics learners and teaing numbers
10–100: A case study of four 1st grade teaers from Romania. e Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 32(3), 564–576. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2013.06.006
Tao, M. T., Swille, J., Senk, S. L., Bankov, K., Rodriguez, M., Rease, M., Ingvarson, L., Rowley,
G., Pe, R., … Rease, M. (2012). Teaer Education and Development Study in Mathematics
(TEDS-M): Policy, practice, and readiness to tea primary and secondary mathematics in 17
countries. Findings from the IEA Study of the mathematics preparation of future teaers.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IEA.

Toshanov, M. A. (2011). Relationship between teaer knowledge of concepts and connections,
teaing practice, and student aievement in middle grades mathematics. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 76(2), 141–164. doi:10.1007/s10649-010-9269-y
Tirosh, D., & Stavy, R. (1999). Intuitive rules: A way to explain and predict students’ reasoning.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 38(1–3), 51–66. doi:10.1023/A:1003436313032
Tirosh, D., Tsamir, P., Levenson, E., & Taba, M. (2011). From presool teaers’ professional
development to ildren’s knowledge: Comparing sets. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 14(2),113–131. doi:10.1007/s10857-011-9172-1
Tirosh, D., Tsamir, P., Levenson, E., Taba, M., & Barkai, R. (2013). Exploring young ildren’s self-
eﬃcacy beliefs related to mathematical and nonmathematical tasks performed in kindergarten:
Abused and neglected ildren and their peers. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 83(2), 309–
322. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9458-y
Tomás, J., & Seidel, T. (2009). e power of video studies in investigating teaing and learning in
the classroom. Münster, Germany: Waxmann.
Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tsamir, P., Tirosh, D., Levenson, E., Taba, M., & Barkai, R. (2014). Developing presool teaers’
knowledge of students’ number conceptions. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 17 (1)
61–83. doi:10.1007/s10857-013-9260-5
Turner, F. (2012). Using the Knowledge Quartet to develop mathematics content knowledge: The role
of reﬂection on professional development. Resear in Mathematics Education, 14(3), 253–271.
doi:10.1080/14794802.2012.734972
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., Kolovou, A., & Robitzs, A. (2013). Primary sool students’
strategies in early algebra problem solving supported by an online game. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 84(3), 281–307. doi:10.1007/s10649-013-9483-5
Van Harpen, X. Y., & Presmeg, N. C. (2013). An investigation of relationships between students’
mathematical problem-posing abilities and their mathematical content knowledge. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 83(1), 117–132. doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9456-0
Van Hiele, P.M. (1985). e ild’s thought and geometry. In D. Fuys, D. Geddes, & R. Tiser (Eds.),
English translation of selected writings of Dina van Hiele-Geldof and Pierre M. van Hiele (pp.
243–252). Brooklyn, NY: Brooklyn College.

Vergnaud, G. (1990). La théorie des amps conceptuels. Reeres en Didactique des
Mathématiques, 10(2–3), 133–170.
Vergnaud, G. (2009). The theory of conceptual fields. Human development, 52(2), 83–94. doi:10.1159/
000202727
Verzosa, D. B., & Mulligan, J. (2013). Learning to solve addition and subtraction word problems in
English as an imported language. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(2), 223–244.
doi:10.1007/s10649-012-9420-z
Wagner, J. F., Speer, N. M., & Rossa, B. (2007). Beyond mathematical content knowledge: A
mathematician’s knowledge needed for teaing an inquiry-oriented diﬀerential equations
course. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 26(3), 247–266. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2007.09.002
Walkowiak, T. A., Berry, R. Q., Meyer, J. P., Rimm-Kaufman, S. E., & Omar, E. R. (2014).
Introducing an observational measure of standards-based mathematics teaing practices:
Evidence of validity and score reliability. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 85(1), 109–128.
doi:10.1007/s10649-013-9499-x
Watson, J. M. (2007). e role of cognitive conﬂict in developing students’ understanding of average.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 65(1), 21–47. doi:10.1007/s10649-006-9043-3
Wilkins, J.L.M., & Norton, A. (2011). e spliing loope. Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 42(4), 386–416.
Wilson, S. M. (1990). A conﬂict of interests: e case of Mark Bla. Educational Evaluation and
Policy Analysis, 12(3), 293–310.
Wood, T., Williams, G., & McNeal, B. (2006). Children’s mathematical thinking in diﬀerent
classroom cultures. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(3), 222–255.
Yakes, C., & Star, J. R. (2011). Using comparison to develop flexibility for teaching algebra. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 14(3), 175–191. doi:10.1007/s10857-009-9131-2
Yang, K. L. (2012). Structures of cognitive and metacognitive reading strategy use for reading
comprehension of geometry proof. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(3), 307–326.
doi:10.1007/s10649-011-9350-1
Yanik, H. B. (2011). Prospective middle sool mathematics teaers’ preconceptions of geometric
translations. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 78(2), 231–260. doi:10.1007/s10649-011-9324-3
Yerushalmy, M. (2006). Slower algebra students meet faster tools: Solving algebra word problems

with graphing software. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(5), 356–387.
Zaariades, T., Christou, C., & Pia-Pantazi, D. (2013). Reﬂective, systemic and analytic thinking
in real numbers. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(1), 5–22. doi:10.1007/s10649–012–
9413-y
Zazkis, R., & Chernoﬀ, E. J. (2008). What makes a counterexample exemplary? Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 68(3), 195–208. doi:10.1007/s10649-007-9110-4
Zazkis, R., & Zazkis, D. (2011). e signiﬁcance of mathematical knowledge in teaing elementary
methods courses: Perspectives of mathematics teaer educators. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 76(3), 247–263. doi:10.1007/s10649-010-9268-z
Zodik, I., & Zaslavsky, O. (2008). Characteristics of teaers’ oice of examples in and for the
mathematics classroom. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 69(2), 165–182. doi:10.1007/s10649-
008-9140-6
Zurina, H., & Williams, J. (2011). Gesturing for oneself. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 77(2–3),
175–188. doi:10.1007/s10649-010-9294-x

3 Approaches to Embodied Learning in
Mathematics
Susan Gerofsky
The University of British Columbia

Introduction
A consideration of mathematics as potentially embodied and the topic of
embodied ways of knowing in a more democratized mathematics education
immediately raise a number of foundational issues that are both fraught
and interesting. Just a few examples follow.
At a theoretical/deﬁnitional level: What is meant by “embodiment”?
Are theorists in agreement about its meanings and implications? Is it time
for mathematics educators to discern and name the contrasts between
diﬀerent senses of the word? Are embodied ways of knowing distinct from
other ways of knowing? Is su a distinction possible? How does embodied
knowing relate to the senses and to the imagination—for example, to the
visualization of mathematical ideas? Can mathematical concepts be
embodied?
In terms of competing philosophies of mathematics: Starting from an
Enlightenment/ Modernist standpoint, what do bodies have to do with the
learning of mathematics, since mathematics is oen aracterized as the
most abstract and disembodied of disciplines? Is the process of learning
mathematics a maer of adopting increasingly abstract, non-bodily
conceptual ways of knowing—creating abstractions of abstractions? e
high-Modernist Bourbaki group banned all triangles, diagrams and
visual/embodied representations from mathematical texts and discussions in
the 1960s; does increasing mathematical sophistication necessarily entail
decreased reliance on the realm of actual physical bodies (viewed in the
Enlightenment/Modernist paradigm as “coarse” and “primitive”) and the
so-called “deceptions” of the sensory world?
To start from a very diﬀerent, Postmodern standpoint: Does mathematics
arise from humans’ lived, sensory, experiences of the world? If so, how can
our bodies’ limitations (in terms of size, ﬂexibility, sensory capacity, etc.) be
used to represent and explore the inﬁnitely large, inﬁnitesimally small and

subtly nuanced relationships of mathematical entities? Does mathematics
arise from, and return to, the physical, embodied world—and if so, does that
help to explain the “unreasonable reasonableness” of mathematics as a
means for modeling physical phenomena? What might be the relationship
between our multisensory, embodied, imaginative encounters with the
physical world, our generalizations of those encounters, and the abstract
relationships within mathematical systems?
In terms of the history of ideas: It is clear that there has been a
tremendous swell of interest and new resear in the area of embodied
cognition in recent years. Why the increased interest in embodied ways of
knowing at this particular time and era of history? What could account for
the sudden interest in bodies in terms of cognition in general and
mathematics learning in particular in our era?
From a sociopolitical viewpoint: What is meant by “democratic access
to mathematics”? How could embodied ways of knowing contribute to
democratic access to mathematical ideas? Is this access diﬀerential
depending upon the particularities of the bodies involved—that is,
particularities of race, class, gender, ability, sexuality, age, etc.? Does access
depend on power structures within and across cultures, nations, and
locations? What can be said generally and particularly about democratic
access to mathematics via bodies and embodied knowing?
Ea of these questions raises theoretical/conceptual issues that will be
addressed in this chapter, under the headings:
1) Abstraction, Mathematics, and Mind/Body
2) Why Embodiment Now? A Postmodern Theoretical Approach
3)  Current Approaes to Resear on Embodiment in Mathematics
Education
e ﬁrst and second of these sections oﬀer historical and philosophical

perspectives on issues of embodiment, mathematics/math education and
culture.
e third section oﬀers a “map of the territory” of current approaes to
embodied mathematics teaing and learning, with the aim of introducing
readers to the range of theoretical groundings for research in this area.
Readers should note that ea of these theoretical approaes entails a
very diﬀerent working deﬁnition of what is meant by body and
embodiment. ere is no one, singular agreed-upon meaning for the term
embodied learning (just as, in a similar way in studies of the language of
mathematics education, there is no singular, agreed-upon meaning for the
term discourse analysis). Particular researers take up aspects of the
meanings of embodiment from the approaches that suit their work, in a sort
of methodological bricolage or pastiche.
Knowing that this is the case, and equipped with a sense of the
theoretical discourses at play, readers should have an easier time sorting out
the references and sorting out trends and inﬂuences. I hope that this will be
helpful as new researers make sense of contemporary work in this area
and begin to develop their own resear programs. I have also included
citations of key works related to ea approa, to oﬀer researers new to
this area an entry point to some of the most inﬂuential ideas that are
animating new work in embodied mathematics education.
In the ﬁnal section, I will describe the trajectory of my own multiyear
resear program on embodied learning in mathematics, the Graphs &
Gestures Project, to exemplify some of the ways that resear in embodied
mathematics learning can develop and take new directions. I will try to
identify some of the theoretical groundings from the “Current Approaes”
section that have been inﬂuential in my own work, in order to highlight the
interdisciplinary nature of embodied learning resear. is section of the
apter will be wrien in a more informal, narrative tone than the earlier
theoretical sections.

As with other topics included in this Handbook, there are hundreds of
publications in ea of the areas toued on in this apter, and it is not
possible to give a complete overview of the whole ﬁeld. My aim is to
highlight some of the important developments in the areas discussed here.
e fact that I am a (primarily) English-speaking Canadian mathematics
educator will certainly have inﬂuenced the publications and authors
selected; I encourage readers to look further to build a fuller picture of the
ﬂourishing international resear scene in the area of embodied
mathematics learning.

Abstraction, Mathematics, and Mind/Body
Mathematics has had both the privilege and burden over many centuries of
being considered the sine qua non exemplar of a purely mental, abstract
discipline. In the Western philosophical tradition, from Plato and Descartes
and their followers to the height (and perhaps last gasp) of the
Enlightenment/Modernist movement in the second half of the 20th century,
mathematics and mathematicians were taken to inhabit an otherworldly
realm of “pure” thought—disembodied, certain, and eternal.
is realm has been posited to exist beyond our sublunary world here on
earth—our familiar wet, messy world of physical bodies subject to birth,
life, death, decay and regeneration. e mathematical realm is imagined to
be other than this one: a world of clean, crystalline, eternal objects that
partake of the qualities of the inﬁnite and even the divine. (See Frye, 1980,
for a more detailed discussion of this in terms of Sky Father/Earth Mother
mythological traditions.) Mathematical beauty in this paradigm is held to be
something ethereal and highly reﬁned, its subtlety accessible only to a small
priestly caste of mathematicians with huge and specialized intellects—those
who are able to work beyond and outside of the world of the physical and
the bodily, grasping abstract objects solely through mental effort.
is Enlightenment/Modernist view diotomizes the world into a realm
of abstract, disembodied mathematical perfection and a realm of physical,
bodily experience—and the physical, experiential aspects of life are
relegated to the status of base and inferior ways of being. Su philosophies
treat physicality, the senses, and even the imagination and imagined
sensory experiences as suspect, unreliable, and deceptive. Empirical
(scientiﬁc and other) investigation, tenical skills, bodily enjoyment and
anything hands-on and involved in making, growing, and anging are
similarly regarded as impermanent, lower functions based on unreliable
knowledge. Only that whi is seen as mental, eternal, and “perfect” is

regarded as being of a high level in a system that has adopted this
dichotomous value system.
is division of the world into two realms is also clearly a nonegalitarian
philosophical move, one whi does not promote democratic access to the
arcane mysteries of mathematical beauty, and one whi has obvious
potential for political ramiﬁcations in terms of gender, culture, ethnicity,
colonialism, and even personality type. For example, anyone who is
intimately connected with birth, ildrearing, and death (ieﬂy women),
with making and tending things physically (notably working-class people,
artists, and craspeople) or with a deep connection to a particular physical
place (for example, Indigenous peoples, farmers, and ﬁshers) is considered
unlikely to be a potential participant in the disembodied, exalted, purely
mental world of mathematical beauty.
I will begin by exploring some of the roots of this mind/body diotomy
in mathematics and refer readers to other studies that have explored these
themes, to set the baground for the contemporary Postmodern interest in
the embodied learning of mathematics.
Plato and Descartes as Markers for Disembodied
Mathematics
It is tempting to blame Plato or Descartes for the Western mind-body split,
though it is clearly an exaggeration to credit two individual
mathematician/philosophers 
with 
single-handedly 
turning 
whole
civilizations away from an integration of mind-body. Many other people
and other inﬂuences were certainly involved, including other philosophers
and writers, theologians (with the Christian ur in its various
denominations particularly inﬂuential), the eﬀects of tenological ange
(especially literacy, of whi more later), and popular reactions to the

physical diﬃculties of life in conditions of injustice, war, disease, and
hunger.
at said, it is still meaningful to refer to the inﬂuential writings of Plato
(in 5th century BCE Greece) and Descartes (in 17th century France) as
markers of the move toward a philosophical separation of mind from body
and a preference for a disembodied mental faculty over human physical
being. Both Plato and Descartes did take a stand in favor of a rariﬁed
mental “realm” as opposed to physical life on earth, and their writing
deserves attention in this regard.
Plato, working at the time when literacy and the alphabet were being
introduced in Greece, spoke vehemently against a preceding culture of
oracy, partially improvised epic poetry, and traditional performative arts,
especially in his tirade against the poets (Havelo, 1982; Plato, 2004). His
allegory of the cave is well known, and speaks to the Platonic diotomy
between the lived, physical world of most people (in whi only the
shadows of the abstract, glorious Forms are seen) and the otherworldly
realm of these abstract Forms, whi is considered more real than the
physically present world. Only the osen few can dwell in this abstract
realm, and in e Republic, Plato argues for an ascendant meritocratic
oligary of these philosopher kings, who he feels ought to rule the rest—
hardly a democratic vision!
Plato’s Meno (Plato, 1976) is also well known among mathematicians and
mathematics educators. In the dialogue between Socrates and the slave boy,
Socrates shows his colleague Meno that even an uneducated young man is
capable of reasoning about subtle mathematical relationships (with Socratic
guidance, of course). Plato aributes this capability to an inborn human
capacity for understanding the Forms, whi he posits as arising from our
having dwelt in the realm of these Forms before our birth.
e Platonic world view emphasizes the primacy of numinous, “perfect”
forms, accessible to humans only through abstract thought, dialectic

Socratic discussion and Plato’s posited memory of direct access to those
forms in an otherworldly life before birth. is Platonic worldview was
well suited for adoption by religious authorities, particularly Christian ones,
where there was emphasis on another, “perfect” eternal world outside the
physicality of human birth, life and death. Resonances of this Platonic ideal
eo through mathematics classes in our own time, where roughly sketed
circles, dots, and lines on a blaboard are taken as tokens of students’
numinous, otherworldly knowledge of the Forms of perfect circles, “points
that have no part” and lines that have no thiness (see Euclid, 1956). In
most mathematics classes, the use of physical, tangible models and
materials are grudgingly allowed at only the lowest levels of mathematical
study; at “higher” levels of mathematics, starting in secondary sool or
earlier, the use of physical manipulatives for learning is generally
considered primitive and babyish. A Socratic-style dialectic (with the
lecturer playing both roles—viz Gerofsky, 1996) is very oen adopted as the
preferred teaing modality, one that immediately recalls a Platonic
approach to learning.
René Descartes, born in Europe in the era when the printing press was
making 
literacy 
mu 
more 
widespread 
and 
consequentially
revolutionizing all the institutions of society, also wrote about mathematics
and a mind-body split. In his Meditations (Descartes, 1641/1996), Descartes
emphasizes his distrust of his senses and the physical sensations related to
his body, treating the sensory, embodied world as one of deception. He
takes a stance of radical doubt, ﬁnding only the kernel of his own doubting
presence and thought as reliable and veriﬁable proof of his existence—the
famous cogito ergo sum. Rebuilding his image of the world from this basis,
Descartes rejects bodily ways of knowing in favor of pure thought and
abstract mental work, particularly exemplified by mathematics.
Although both Descartes and Plato rejected the body and the senses as
ways 
of 
knowing 
truth, 
the 
mathematics 
of 
both 
of 
these

philosopher/mathematicians was ﬁrmly grounded in geometry, along with
logic, number, and other areas of mathematics. Indeed, Greek mathematics
generally works with numbers in terms of geometric ﬁgures, rather than
“purely” as number. Square numbers, for example, were described by the
Greeks as the areas of squares with certain side lengths, and square roots as
the side lengths of squares with a particular area. Both Plato and Descartes
wrote about a geometry of idealized mental Forms, but nonetheless, even
their geometry still retains some tenuous connection with the physical
world of shapes and objects via visualizations and sematic drawings of
shapes and objects. e 20th century saw a more extreme form of rejection
of the physical, including even the traces of physicality inherent in
geometry, with the Bourbaki movement.
Bourbaki as a Culmination of Rejection of the
Physical in Mathematics
Again using one sool of thought and group of solars as a marker for
larger trends in philosophy and society, it is instructive to look at the work
of the Bourbaki group of mathematicians in mid-20th century France as an
extreme point in the rejection of embodied, physical ways of doing
mathematics.
“Nicolas Bourbaki” was a pseudonym used by a group of European
mathematicians who aimed to formalize mathematical systems and create a
groundwork of absolute certainty via abstract theorems for mathematics.
e eﬀorts of this group came in part as a reaction to earlier philosophers’
discovery that it would be very diﬃcult (Frege, 1980; Whitehead & Russell,
2011), or in fact impossible (Gödel, 1992) to set mathematics on su ﬁrm
and certain grounds.
Where Plato and Descartes did mu of their mathematical work via

various forms of geometry, the Bourbaki group went further in their
antiembodied stance and set themselves against geometric ﬁgures of any
kind—hence their famous dictum, “Down with Euclid! Death to all
triangles!” reported to have been shouted out by leading Bourbaki
mathematician Jean Dieudonné at a 1959conference on mathematics
education in Réalmont, France (Yaglom, 1981). Mathematics was abstracted
to the point where it became a complicated but ultimately meaningless
game of moving symbols on paper according to algorithmic rules—
meaningless in that this intellectual game was not meant to have
signiﬁcation in terms of the physical world or the situations of everyday
life. It was enough for Bourbaki that the system of mathematics was
consistent and well-grounded in itself, in an abstract, rule-governed realm
of symbolic theorems and proofs. Any recourse to physical existence,
including even a minimalist reference sket of a triangle, was considered
excessively embodied.

Why Embodiment Now? A Postmodern
Theoretical Approach
Where the Enlightenment/Modernist philosophical project promoted a
worldview that separated mind and body (and elevated the mental to a
mu higher status than the physical and sensory), contemporary
Postmodern theory throws us ba into a fully embodied world where
mental and physical ways of being are inseparable. Dating from the mid-
20th century, but particularly active since the rise of personal computing
and the Internet from the 1980s onward, Postmodernism is an approa to
understanding the world as it is being reconfigured in our times.
Postmodern theories in a variety of areas frequently turn to the concept
of the embodied mind, and to the variety of ways that sentient beings
experience embodiment. In a counter-move to Modernism’s sear for
universal precepts and generalized, abstracted knowledge, Postmodernism
situates knowledge in the particularities of bodies, cultures, places, genders,
classes, “races”, ethnicities, ages, abilities, and so on. Mu of Postmodern
writing focuses on the relationships between particular ways of knowing
based in embodied experiences and the ways these knowledges play out in
power structures like colonialism and political struggles.
In mathematics education, Postmodern theories allenge pedagogies
that make Modernist assumptions about the purely mental, abstract nature
of mathematics learning, and bring us ba to body-mind connections in a
number of ways.
Understanding “Why Embodiment Now?”: A
Contemporary Interpretation of McLuhan
estions about why particular intellectual trends, sools of thought, or

new ideas arise at a particular time and place are seldom resolved to
everyone’s satisfaction. Even in retrospect, it is diﬃcult to be able to sort
out whi convergences (political, economic, academic, tenological,
social, religious, etc.) form paerns that might account for particular new
preoccupations and new ways of thinking and living. e task is even more
diﬃcult, and more urgent, when trying to make sense of one’s own
contemporary society.
Many theorists in our time have taken up the intellectual task of
reintegrating body and embodied learning into many disciplinary areas, and
the intensity of this work has increased since about 1980. Others have
wrien wondering or accounting for why there is an increased
preoccupation with embodiment at this time (see for example Slingerland,
2008; Wilde, 1999).
I will jump into the fray here with an approa to the question of “Why
embodiment now?” based on Marshall McLuhan’s inﬂuential Postmodern
work on theories of tenology and culture. McLuhan (1911–1980), the
famous Canadian media theorist, drew from the work of his intellectual
mentor, economic historian Harold Innis (2008), and contributed to the
work of later cultural theorists like Jean Baudrillard (1994) and many
others.
First, I would like to oﬀer an explanation of my use of the term
Postmodern throughout this apter, a usage that is based in McLuhan’s
theoretical work (McLuhan & McLuhan, 1988; McLuhan, 2010; McLuhan &
Zingrone, 1995). inking about cultural and intellectual ways of being and
thinking as responses to and outcomes of tenological and media ange,
Modernism (and the so-called Enlightenment) arose from widespread
alphabetic literacy starting in the Western world with the invention of the
Gutenberg press and the replacement of scant manuscript books with
abundant printed ones in the mid-1400s (McLuhan, 1962). McLuhan
associates alphabetic literacy and the Enlightenment/Modernist project with

the separation of mind and body, radical individualism (and its aendant
loneliness and alienation), the valuing of linear, logical ways of thinking,
universalist theories, the rise of science, Protestantism, and many other
familiar tendencies and tropes of Modernism (see, for example, Toulmin,
1992). e period famously named as Postmodern by Lyotard (1984) and
others is one where, as McLuhan asserts, alphabetic literacy and the
printing press are in the process of being supplanted by electric and
electronic media as the predominant “default” tenology of our societies
worldwide. is process has been a gradual one over the course of the past
century or more, not a sudden rupture that was started and completed in a
particular year. e process has greatly accelerated since approximately
1980 with the widespread introduction of personal computing devices and
the rapid development of the Internet. Earlier, however, the introduction of
telegraphy, telephones, cinema, and electric lights in the second half of the
19th century, and radio and television in the 20th century, already began
the transition from the Modern to the Postmodern. McLuhan aracterizes
the Postmodern era of instant global electronic communications as one of
integrative thinking, the ange from individualism to “tribal” or
communitarian consciousness, the importance of the local, of intuition and
faith, of the ear rather than the eye as a dominant sensory modality, and of
nonlinear geometries of thought and knowing replacing linearity. It is this
era that I refer to as the Postmodern. In our lives in the 20th and 21st
centuries, we have been experiencing the rapid (though uneven) transition
from the dominance of Modernist ways of thinking and being to those of
the Postmodern, and it is very oen possible to witness the uneasy
coexistence of these modes of being in our times.
To account for “Why embodiment now?” in these Postmodern times, I
draw on another aspect of McLuhan’s theory that I have found to have
great explanatory power: his theory of obsolescence.
McLuhan posited that the media/tenologies work us over completely,

and that people are usually no more able to have awareness of the “default”
media of our culture than ﬁsh are able to be aware of the water in whi
they swim. We shape our tools and tenologies, and they immediately
shape us in return, in ways we oen cannot consciously see or know.
However, as soon as the dominant tenology of a culture is completely
encircled, surrounded or overtaken by a newly dominant tenology, the
old tenology suddenly pops into relief and becomes knowable, visible,
obsolete (in that it is no longer the “default” medium, although it may
certainly continue to be used), and it instantly becomes an art form
(McLuhan, 1974; McLuhan &McLuhan, 1988).
Some examples to clarify this rather startling notion.
Horse carts as art form. With the advent of the motor car, horses and
carriages moved from being the default means of transportation and
became a novelty and an art form, so that now people will pay large
sums of money to ride in a horse-drawn carriage (say, around Central
Park).
Earth as art form. McLuhan writes:
Perhaps the largest conceivable revolution in information occurred on October 17, 1957,
when Sputnik created a new environment for the planet. For the ﬁrst time the natural
world was completely enclosed in a man-made container. At the moment that the earth
went inside this new artifact, Nature ended and Ecology was born. “Ecological” thinking
became inevitable as soon as the planet moved up into the status of a work of art
(McLuhan, 1974, p. 49).
is eﬀect—of seeing Earth, not as “the world” or as our default medium,
but as the contents of another tenology—was ampliﬁed with the moon
landing in 1969 and the famous photographs of Earth from space. Suddenly
people began to talk about Spaceship Earth and to see Earth as a “fragile
blue marble” in space, and the environmental movement immediately took
on huge new energy and signiﬁcance. At these moments, humans generally

became aware of Earth as a work of art, and no longer as “the world” or as
“just everything”—in other words, Earth ceased to be treated culturally as
our unseen default surround medium, and became an art object.
Old tenologies turning to art forms in our era. In our current
situation of very rapid tenological ange we have seen many
tenologies that were formerly “the default” suddenly encircled by
new media, obsolesced, and turned into new art forms. Typewriters,
rotary telephones, ﬁlm and Polaroid cameras, handwriting, vinyl
records, cassette and VHS tapes, and many other technologies have not
completely disappeared, but have gained new value as art forms since
becoming “obsolete” in McLuhan’s terminology. As McLuhan said,
“Obsolescence never meant the end of anything, it’s just the
beginning” (McLuhan, 1967).
In the present age, with the advent of networked electric/electronic
tenologies (starting from the telegraph and telephone in the late 19th
century), our culturally mediated relationships with our actual bodies have
anged. McLuhan points out that any new tenology extends some
aspect of the body and simultaneously numbs that part of our actual body;
for example, cars greatly extend the capabilities of our legs and feet (i.e.
moving across the surface of the planet), but at the same time, they numb
our legs and feet as we sit immobilized in cars for hours at a time.
Networked electric/electronic media of communications extend (and at the
same time numb) our entire nervous system.
ese networked media also allow us to be present in many places
around the world at any given moment, even though our physical bodies
are still at home. is eﬀect was present from the earliest days of
telegraphy and the telephone, where one’s words or voice could be made
present around the globe at the speed of electricity. e process was

accelerated with radio and television, and greatly accelerated and
broadened with the introduction of personal computing and the Internet
starting in the 1980s. We can now “be” in multiple places at once through
our voices and video images, but also through the virtual embodiment of
3D on-screen avatars, through robotic control of distant objects and tools,
and through haptic interfaces. We are just beginning to sort out the multiple
ways people can interact between actual and virtual worlds, in mixed
reality and augmented reality applications (see, for example, Lindgren &
Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). ese human-computer interfaces can involve
something as minimal as a glance or tou of a ﬁngertip, or as extensive as
whole-body movement, locomotion, and voice.
McLuhan saw as early as the 1960s that we were in the process of
externalizing our collective neurological system and (just about literally)
wrapping it around the globe, through the use of satellites and other wired,
wireless, and broadcast tenologies (McLuhan, 1964/1994). Since the 1980s,
this process has been sped up and ampliﬁed, and its side eﬀects have
accelerated too. Living inside our own externalized collective nervous
system has surrounded our physical bodies with a new default medium
(early on, telegraph, telephone, radio and television networks, and now,
powerfully, the Internet), and suddenly the “body” has gone from being the
unquestioned default medium (the only way to be) to an option, an art
form, something to be cultivated, modiﬁed, decorated, treasured. We are
now, en masse, more able to be living in disembodied ways than ever
before in human history, and it is because of this, I argue, that we have
suddenly become aware of embodiment as a oice, rather than a necessity.
I would posit that this is evidenced by ways that many people began to
treat their bodies as art objects or objects of tenological manipulation
starting in the 1980s, with the mu-increased use of ornamentation
through interventions like piercings and taoos, and medicalized
manipulation via cosmetic surgery and prostheses, steroids, implants, and

cyber-enhancements (see Haraway, 1987).
If the body has now become optional, obsolete (in McLuhan’s terms) and
an art form, then another, diﬀerent tenology or medium has supplanted
the body as our unnoticed default, the waters in whi we swim. Has the
huge acceleration of tenological ange made it possible for us to see
what this new medium is, and what its eﬀects are, or will that only happen
once this also becomes fully surrounded by a yet-newer medium and
becomes obsolete? McLuhan’s answer might be that we should be paying
aention to the leading-edge artists to ﬁnd out, since artists have the role of
“antennae” for the culture, remaining sensitized to anges and
perturbations of the ﬁeld that others may have become numbed to. Avant
garde artists, and perhaps academics as well, are responsible as a kind of
Distant Early Warning system for the culture, sensing ange, exploring
and expressing it to everyone else.
Other explanations (at macro and micro levels) for our present
preoccupation with body and embodiment can certainly be oﬀered from
other points of view, including the political, historical, sociological, and
economic. I expect that these alternate explanations will have a number of
important elements in common as the eﬀects of the Internet are felt
throughout all aspects of our lives. I put forth this McLuhan-esque account
based on the relationship between culture and tenology as one that deals
directly with a methodology for analyzing tenological ange (McLuhan
&McLuhan, 1988) and has the potential for great resonance and explanatory
power.

Current Approaches to Research on Embodiment
in Mathematics Education
In this section, I will outline seven approaes to embodiment in
contemporary mathematics education research, through:
1) metaphor and language,
2) cognitive science,
3) semiotics,
4) cultural studies,
5) the New Materialism,
6) gesture studies, and
7) arts and performance theory.
Readers should note that this list is not exhaustive—further approaes are
certainly possible, and may be developing now. What is more, the seven
categories oﬀered here are all interdisciplinary in themselves and may be
used in conjunction with one another by particular researers. Any parsing
out of particular approaes and inﬂuences will necessarily be considered
unsatisfactory by some, as the boundaries among these approaes are
porous and anging. However, provisional as it is, this aracterization of
seven resear approaes does oﬀer an account of some quite distinct
starting points that have their own particular and recognizable aracter. I
will include samples from the literature of ea resear approa, to
exemplify the ways ea of these approaes plays out (for example, in the
choice of material to be considered and the modes of analysis used).
Approaches to Embodiment Through Metaphor
and Language

Postmodern approaes to embodiment come from many diﬀerent
disciplinary and interdisciplinary standpoints, several of whi will be
discussed here. One of the most inﬂuential explores the nature of embodied
knowledge (generally and in mathematics particularly) via evidence from
metaphor and language, led by George Lakoﬀ, Mark Johnson, and Rafael
Núñez.
e work of Lakoﬀ, Johnson, and Núñez in the new ﬁeld of cognitive
linguistics, starting in the early 1980s, began by questioning many
Modernist assumptions about linguistics and cognitive psyology, and
went on to allenge taken-as-given assumptions about mathematics.
Although their work in cognitive linguistics does not directly address
mathematics education, it has certainly had an aﬀect as the groundwork for
new ways of conceptualizing mathematics teaing and learning, and
Núñez has gone on to collaborate with mathematics educators in his further
work.
Johnson (1990, 2008), Lakoﬀ (1990), Lakoﬀ and Johnson (1999, 2003), and
Lakoﬀ and Núñez (2000) make the connection between mind and body via
embodied image semata. Stated brieﬂy, an image sema is a structure
that brings together our human bodily experiences of the world, ways of
languaging that experience, and conceptual metaphors emerging from
these complexes of experiences within our particular cultures. e
metaphors are embodied because they are initially experienced through
movement, locomotion, reaing, grasping, eating, sleeping, moving objects
around, noticing diﬀerences in temperature, and all the other physical
movements and sensations we experience with/as embodied human beings,
particularly in early ildhood. As we grow up, we also experience the
emotions, values, stories, and cultural categories that have emerged around
these experiences and become part of language and cultural practices.
Starting from these physical experiences and linguistic/cultural meanings
accruing to them, we acquire and create the “metaphors we live by,”

metaphors that give meaning to mathematical concepts as well as other
areas of human cultural development.
Lakoﬀ, Johnson, and Núñez begin by exploring and elaborating some of
the key image semata and embodied metaphor systems in contemporary
English-speaking societies, and then ﬁnd the extensions and working-
through of these primary embodied metaphors in the abstract concepts
within this culture. Embodied metaphor systems and image semata are
shown to underlie conceptualizations in areas as wide-ranging as aesthetics,
ethics, and mathematics, and these theorists show the presence of bodily
experience as a “live” and productive presence in even the most abstract
concepts.
In connecting mental concepts to embodied experiences, Lakoﬀ, Johnson,
and Núñez rehabilitate areas of human experience that were rejected by
earlier philosophers of language, mathematics, ethics, etc. For example,
bodily movement and sensation are no longer viewed here as coarse, base,
and deceptive (as they were by Descartes and his followers), but as the very
foundations of any kind of conceptual thought and language. Language in
use, and so-called paralinguistic functions like gesture, whi were rejected
by Noam Chomsky in his foundational work in establishing a minimalist
modern linguistics (Chomsky, 1993), are brought into the center of
linguistics by this work on embodied metaphor. Emotion, banned from
Enlightenment/Modernist thought and from mathematics as a deceptive,
irrational distraction to logic and reason, is also rehabilitated to a central
role in human reasoning. rough their meticulous study of image
semata and embodied metaphor, Lakoﬀ, Johnson, and Núñez build a
philosophical case for the inclusion of many “messy” aspects of human life
that were excluded by Enlightenment/Modernist philosophers in their quest
for purity: that is, the body, the senses, movement, emotion, and the
prelinguistic experiences of childhood.
ey ﬁnd that su experiences are the basis not only for competence in

terms of physical skills, but for all of human conceptualizations—including
the most abstract realms of mathematical thought. (In Lakoﬀ & Núñez,
2000, the culmination of the argument is to show that even Euler’s Identity,
e^(pi)(i) = –1, a seemingly highly abstract formulation, is rooted in
embodied metaphors based in human sensory, emotional, and cultural
experiences.) ese ﬁndings allenge mathematics educators to make the
turn to bodily and sensory experiences, emotions, language, metaphor, and
narrative as modalities that are absolutely foundational and essential for
any kind of mathematical sense making. Where a Modernist/Enlightenment
model of mathematics pedagogy focused on the “delivery” of mathematical
concepts via lectures comprising mostly abstract language and notation, the
work of Lakoﬀ, Johnson, and Núñez points to the importance of
attentiveness to and a renewed pedagogy of body integrated with mind.
As an interesting aside, one reviewer has pointed out to me that some
recent notable scientists have taken an “embodied imagination” approa
to scientiﬁc resear via linguistic and narrative strategies. is potentially
generative approa goes against formal scientiﬁc traditions that decry
anthropomorphism and the personalization of imagery in science,
nevertheless, it appears to be part of the practice of a number of
researers. Jonas Salk, the researer who developed the ﬁrst polio
vaccine, writes about imagining himself embodying the entities he studied:
When I observed phenomena in the laboratory that I did not understand, I would also ask
questions as if interrogating myself: “Why would I do that if I were a virus or a cancer cell, or
the immune system?” Before long, this internal dialogue became second nature to me; I found
that my mind worked this way all the time.
(Salk, 1983, p. 7)
In a similar way, 1983 Nobel laureate cytogeneticist Barbara McClinto
talks about studying maize by “being” the maize through a process of
imaginative embodiment (as reported in Keller, 1983). ought

experiments (like Einstein’s, in whi he imagined asing or riding upon a
beam of light) similarly bring the scientist’s imagined bodily presence into a
resear scenario. Interestingly, these examples from the sciences resonate
with students talking about ‘being the graph’ in the Graphs & Gestures
Project reported later.

An example of an approach to embodiment in
mathematics via metaphor and language
In Núñez, Edwards, & Matos (1999), the authors compare two deﬁnitions
of continuous mathematical functions: the “natural” and the Cauy-
Weierstrasse deﬁnitions. Where the informal, intuitive, “natural”
deﬁnition describes the graph of a mathematical function using
metaphors of motion and travel (source-path-goal semata), the
Cauy-Weierstrasse deﬁnition uses static metaphors of discrete,
atomistic points and of things contained within other things (part-whole
and container schemata).
e authors suggest that the more “natural” deﬁnition of continuity is
the older one, coming from the work of Newton, Leibniz, and Euler. is
deﬁnition seems to arise from the experience of gesturing a graph, and
Euler is cited as describing a continuous function as “a curve described
by freely leading the hand.”
is deﬁnition of continuity involves “cognitive contents su as
motion, ﬂows, processes, ange in time, and wholeness” (p. 54), is thus
seen to be more intuitive and more easily accessible than a static
metaphor would be, as it arises from everyday experiences and from the
very common metaphor of ﬁctive motion. Fictive motion refers to
metaphors of movement applied to nonmoving things—for example,
when we say things like “the road travels past Springﬁeld” or “the
bridge goes over the river,” we imply that the road and bridge are
moving, when they are actually static. Similarly, we oen talk about
mathematical functions using metaphors of ﬁctive motion—for example,
when we say “the graph approaches an asymptote,” “the function
reaches a limit,” or “the curve oscillates.”
In contrast, the Cauy-Weierstrasse deﬁnition of continuity, arising

from 19th century developments in analysis, treats mathematical
functions as static entities comprised of discrete points. Foundational to
this deﬁnition, points are not conceived of as locations on a line, but as
the entities constituting the line.
ese diﬀerences are explored in the context of potential student
diﬃculties in reconciling the two deﬁnitions in learning calculus. Once
students have made sense of the gestural, more natural deﬁnition based
on a metaphor of ﬁctive motion, they may ﬁnd it hard to incorporate the
later static, atomistic deﬁnition into their developing conceptualization of
continuity of mathematical functions.
Approaches to Embodiment Through Cognitive
Science
e ﬁeld of cognitive science has grown rapidly since the 1980s, with the
accelerated development of computing, computer networks, and robotics
and new methods of imaging the brain and brain functions. Cognitive
science brings together a number of disciplines including computer science,
artiﬁcial intelligence studies (AI), philosophy of mind, anthropology,
psyology, neuroscience, and linguistics. Resear in this area addresses,
among other things, philosophical questions about the nature of
consciousness, aention, perception, and memory and the possibilities of
sentient cognition that is not necessarily human—for example, sentient
cognition in other-than-human animals, maines, etc. With a focus on
neuroscience and brain imaging, cognitive science also deals with questions
of the brain and nervous system as physical entities, and neurological
functions as part of body functioning (and so a way of treating embodied
learning and knowing at the level of neurons, hormones, brain lesions, and
other physical manifestations of the neurological system).

Cognitive science approaes to embodied ways of knowing in
mathematics have been inﬂuenced by studies like Dehaene’s experimental
work on human infants’ and other-than-human animals’ development of
concepts of number (Dehaene, 1999) and Devlin’s extrapolation from su
studies (Devlin, 2006). Dehaene and Devlin use behavioral studies in animal
cognition and in infant cognitive development to reﬂect on the degree of
innateness in processes like subitization, estimation, and other elements of
number sense. e results of these studies have inﬂuenced conceptions of
human mathematical ability across life stages, cultures, and languages, and
extrapolations from this work continue to influence research in the didactics
of mathematics.
Coming from a diﬀerent aspect of cognitive science, researers in
design and cognitive systems have brought together ideas from the design
of human-computer interactions (HCI) and computer modeling with
psyological and educational theories of learning to develop “cognitively
ergonomic” systems, in whi computer interfaces and human mind-bodies
respond to and mutually shape one another in a learning seing (see, for
example, Abrahamson, 2009, 2010; Holbert & Wilensky, 2012; Antle &
Wang, 2013; Lindgren & Johnson-Glenberg, 2013). Aention to the design
of interactions, and resear on the ways these interact with cultural and
bodily norms, plays an important role in the design of hardware, soware,
interfaces, curriculum, and pedagogy in educational tenology for
mathematics learning (as well as other areas of the social use of
tenology). eoretical work by cognitive scientists like Barsalou (2008,
2009) has grounded mu of this work. Also worth noting in this area is
work on mirror neurons and embodied learning (for example, Decety &
Grèzes, 2006).
Other important studies in embodied learning and the design of human-
computer interactions include work exempliﬁed by Hoyles & Noss (2009),
Kaput (1994), Fernandes and Healy (2010), Healy and Kynigos (2010),

Jaiw and Sinclair (2009), Hegedus and Moreno-Armella (2011), Borba and
Villarreal (2005) and others. Mu of this work is based in the pioneering
studies of Papert (1993) and Turkle (1984). ere is a huge literature in the
use of tenology in mathematics education, and it is beyond the scope of
this apter to fully represent developments in this area, but issues of
embodied learning have come to the fore in current thinking about
educational tenology in our ﬁeld. Some of the important questions
addressed include: relationships between actual and virtual embodiment
through an on-screen agent; aﬀordances for learning oﬀered by computer-
based static and dynamic imagery; engagement of the imagination through
embodied images; the development of mathematical concepts through
visual and multisensory (haptic, sonic) engagements with learning
technologies; and much more.
Work in embodiment in educational tenologies and mathematics
learning is not restricted to students’ engagement with electronic devices
and computers, but oen integrates the use of actual physical objects and
manipulatives, whole-body activities, paper-and-pencil or alk-and-
blaboard diagrams and symbolic notation, narrative, group discussion,
problem solving, and other kinds of multimodal mathematical work.
Papert’s work with LOGO microworlds and “turtle geometry” in the 1980s
oﬀered inspiration for the integration of actual/virtual experiences (see
Abelson & diSessa, 1986), along with seminal work on embodied cognition
and the use of manipulatives/concrete materials in mathematics education
by leading educational theorists like Dienes (1963) and Gaegno (1987) and
theorist-practitioners like Castelnuovo (Castelnuovo & Gori-Giorgi, 1976).
ese researers took an integrative approa that rejected the drawing of
boundary lines between physical and mental aspects of learning, but rather
brought multimodal learning experiences together in a conceptualization of
embodied cognition. e introduction of electronic, online, and virtual
spaces has added new ways of experiencing mathematics through the body,

without rejecting nonelectronic approaes. Contemporary researers
working with both virtual and actual mathematical experiences include
Nemirovsky (Nemirovsky & Borba, 2003), Noble (Noble, Nemirovsky,
Wright, & Tierney, 2001), and Ferrara (Nemirovsky & Ferrara, 2009).

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics education through cognitive science
Nemirovsky & Ferrara (2009) explore aspects of mathematical
imagination and embodied learning through a microanalysis of a
student’s discourse, gesture, and gaze in a 17-second-long videotaped
episode in a secondary sool classroom. (Note that very close
microanalysis of short episodes of discourse, gesture, and other features
of interaction are oen undertaken as part of cognitive science-based
studies, semiotic studies, and gesture studies, while other approaes to
embodiment may take up examples of longer duration, or work with
conceptual entities rather than analyzed examples.)
is microanalysis looks closely at a student working with an
apparatus that decomposed x- and y-coordinates of the graph of a
function, in interaction with the teaer, classmates, and apparatus. e
authors identify two cognitive phenomena of interest: “juxtaposing
displacements” and “articulating necessary cases,” whi they see
revealed in the student’s discourse, gestures, interactions, and use of
physical materials. e focus in this article is on the relationship between
embodied expression and the development of mathematical imagination.
e authors describe “juxtaposing displacements” as a cognitive move
where diﬀerent aspects of an imagined situation are placed in relation to
one another. e eﬀect is compared to the composition of a cubist
painting, in whi diﬀerent perspectives and visual planes are juxtaposed
as if they were contiguous. is move is hypothesized to exist beyond
mathematics learning and perhaps to be a feature of human imaginative
cognition more generally.
“Articulating necessary cases” is a described as a cognitive move in
contrast to “juxtaposing displacements,” as it involves spliing rather

than pasting concepts or images together in a kind of collage. In
articulating necessary cases, particular cases are split oﬀ, sequenced, and
explained through rules or principles linked through logical necessity.
Evidence of these two phenomena is found in the student’s gestures,
gaze, and discourse as she oﬀers mathematical explanations in class. Her
cognition vis-à-vis the graph of the mathematical function under
discussion is interpreted in terms of the student’s mathematical
imagination in relationship to her perceptuo-motor activity, using the
two cognitive phenomena described. Certain student and teaer
interactions in this 17-second classroom incident are seen to be joint
uerances, using Gallese’s neurocognitive resear on “mirror systems”
and mirror neurons (see Gallese & Lakoﬀ, 2005). Mathematics learning,
using appropriate materials and apparatus, is viewed as a primarily a
process of enriing learners’ mathematical imagination through
embodied experience, and evidenced through embodied, multimodal
expression.
Approaches to Embodiment Through Semiotics
Semiotics arose in the 20th century as a ﬁeld of study used to analyze
cultural phenomena via a consideration of signs and their signiﬁcation.
Semiotics is closely connected with structuralism (and its contemporary
successor, poststructuralism), and has roots in linguistics (through its
founder, Ferdinand de Saussure), mathematics and philosophy (through the
work of Charles Peirce), anthropology (through Claude Levis-Strauss),
literary criticism and cultural studies (through Roland Barthes), and extends
to other areas of culture including film studies, architecture, and education.
A number of prominent contemporary mathematics education theorists
ground their embodied mathematics education resear in semiotics and

related areas of philosophy and linguistics. Semiotics oﬀers theory and
analytic methods for making sense of a wide range of mathematical
representations and artifacts, including spoken and wrien language,
gesture, mathematical symbolism, diagrams, drawings, and physical and
virtual models. rough semiotic concepts like ains of signiﬁcation,
paradigmatic and syntagmatic relationships, denotation and connotation,
polysemy, intertextuality, and others, mathematics education researers
have been able to work with (more and less) embodied signs, symbols, and
representations to gain new insights into teaching and learning.
Some of the notable solars working in semiotics as an approa to
embodied mathematics learning include Radford (Radford, 2002, 2009, 2010;
Radford, Edwards, & Arzarello, 2009; Radford & Puig, 2007), Roth (Givry &
Roth, 2006; Roth, 2001, 2010; Roth & Bowen 1998; Roth & McGinn, 1998)
Presmeg (Presmeg, 1997, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008), Arzarello (Arzarello, Paola,
Robui, & Sabena, 2009), Robui (2006), Ferrara (2006) and Sabena
(Sabena, Radford & Bardini, 2005).

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics learning through semiotics
Arzarello, Paola, Robui, & Sabena (2009) undertake a microanalysis of
multimodal aspects of student and teaer interactions in a high sool
calculus class, developing the concepts of “semiotic bundles” and
“semiotic games” to frame and model observed embodied phenomena
involving gesture.
e basic unit of classical semiotic analysis is the sign, as deﬁned by
Peirce and other theoretical semioticians. However, su signs are not
necessarily multimodal, and have traditionally been viewed in an
isolated moment of time in relation to an individual.
Semiotic bundles as described here are collections of activities
(including but not limited to gestures, speech, glances, and drawings) that
co-occur in typical classroom interactions. Semiotic bundles may include
signs made by various students and/or teaers. Semiotic bundles as a
concept allows for interactions among people in the class, and for the
dynamic development of multimodal semiosis over time. is is a
broader, more ﬂexible idea about semiotics than the classical concept of
the sign accommodates, and it oﬀers mathematics educators a helpful
unit of semiotic analysis for classroom interactions. It also allows for
analysis of bodily movement, physical objects, and dynamic interaction
among people that brings physicality and intersubjectivity to semiotic
classroom analysis. Semiotic bundles can be analyzed synchronically (at a
particular moment) and/or diachronically (over a span of time).
Semiotic games here refers mainly to the pedagogic oices made by
the teaer in relation to semiotic resources and semiotic bundles
developed through teaer-guided classroom interactions. e teaer is
viewed as mediating the semiotic resources of the classroom. A teaer’s

ability to make sense of the embodied, multimodal semiotic bundles
developing in the class is seen as a valuable tool in making pedagogic
decisions that use su resources to their fullest. Su an analysis can also
help the teaer monitor individual students’ gestures, drawings,
language, and other multimodal, embodied expressions to understand
ea student’s developing mathematical conceptions, and to intervene as
needed.
More generally, this study aims to show that the multimodal,
embodied, interpersonal, and temporal elements of the semiosis involved
in mathematics classrooms form a ri and complex system of meaning-
making that goes beyond the linguistic signs of a particular individual.
Approaches to Embodiment Through Cultural
Studies
Cultural studies is a contemporary interdisciplinary ﬁeld of solarship that
investigates power relationships and identities in the context of cultural
objects, processes, institutions, and forms. The term cultural studies was ﬁrst
used in the mid-1960s, but the field has had “an unprecedented international
boom” since the 1980s (Grossberg, Nelson, & Treichler, 1992).
is ﬁeld of study is grounded in a multiplicity of disciplinary approaes
and theories, including those from anthropology, sociology, political
science, ﬁlm and media studies, literature, history, science and tenology
studies, psyoanalysis, feminist and gender studies, disability studies, and
curriculum studies. rough these multiple approaes, cultural studies
aims to theorize contemporary life and bring awareness to relationships of
oppression and hegemony, liberation and social justice inherent in societies
and cultures. As circumstances of life ange in the contemporary
Postmodern era, cultural studies as a ﬁeld anowledges new modalities

and ways of living, and the anges in consciousness and power relations
that emerge from these changed circumstances.
Cultural studies solars in feminist, gender, race, and disability studies
have been particularly active in raising issues of embodiment as an aspect
of Postmodern power relationships. In all these ﬁelds, it is anowledged
that persons have experienced subjugation as a direct consequence of being
“diﬀerently bodied” compared those in positions of power in mainstream,
colonialist/patriaral/heteronormative/racist/ablist societal hieraries. A
focus on embodiment(s) in terms of diﬀerence and diﬀerential power has
led to radical reconceptualization of binaries including feminine-masculine,
Bla-White, ablebodied-disabled, human-animal, human-maine, and
others. Solars in this ﬁeld who work from economics, political science,
anthropology, and sociology may use theories of embodiment as an
approa to allenging norms around binaries like producer-consumer,
ﬁrst world–third world, colonizing-colonized, powerful-powerless, and so
on.
In relation to these and other disputed oppositions, cultural theorists
allenge watertight categories and exclusionary boundary lines. New
theory in this ﬁeld takes innovative standpoints (oen from the point of
view of the oppressed and politically disenfranised) in considering
contextualized 
and 
embodied 
experiences 
of 
diversity, 
desire,
commodiﬁcation, community, media inﬂuences, identities, cultural tropes,
and literacies. Bodily practices and experiences that were considered
hidden, private, or taboo have been brought into public and academic
discourse, and form the basis for new theory. ese radical conceptual
allenges are not limited to academic publications, but are put into
practice in the arts and in policy making as a basis for fundamental social
ange and work towards more socially just laws and practices. Cultural
studies as a ﬁeld takes a playful stance in allenging binaries of high
culture–low culture, so that diverse phenomena and genres from popular

culture (like movies and TV shows, comic books, video games, and popular
songs) are given consideration equal to those of so-called high culture.
rough the work of many key cultural theorists—including Grosz
(1994), Haraway (1999), Bordo (2003), Hall (1993), Butler (1993), Sheets-
Johnstone (1999), Tyler (2000), Csordas (1994), Zizek (1997), Kroker and
Kroker (1987), based on earlier philosophical groundwork by Heidegger
(1962), Merleau-Ponty (1962/1945), Foucault (1977), Levi-Strauss (1969),
Mauss (1954), Lacan (1966), Kristeva (2002), and others—new discourses
around body, embodiment, bodily experiences, motion, senses, hybridities,
and diversity have entered public, political, artistic, and academic realms.
ese discussions have brought about struggle and ange in societies at
large. ey have certainly inﬂuenced work in mathematics education as
well, particularly a number of mathematics education theorists working in
areas of equity, culture, and social justice, including Walkerdine (1998),
Mendi (2004), Appelbaum (2010), Swanson (2007), De Freitas (2008),
Walshaw (2004), and Zevenbergen (2000).

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics learning through cultural studies
Mendi (2004, pp. 43–47) uses a cultural studies analysis of embodied
cultural stereotypes of mathematicians in a number of popular feature
ﬁlms to interrogate gender-stereotyping that may aﬀect learners’
relationships to mathematics.
Mendi begins with an analysis of her own hybrid identity—as a
mathematician, teaer of mathematics, sociologist, and a person deeply
connected with popular culture.
As a female mathematician who goes to the movies and pays
aention to popular culture, Mendi notices that mathematicians are
oen stereotyped as “boring, obsessed with the irrelevant, socially
incompetent, male, and unsuccessfully heterosexual.” e nerdy
mathematician is oen portrayed as “so” (so-bodied, through la of
exercise and healthy food, and through a diotomization of mind and
body), although the mathematics they work on is “hard.”
At the same time, there is a paradoxical contrast between the popular
culture vision of mathematicians as nerds and, simultaneously, as
geniuses and adventurers. e mathematicians in pop culture are oen
shown as on a quest for rationality, through detective work, espionage,
and academic resear. ese quests are oen stereotyped as ending in
madness—as if mathematical work itself makes the mathematicians mad.
Mendi looks at four recent ﬁlms about mathematics (A Beautiful
Mind, Enigma, Good Will Hunting, and Pi) and examines their portrayals
of mathematicians in terms of gender and sexuality, madness, rationality,
and connection (or more oen, disconnection) with a fully embodied,
emotionally engaged, connected way of living. Her detailed analysis of
the four ﬁlms shows that mathematicians are stereotyped as male;

heteronormative (even in biopics of actual mathematicians who were
openly gay or bisexual); on a quest; disconnected from their bodies,
emotions, and communities; and tending towards mental illness. In at
least one of the ﬁlms, Good Will Hunting, a series of gendered binaries
are presented: “mind/body, separation/connection, theory/experience,
reading books/living life. Mathematics is aaed to the ﬁrst terms in
these oppositions and Will’s relationship with his girlfriend Skyla is
associated with the second terms” (p. 47). e mathematician in this ﬁlm
eventually abandons mathematics in order to be able to live in a fully
embodied, connected, experiential way.
Mendi questions the eﬀects of these kinds of stereotyped media
images on students, regardless of gender, who might be considering
taking up mathematics. She also wonders why being a mathematician is
treated in popular culture as an inborn talent possessed by very few
people, while literacy is “seen as an essential part of being fully human”
(p. 47).
Approaches to Embodiment Through the New
Materialism
It is worth noting a new theoretical approa to embodiment within
cultural studies currently being taken up by a number of solars in
mathematics education. e New Materialism is radically material,
feminist, and anti-Cartesian. It is a turn against “the linguistic turn” that
aracterized mu of early Postmodern philosophy. e New Materialism
frames everything as material, including language, discourse, thought, and
concepts. It is a theory of monism, in opposition to Platonic/Cartesian
dualism, in whi everything that might have earlier been considered
abstract is now taken as embodied and physical, although what is meant by

the materiality of thought or language remains to be worked out in detail.
Key writers in basic New Materialism theory include Barad (2003),
Maclure (2013), Massumi (2002), and Stewart (2007), with work based on
theorists that include Butler (1993, 2010), Latour (2007, 2009), Deleuze
(1987), Bergson (2004), and Tarde (2010). New Materialism is closely
associated with work in the posthuman (see, for example, Weaver, 2010;
Lewis & Kahn, 2010). Mathematics educators beginning to work with New
Materialism theory and embodied mathematics include De Freitas, Sinclair,
Ferrara, and Radford (De Freitas & Sinclair, 2014; Radford 2013; Sinclair, De
Freitas, & Ferrara 2013).

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics learning through the New
Materialism
De Freitas & Sinclair (2013, pp. 456–468) use the work of Barad and
Châtelet to recast the inextricable entanglement of humans, material
objects, and mathematical concepts in terms of the “body of
mathematics.” is recasting of embodiment rejects Platonic/Cartesian
boundaries and static or inert aracterizations of materials and concepts,
taking up instead a feminist practice of studying identity as performative,
sociocultural, and situated. Mathematical concepts, manipulative objects,
and people doing mathematics are treated as material, embodied and
coextensive, mobile and mutually shaping in an unending process of
becoming.
In this article, the body is conceived of as a “social entanglement” (p.
456) so that a focus on the individual learner creates a kind of artiﬁcial
analytical cut between person and sociocultural context. However, the
New Materialism goes further than previous sociocultural analyses in
mathematics education in seeing human bodies, environments, and
materials in a classroom as continually in a state of ﬂux and movement,
mutually constituting one another and never fully formed or static.
Learners’ and teaers’ bodies, the classroom itself, manipulatives, and
other presences are all both actors and acted upon; none is ever fully
formed, finished, or inert.
is radical reframing of the body and interaction goes further in
considering mathematical concepts as embodied and material, in the
emergent process of becoming in the relational ontology of the
“assemblage” that is the classroom.
Coming from a philosophy of the posthuman, and drawing on the

work of Haraway and others, this analysis of a “new concept of the self
(and of the body) esews the notion of an isolated human agent acting
upon the inert and inanimate world” (p. 457). e body is seen, not as a
biologically bounded ‘container’ nor as an individual cognizing entity,
but rather as an ongoing interaction among materials, forces and beings
—“a self that constantly projects and extends itself beyond the skin
actively engaging and incorporating its material surroundings via the
interface of the body” (p. 458).
e authors take on the allenging task of rethinking mathematics in
this context, and ﬁnd Châtelet’s concept of the virtual as a key to
accounting for the materiality of mathematical ideas and concepts. In this
account, “the mathematical concept is always ﬂuid and, in some
important sense, unﬁnished,” and is brought into being in material ways
through gestures, diagrams, manipulatives, language, digital networks,
etc. e authors ﬁnd hope in opening up the mathematics curriculum
through New Materialist perspectives. ey conclude that “focusing on
acts of embodiment whereby assemblages of concept and learner come
in and out of being, and recasting concepts as acts of actualizing the
virtual, shis our aention to a future alive with mathematical
potential.”
Approaches to Embodiment Through Gesture
With a renewed interest in body and embodied ways of being and
knowing, there has been great aention given to gesture, since gesture is a
way that aspects of body and physical movement enter into communication
and other human activities. Mathematics education has been one of the key
disciplines involved from the start in the emerging ﬁeld of gesture studies,
and it is interesting to speculate why this is so.

Gesture studies is a new interdisciplinary ﬁeld, developed since the 1980s,
with a public presence since 2002 through the International Society for
Gesture 
Studies 
(ISGS, 
accessible 
via 
its 
active 
website 
at
http://gesturestudies.com), the journal Gesture, and related book publishing
(mostly through John Benjamins Publishers in its Gesture Studies book
series). Mu of the foundational work in gesture studies was developed
initially by two University of Chicago psyolinguists, David McNeill (1992,
2000, 2008) and Susan Goldin-Meadow (2003; 2005) and their collaborators,
and by other inﬂuential gesture theorists including Adam Kendon (2004),
Sotaro Kita (2000), Cornelia Müller (Cienki & Müller, 2008), Jürgen Stree
(2009), Gale Stam (McCaﬀerty & Stam, 2008) and others. A brief history of
the ISGS and gesture studies as a field can be found in Müller (2002).
Gesture studies had its interdisciplinary origins in psyology,
anthropology, and linguistics, but by the third congress of the ISGS (in
Chicago, 2007), many other academic disciplines presented resear into the
nature and uses of gesture. Solars from computer science, art history,
sociology, and music participated in the congress, but so, notably, did many
researers in mathematics education. In fact, mathematics educators made
up 10% of conference presenters that year. Work in mathematics education
and gesture dates ba a few years earlier, to about 2002, and resear fora
in embodied mathematics and gesture have been part of the inﬂuential
IGPME (International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education)
and ICME (International Congress on Mathematical Education) conferences
since that time.
Mu of the groundwork for the analysis of gesture has come from
McNeill’s work cited earlier. Mathematics educators (and others) doing this
work have beneﬁted from McNeill’s foundational work, whi includes a
taxonomy of gesture phases and types; resear into the relationships
between gesture and spee, and gesture and thought; the uses and
purposes of gesture; gesture phraseology; methodology, methods, and

protocols for annotating gesture; gesture and neurological disabilities; cross-
cultural studies of gesture; and much more.
A limitation of the use of McNeill’s work in education resear is that
McNeill has osen to study unconsciously produced spee-accompanying
gesture, while educators may sometimes be interested in consciously
produced gesture (perhaps on the part of teaers), and consciously taught
or elicited gestures (in teaers’ pedagogic interactions with students).
McNeill’s work may still be useful in considering these sorts of gestures, but
there may be diﬀerences that merit aention in education resear
contexts.
Mu of current mathematics education resear involving gesture
studies can be aracterized as touing on one or several of the following
areas.
(i) Connections with linguistic analysis of classroom interactions:
Microanalysis of very short bursts of spee and accompanying
gesture by mathematics learners and teaers, oen in the context of
group problem solving and instruction, with the aim of accessing
aspects of learners’ and teaers’ unconscious thinking evidenced in
gesture.
(ii) Connections with cognitive and computer design: analysis of learners’
gestures as a resource for the design of “cognitively ergonomic”
manipulatives and teaching sequences (both actual and virtual).
(iii) Connections with philosophical theories of mind, consciousness,
language, semiotics and culture: observation and analysis of gestures
around mathematical activity as evidence of qualities and
relationships in mind-body-language-culture theory.
(iv) Connections with theories of curriculum and pedagogy: observation
and teaing/elicitation of gesture as part of design experiments in
curriculum and pedagogy aimed at learners’ multimodal engagement

in mathematical relationships and ideas.
(v) Connections with cultural studies and studies of diversity: observations
of gesture produced in mathematics learning with reference to gender,
social class, ethnicity, culture, (dis)ability, language use, and the many
other dimensions of diversity of students physical and sociocultural
ways of being.
Gesture studies in mathematics education have not been limited to a
particular age group or sool grade level, but have spanned all ages,
including early ildhood, elementary, secondary and tertiary sooling,
and out-of-sool learning experiences for ildren and adults in their
communities.
Since about 2002, scores of academic articles and apters have been
published on gesture and mathematics education, and this continues to be a
very productive area of resear in our ﬁeld. Some of the most inﬂuential
researers and papers in this area include Núñez (2004a; 2004b; 2008),
Goldin-Meadow (Goldin-Meadow 2014; Goldin-Meadow, Nusbaum, Kelly,
& Wagner, 2001), Abrahamson (2004; 2007), Edwards (2003; 2009; Edwards
& Moore-Russo 2012), De Freitas and Sinclair (2012; Sinclair et al., 2013),
Arzarello (Arzarello & Edwards, 2005; Arzarello, Robui, & Bazzini, 2005),
Radford (2009; Radford et al., 2009), Ferrara and Nemirovsky (2005; Ferrara,
2013; Nemirovsky, Kelton, & Rhodehamel, 2012), Gerofsky (2008; 2010;
2011a), Alibali and Nathan (2012; Alibali et al., 2013; Alibali et al., 2014),
Morgan (Morgan & Alshwaikh, 2008), Rotman (2005), Francaviglia
(Francaviglia & Servidio, 2011), Frant (Frant, Acevedo, & Font, 2005),
Robui (Robui, Edwards, & Ferrara, 2012), Healy and Fernandes (2011;
Healy, Fernandes, & do Rosário, 2008).

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics learning through gesture theory
Alibali & Nathan (2012, pp. 248–277) use a close analysis of several
examples of teaer and student gestures in classroom interactions to
argue that mathematical knowledge is necessarily embodied. Two
classes of gesture from McNeill’s gesture typology are shown to be
commonly used to represent mathematical concepts through action and
to ground those concepts in the objects and seings of the
teaching/learning environment.
e authors focus on the gestures that teaers and learners produce
when explaining mathematical ideas (rather than when negotiating
interactions with others in the classroom, etc.) In the process of su
explanations, they pay particular notice to David McNeill’s categories of
representational gestures (and its subcategory of metaphoric gestures),
and pointing or deictic gestures.
Representational gestures are theorized to “manifest the motoric and
perceptual simulations that underlie language and imagery” (p. 254) and
reveal conceptual metaphors grounded in bodily experiences. Su
gestures are also shown to have the power to enable cognition of objects
and situations that are not actually present, recalling Nemirovsky and
Ferrara’s work on mathematical imagination described earlier on page
71.
Pointing gestures provide evidence that learners’ mathematical
thinking is grounded in the physical environment of the learning space,
and “support the claims that cognition is situated in the environment and
that the environment is an integral part of the cognitive system,” (p. 255)
recalling De Freitas’ and Sinclair’s work in New Materialist theory
described on page 76, although perhaps to a less radical degree.

Alibali and Nathan undertake this analysis with two related aims: ﬁrst,
to advance understanding of the embodied nature of mathematical
thinking, learning, and instruction; and second, to help develop an
empirical analytic basis for improved mathematical experiences and
mathematics pedagogy.
Approaches to Embodiment Through the Arts and
Performance Theory
ere is a materiality and physicality to all of the ﬁne, performing, and
practical arts, and some of these arts undeniably involve the human body.
Dance, theater, music, and other forms of performance art involve the
artists’ physical presence and skills with movement, voice, and instruments;
in addition, arts that use recorded performances (live-action ﬁlm, recorded
and sampled music) require artists’ physical presence at stages of the work.
e making of art is intimately entangled with materials, place, and
presence. Sculptors, painters, poers, and weavers all need to become very
familiar with their media and develop their physical and design skills in
shaping them. Even arts that might seem more ethereal or less physical
(say, video animation or poetry) involve materials that must become
familiar in the hands, bodies, and voices of the artists, notwithstanding that
these materials might include computer applications or language.
e arts and performance also have the power to communicate and to
move people in ways that go beyond the limits of propositional language.
Eﬀective/aﬀective art works on many levels simultaneously and can help
people understand complex relationships in a holistic way. Artworks have
the potential to engage the intellect, emotions, kinetic, and sensory
experiences and an openness of response all at once.
For mathematicians and mathematics educators, these embodied,

aﬀective, intellectual, and intuitive qualities of the arts oﬀer new ways to
rea others and communicate the beauty of mathematical paerning.
Many people do not have the educational baground or interest to access
mathematical paerns through the specialized propositional language of
proofs, explanations, and equations, but most can appreciate the aesthetic
qualities of mathematics when they are expressed via music, dance,
painting, photography, sculpture, ﬁlm, theater, etc. ere is the possibility
that this aesthetic appreciation may be a starting point for greater
experiential and/or propositional understanding of mathematical relations.
What is more, learners may be beer able to express their own intuitions
and questions about mathematical paerns by using color, shape,
movement, voice, poetic language, and other artistic modes of expression,
rather than being required to work with nothing but formal mathematical
symbolism.
A number of mathematicians and mathematics educators have taken up
embodied expression through the arts as part of their own mathematical
and educational practices. e uptake is based in a number of diﬀerent
premises and on the researchers’ academic and artistic positionings:
A large group of resear mathematicians and computer scientists
have taken up art forms like sculpture, painting, and digital graphic
arts to express or apply their theoretical work in their ﬁeld. Many of
the participants in the annual Bridges Math and Art conference fall
into this category; the conference proceedings and gallery (both
available on the website, http://bridgesmathart.org) display many
beautiful and interesting works. Some of the best-known
mathematician artists doing this kind of work include George Hart,
Carlo Sequin, Craig Kaplan, Mike Naylor, and Robert Bosch.
Some artists are interested in creating artwork based on mathematical
themes and relationships because these paerns inform their artistic

inquiry. Again, many Bridges participants as well as others are doing
notable work that falls into this category—for example, Karl Saeﬀer
and his Dr. Saﬀer & Mr. Stern Dance Ensemble, sculptor Ni
Sayers, and others like dancer and oreographer Sarah Chase and
playwright/mathematician John Mighton.
Some mathematicians interested in didactics at the university level
have developed arts-based resources and pedagogies for teaing
undergraduate math classes. A number of these are women
mathematicians who aim to make mathematics more accessible to all,
and especially to women students, by using traditionally women’s arts
like needlework to represent mathematical spaces and relationships
(see, for example, Taimina, 2009; belcastro & Yackel, 2008, 2011).
Some mathematics educators working with elementary and secondary
schools engage in the arts and mathematical performance with the aim
of helping learners learn and understand mathematics beer. For most
of these educators, student participation as artists is central to the
project, and is seen to oﬀer learners a sense of agency, and a way of
expressing and exploring mathematical relationships. For example,
George Gadanidis, Marcelo Borba, myself and my collaborators have
worked on mathematical performances with K-12 students and
teaers and established the Math + Science Performance Festival
(http://mathfest.ca), an international online math performance
festival/contest, bringing together “live” and digital mathematical
performances (Gadanidis & Borba 2008; Gadanidis, Hughes & Borba
2008). Others treat mathematical performances as a spectator activity,
notably the MITACS math show/Math Out Loud performances,
founded by mathematician Jean-Marie De Konin and aimed at high
school student audiences.
Mathematics educators are exploring both pedagogical and theoretical

facets of an arts-based or arts-infused mathematics curriculum, including
studies of the aesthetics of mathematics and mathematics education
(Sinclair, Pimm, & Higginson, 2006; Sinclair, 2001, 2009; De Freitas, 2010;
Gerofsky, Sinclair, & Davis 2003; Gerofsky, 2007, 2009, 2011b). eoretical
groundings for these studies range from more general studies of aesthetics
from philosophy and cultural studies (for example, Dissanayake, 1995;
Rancière, 2004) to works on performance ethnography (Denzin, 2003, 2006a,
2006b), to the ﬁeld of performance studies, with roots in both theater and
anthropology (Turner, 1986; Conquergood, 2002; Schechner, 2003, 2011).
Some resear mathematician–artists have put some of their eﬀort into
work that addresses mathematics teaing and learning, even though they
would not identify themselves as mathematics educators. ese include,
most famously, George Hart and Vi Hart, both of whom are continuing to
produce very popular, publicly accessible video series on mathematical
topics through music, juggling, bell-ringing, origami, poetry, drawing, and
sculpture. ese and other math/art videos and resources that explore
sool mathematics topics through embodied arts have become staples of
many secondary math classrooms.

An example of an approach to embodied
mathematics learning through the arts and
performance theory
Gadanidis and Borba (2008) explore the idea of mathematics education
as (digital) performance through an analysis of a collaboratively
produced set of online videos, Flatland, a speculation on the nature of
parallel lines. ese authors ground their analysis in a number of
performance theories, primarily Boorstin’s (1990) categories of the
experience of performance as voyeuristic, vicarious and/or visceral.
e authors place themselves within the world of performance
through their work in songwriting and video production (Gadanidis) and
in political theater in Brazil and elsewhere (Borba). e politically
activist forum theater work of Augusto Boal informs their sense of
engagement of the audience as “spect(actors),” and the idea that
performative engagement can bring about positive disruptions to
traditional assumptions (in mathematics education as well as political
systems).
eir work in digital mathematics performance aims to counter
assumptions about mathematics as a cold, inhumane experience; as a
series of procedures for generating correct answers; as something best
taught in small, easy increments; and as something that involves only
known facts. Instead, they want to use performative mathematics as a
means to encourage students and teaers to develop a sense of
mathematics as warm and human, insightful and imaginative,
welcoming curiosity, narrative, and sustained hard work.
In their analysis of embodied, arts-based performances that may be
enacted live and/or online, the authors conceive of art and the Internet as
other-than-human actors that have the potential to ange mathematics

as much as mathematics changes them.
rough the arts, Gadanidis and Borba wish to create poetic, storied
experiences that partake of the rare and wondrous (as a memorable
poem might), and that oﬀer learners ances to ask profound questions
and tell tales of the mathematics they have learned (as they might talk
about their learning in history, literature, or science class). All too oen,
these authors point out, mathematics has been treated as routine,
procedural, disembodied, and impossible to question or story. An
engagement with performance mathematics allenges the underlying
assumptions that have made traditional mathematics alienating and may
open up new worlds for learners and teaers. e authors suggest that
“calling ourselves performance mathematicians creates a shi of identity
that impacts on mathematics education, by helping us view mathematics
not as conﬁned to classroom activity or to the work of professional
mathematicians, but as something that is shared with the wider world”
(p. 50).
Summary of Current Approaches to Research on
Embodiment in Mathematics Education Presented
Here
In the previous section I oﬀered a brief catalogue of seven of the most
active and productive of the current approaes to embodiment in
mathematics education. For ea of these, I have given a aracterization of
its theoretical roots, its current focus points, some of the terminology used,
and some key authors and readings. Here is a condensed recap of these
seven approaches.
Embodiment through language and metaphor: Using Lakoﬀ, Johnson

and Núñez’s work on embodied metaphor, mathematics educators have
focused on the relationship among physical bodily experiences (including
emotions), the languaging of that experience within cultures, and their
relationship to the learning of mathematical conceptual material. e focus
on embodied metaphor gives a new, non-Cartesian meaning to
mathematical conceptualization.
Embodiment through cognitive sciences: e new ﬁeld of cognitive
science, whi includes AI, cognitive neuroscience, computer science,
philosophy of mind, and cognitive linguistics (see p. 70), has brought
mathematics education researers to consider embodied learning at the
neurological/autonomic systems level, to work on cognitively ergonomic
design, to consider virtual as well as actual bodies in learning (for example,
to researing mathematics learning in online and hybrid spaces), and to
include the more-than-human world in conceiving of mathematical
learning and intelligence.
Embodiment through semiotics: Semiotics is an important structuralist
philosophical approa based in the Modern era, but heralding (and a
foundation of) the Postmodern. Mathematics educators have taken up
analytical structures and methods of semiotics to make sense of
relationships between diﬀerent modalities of representation, including
spee, writing, diagrams, graphs, ﬁlms, etc., and interpret these
relationships in terms of mathematics teaching and learning.
Embodiment through cultural studies: Mathematics educators
concerned with social justice and questions of power, oppression, and
liberation may take up theoretical approaes from the Postmodern ﬁeld of
cultural studies to do work about gendered, racialized, class-marked bodies,
voices, and presences in mathematics classrooms and to allenge unjust
practices.
Embodiment through the New Materialism: As a new and signiﬁcant
subtopic of cultural studies, the New Materialism takes a radically monistic

stance to allenge the Cartesian dualism of mind-body. New Materialism
asserts that everything—even language and thought—is material.
Mathematics education researers working in this area are beginning to
develop field-specific theory about conceptualization, thinking, and material
being as part of the learning of mathematics.
Embodiment through gesture: The new interdisciplinary field of gesture
studies, based in linguistics, psyology, and computer science, has been
taken up with enthusiasm by many mathematics education researers to
use gestural evidence as data in mathematics teaching and learning. Gesture
has been shown to oﬀer access to some unconscious process, both cognitive
and social, and this has yielded insights into some the unconscious processes
of interest in mathematics education.
Embodiment through the arts and performance theory: All of the arts
(and especially the performing arts) are embodied in their use of materials
and movement and their aﬀect on the senses, emotions, and the physical
world. An embodied mathematics through the ﬁne, performing, and
practical arts has been a productive new area of resear for a number of
distinct groups: resear mathematicians expressing their ﬁndings in artistic
ways, artists who have an interest in mathematical themes for their art,
postsecondary mathematics educators who want to make learning more
accessible to students (particularly women students), educators interested in
oﬀering greater access and engagement to elementary and high sool
math students, and mathematician/artists who are beginning to address
educational audiences, through online videos and other projects.

The Graphs & Gestures Project: Mapping the
Trajectory of a Research Program in Embodied
Mathematics Teaching and Learning
e seven approaes outlined earlier are recognizable and distinct, but not
mutually exclusive, in the practices of mathematics education resear.
Most researers interested in embodied mathematics education engage a
number of these approaes in the course of a particular piece of resear
or their research program.
In the ﬁnal section of this apter, I will trace the trajectory of my own
multiyear Graphs & Gestures Project in embodied mathematics teaing
and learning as a exemplar of the ways that su a program might develop,
and outline ways that this program was inspired and grounded in multiple
approaes taken from those outlined in the previous section. I have osen
to take a macro-level view of a whole research program rather than engage
in micro analysis of a few minutes of classroom video, as is oen the
tradition in articles of this kind. ere is potential value in analysis at all
levels (micro, meso, and macro). With this example, I intend to add to the
literature that examines resear programs rather than focuses on resear
moments.
Introduction to the Graphs & Gestures Project
e Graphs & Gestures Project is an ongoing resear program exploring
the teaing and learning of the graphs of mathematical functions through
gesture, movement, voice, and materials. The project began in 2006, and has
focused mainly on secondary and senior elementary sool learners in
Vancouver, Canada, and Torino, Italy.
is project arose from a small observation and a general interest and

aentiveness to the ways that our bodily, sensory, and kinesthetic
experiences of the world inform our mathematical understanding. From a
hun—and a feeling that there was something important at play with
embodied images of graphs—the project has grown and anged over time.
It now includes work with diﬀerent groups of learners labeled as gied,
“typical,” reluctant, dyslexic, and blind and visually impaired. e aims of
the project range from the development of basic principles to theory
development to interdisciplinary pedagogic design experiments. By
mapping the trajectory of Graphs & Gestures over the past eight years, I
would like to oﬀer those new to embodied mathematics education a
snapshot of a particular “way in” to this area of resear. I hope that this
will encourage others to ﬁnd their own way in to this new and promising
area.
When an academic researer, whether new or experienced, embarks on
work in a new area, there is some expectation that it will be possible right
from the start to delineate a plan for the program of resear. is might
sometimes be the case, but when working in an area that is still actively
developing (as is the case with embodied mathematics learning), there is a
sense that the trajectory of the resear is a “path made by walking.” e
researer may be developing the resear program from year to year, and
will help develop the theoretical basis for future work through present
results, conjectures, and findings.
A methodological article by Bavelas (1987) has been a guide to me in this
process, although I was introduced to it aer I had begun work in this way
for myself. Bavelas, a social psyologist and gesture theorist, advocates for
the “care and feeding of hunes” in the initial stages of scientiﬁc resear
and the importance of not foreclosing on one’s own new and unfamiliar
ideas too early in the resear process. She explains that there are many
later stages of resear where rigor, critique, and the discarding of
untenable ideas are essential, but at the early stages, an openness and

willingness to entertain wild ideas are necessary to engage creativity in
scientiﬁc work. It is important for researers not to foreclose on their own
“wild ideas” too early—but once those ideas have had time to develop, it is
also important to scrutinize them seriously and critically. A process like
Bavelas’s sema for permiing creativity in the sciences is playing out in
the multiyear Graphs & Gestures Project, and it may serve as an example
for others taking on new aspects of mathematics education research.
Years Zero to Eight of the Research
Year Zero: Starting from Teaching Experience and a Hunch
is project began in the year before I began work as a university
researer, while I was still teaing mathematics in secondary sool aer
completing my doctorate. e resear questions arose in Year Zero from
observations, introspection, and a hunch.
As a high sool teaer, I noticed that my colleagues and I used lots of
gesture, movement, and vocal sound as we talked about mathematical
paerns with our students. Since the main stream of secondary
mathematics is focused on mathematical functions, including their graphs,
many of these gestures indicated things about the graphs of functions on
the Cartesian plane.
One particular incident was the germ of the idea for this project: I was
teaing a Math 10 lesson on the maximum region of a quadratic function,
whi hinged on a graph of a parabola intersected by the line y = 4. As a
qui e, I asked all the students to show me, simultaneously and
through gesture, what the function y = 4 looked like. My pedagogic aim
was to take a qui poll of the students’ knowledge and to see whether
they knew that this function would be a horizontal line four units above the

origin (and in fact, most students did show me that they knew this).
What stru me at the time, though, was the variety of ways my students
gestured this horizontal line. Some made a small gesture pointing with one
ﬁnger near their nose. Others used two hands in a larger symmetrical
gesture at est level, starting from the middle and extending outwards in
both directions. Still others used one or both hands at est level or below,
in a large movement from one side to the other, extending beyond their
center of gravity, and sometimes accompanying their gesture with a sound
like “whoosh.”
I began to wonder about the varied qualities of these student gestures,
and especially about the height of the lines they used to represent the
function y = 4. I realized that I could tell whether a student was showing a
horizontal line, but I could not tell how many units above the origin it was
supposed to be unless I knew where the origin was situated. is raised two
important research questions for me:
1) Where do people place the x-axis against their body when gesturing the
shape of a Cartesian graph?
2) Is there anything telling about the qualities of people’s elicited gestures
of these graphs (for example, symmetrical or not, one-ﬁngered or two-
handed, fast or slow, large or small, accompanied by vocalization or not,
etc.)?
Introspection into my own gesturing of Cartesian graphs revealed that, as a
default, I tended to place the x-axis at my waist and the origin at my navel
(unless the graph lay mostly below the horizontal axis, whi would make
su a placement diﬃcult to rea in a gesture, in whi case I would raise
the axis a bit higher). In my role as math teaer, standing rather than
siing at a desk, my movements were large and oen accompanied by
vocalizations as a way of highlighting particular features of the graph that I

wanted students to aend to. I had noticed similar large gestures and
vocalizations when observing my colleagues teaching aspects of graphing in
their math classes as well. But observation showed me that many students
gestured the shapes of graphs diﬀerently, and I was curious to explore how
these gestures varied, and whether these variations had anything to tell us
in terms of mathematics teaching and learning.
My assumption in posing these nascent resear questions was that, in
embodying a graph through gesture, the person’s body, movement, and
their conception of the graph must be inextricably co-implicated. e x-
and y-axes, and the origin, local maximum and minimum points, roots,
slopes, intersection points, and so on are expressed by bodies moving in
space as students and teaers gesture, and must necessarily be made in
relationship to locations on the gesturer’s own body. is assumption aligns
most closely with the theoretical constructs of Gesture eory (elaborated
in 3.5), although I was not familiar with this emergent ﬁeld at that time.
ere are also potential connections with the sections on “Embodiment
through the Arts” and “Embodiment through the New Materialism.”
In Year Zero of the project, however, I was not yet aware of these
theoretical connections. e resear question was in the process of
formation as a hun, and in Year Zero, the work was simply to care for
and nourish this hunch.
Years One and Two: Pilot Projects
In my ﬁrst year as a university professor and researer, I designed an
informal pilot project that began to follow up on my preliminary resear
questions. e subjects of the pilot project were mostly adults osen
through an opportunistic sampling process—that is, anyone I knew who
would agree to participate. at included a score of academic colleagues,
graduate students, university staff, friends, and family members.

I selected seventeen graphs of mathematical functions from a calculus
course, whi I enlarged and mounted on pieces of card. Ea participant
was videotaped separately facing a camera on a tripod. Participants were
instructed to gesture the shape of ea graph for the camera, with the
optional addition of accompanying their gestures with verbal metaphors
and/or vocalizations.
The resulting videos were analyzed in terms of
placement of the x- and y-axes against the body,
symmetrical or asymmetrical gesturing of graphs with bilateral or
rotational symmetry,
for symmetrical gestures, the oice of whether to start at the top and
move downwards or vice versa (or to start at the center and move
outwards or vice versa),
acceleration (or lack of acceleration) in the gestures,
degree of full-body engagement in the gestures, and
the nature and quality of verbal metaphors and vocalizations, if used.
My analysis of the informal pilot project videos showed that most
participants placed the y-axis on the center vertical line of the body
(paralleling the spine), although one participant oﬀset the y-axis to either
the le or right of his body for ea of the graphs. ere was great
variation in the placement of the x-axis, ranging from waist to nose level,
but I observed that a higher placement of the x-axis seemed to co-occur
with more limited body movements, lile or no acceleration of gestural
movements, and few metaphors or vocalizations, while a lower placement
of the x-axis seemed to co-occur with larger bodily movements, extremes
of accelerated/decelerated pace of gesturing, and more use of verbal
metaphors and vocalizations.
A number of participants used symmetrical gestures involving both

hands moving simultaneously, and these were generally those that also
placed the x-axis lower. ese participants showed an increased verbal
aentiveness to the symmetrical nature of the graphs that had symmetries,
but so did some of the participants who simply gestured the graphs from
left to right or right to left.
Results from Year One led to a more formal pilot project in Year Two,
involving 22 students in grades 8 and 11 and their four teaers from three
secondary sools representing diﬀering socioeconomic areas of Vancouver,
Canada (Gerofsky, 2010). I selected these two age groups (age 13 and 16)
because the younger students had done lile or no work with the graphs of
mathematical functions, and the older students would just have completed a
year of intensive work on this topic. I wanted to see whether novice
students would gesture the graphs diﬀerently than those with a great deal
of recent experience in this area. I was also interested in seeing whether
teaers gestured the graphs diﬀerently from their students or not—or in
the other direction, whether students mimicked their teachers’ gestures.
Teaers were asked to select a varied group of students from among
those who volunteered to participate in the study—varied in terms of
gender, cultural baground, socio-economic status, and in terms of their
interest and/or success in their math courses at school.
For this second pilot study, I limited the printed materials to ﬁve of the
17 graphs that had produced the most interesting results in the Year Zero
informal study. As in Year Zero, I asked participants to gesture the shapes
of the graphs to a camera on a tripod. However, this time I asked for ea
graph to be gestured three times, with the third time silent. (In the ﬁrst two
gestures, participants were asked to verbalize using metaphors or vocal
sounds if they wished, but not to use tenical descriptions of the graph’s
mathematical function, whi I had observed tended to inhibit any kind of
gesturing.)
In the Year Two pilot project, I visited the sools twice. In the ﬁrst visit,

I videotaped students and teaers gesturing the graphs; during the second,
a week later, I interviewed participants about their own sense of their
gestures while playing ba ea participant’s video from the previous
session. I was interested in knowing whether participants would be aware
of the qualities of their own gestures before and while viewing them, and
whether their own introspections would help clarify why people gestured
the graphs differently from one another.
The research questions for Year Two included the following:
1) Where do people place the x-axis against their body when gesturing the
shape of a Cartesian graph? Are people consciously aware of their
placement of the x-axis as they remember their gestures? How do
participants account for this placement upon introspection?
2) Is there anything telling about the qualities of people’s elicited gestures
of these graphs (for example, symmetrical or not, one-ﬁngered or two-
handed, fast or slow, large or small, accompanied by vocalization or not,
etc.)? Are there co-occurring qualities in these gestures, and if so, how
could these be accounted for?
3)  Do novice learners, experienced learners, and teaers gesture the
graphs in distinctive ways? Is there mimiing or transfer between the
ways learners and their teachers gesture graphs?
Results from the Year Two pilot project deepened insights that were
intuited in the Year One informal pilot study, contributing to the “care and
feeding of hunes” by articulating, formalizing, developing, and theorizing
early hunes in ways that permied them to be presented, tested, and
scrutinized critically within solarly communities in mathematics
education and gesture theory.
Observations of students and teaers showed a similar bifurcation to
that observed in Year One between those who placed the x-axis high and

low, and similar co-occurring qualities of the gestures associated with ea
of these extremes of placement of the axis.
Teaers, as might be expected, were more consciously aware of many
of the qualities of their gestures, whi they deployed thoughtfully as part
of their repertoire of presentation skills. In contrast, none of the students
was able to recollect where they had placed the x-axis against their body
until they viewed their gestures on videotape in the second session, and
many of them were surprised to notice that they had placed the axis high or
low.
Interestingly, though, once they had noticed where they had place the x-
axis, student participants could readily explain why they had placed the axis
at that particular spot. ose who placed the axis high, at nose or throat
level, said they wanted to be able to see the graph; those who placed it
lower, at heart, waist or hip level, said they wanted to be able to rea it.
ose who placed the x-axis lower also talked about “riding on the graph,”
as if the graph were a wave on the ocean, a ski hill or a roller coaster.
When asked where the origin was placed against their body, and why,
several students answered very quily and with assurance, “at’s the
center of me!” is occurred for an origin placed near the heart, the navel,
or the throat. It was interesting to me that the mathematical origin was
oen identiﬁed with the origin or center of the person, and that there was
frequently an identiﬁcation with this potently named point on the Cartesian
coordinates and a sense of oneself and one’s center.
Later video analysis, following a suggestion by Ferdinando Arzarello,
revealed that those who placed the axis high also eye-traed their own
gestures and tended to gesture with one ﬁnger (as if it were a pencil), using
smaller, very controlled, even gestures at arm’s length. ose who placed
the axis low did not eye-tra their own movements. ey tended to
gesture with mu larger movements, oen using both hands together.
Following a suggestion by Kathryn Ries, I noticed that these

participants engaged their spine and the core of their body, and moved oﬀ
their center of balance, moving both vertically, from low to high, and
horizontally, from le to right. e students who placed the x-axis high, in
contrast, did not engage the spine or core of the body in their gestures, but
held quite still, moving mostly one hand and arm and their eyes.
ese observations were integrated into the following phrases that
capture the bifurcation of gesture and movement types connected with high
and low placement of the x-axis against the body:
having the graph “within sight” vs. “within reach,”
“seeing the graph” vs. “being the graph.”
One of the four teaers involved in the Year Two pilot project asked me
aer the ﬁrst day with the students whether I could identify whi of her
students were her “top” math learners, both precise and creative, fully
grasping the new math concepts introduced; whi were her “average”
math students, who worked hard but relied too mu on rote memorization
rather than a deeper understanding; and whi were her students at risk of
failing mathematics altogether, and who did not understand nor like math.
Aer having spent only ﬁve minutes with ea student videotaping them
gesturing ﬁve graphs, I was able to correctly identify all of her students in
these terms. As an exercise, I endeavored to do the same with the other
three teaers’ students, and there was only one case where my assessment
diﬀered from the teaer’s (a case where a student consistently gestured
only half of every graph that had bilateral symmetry).
My assessments were based on the following observations, only partially
articulated at the time: ose students who were “being the graph” were
engaging with the shape of the graph more fully and viscerally, while those
who “held the graph at arm’s length” and gestured only with a carefully
controlled ﬁngertip were holding mathematics itself at arm’s length, as far

away from themselves as possible, and engaging with it in as minimal a
way as possible. In terms of developing mathematical understanding, there
is a distinction in terms of mathematical noticing that emerged in the Year
Two pilot project and in later resear on the project. Brieﬂy stated, those
who engaged with the graph in a visceral way that involved their spine and
the core of their body could not help but notice important features of the
graph (extrema, slope, discontinuities, etc.) ose who engaged minimally
with the graph had a less intense, more minimal experience of noticing such
features, and could in fact miss noticing them. Since this kind of
mathematical noticing is a basis for an awareness of paerns and
relationships, any engagement that enhances “noticing” may also enhance
an awareness of mathematical relationships (and may thus have further
implications for pedagogical practices).
e students who were “being the graph” were also those who readily
produced the most varied verbal metaphors and vocalizations to describe
the shape of the graphs. ese students seemed to be engaging in ri
metaphorical and imaginative analogies to begin to make sense of the
graphs. In contrast, the students who talked about “seeing the graph”
mostly verbalized the numerical coordinates of points on the graphs—and
they seemed to be seeking solely tenical descriptions, without a great
deal of imaginative or analogical engagement. Based on these observations,
I correctly guessed that the students who were “being the graph” were the
top mathematics learners, while those who were “seeing the graph” were
the average learners who had more diﬃculty grasping mathematical
meanings, relationships, and concepts.
ere were a few students who were very hesitant to gesture the shapes
of the graphs at all, and who kept returning to scan the printed cards with
the graph shapes, starting and restarting their gestures many times without
completing them. ese students seemed unsure of what to focus on, even
at a visual level, and did not seem to know what might be mathematically

salient in the graphs. ese students typically looked for a singular familiar
analogy to the shape of the graph to hang onto as they made their gestures.
Unlike the students who were “being the graph,” these learners did not
generate a profusion of possible metaphors, but clung to a single, inaccurate
metaphor as the basis for their description of the graph. For example, when
faced with the asymmetrical, rounded graph of a quartic function, one
student hesitated for a long time, then could be heard whispering “a W,”
and then quily gestured the shape of a symmetrical, sharply angular W
three times in succession. ese students, who did not discern what was
mathematically salient in the graphs, I correctly guessed to be the students
at risk of failing their mathematics courses.
Decisions About Research Directions for Year Three
At this stage in the Graphs & Gestures Project, I found myself needing to
make a decision about whether to explore and formally test the emergent
hypothesis, “Learners whose gestures show them being the graph are
‘beer’ mathematics students in some way than those whose gestures show
them only seeing the graph.” Su a study may well be worthwhile as a
way of applying a rigorous methodology to following up on an
opportunistic, informal observation, and I may engage in this work in
upcoming years of the project. ere are clear beneﬁts possible to this line
of resear, including the establishment of an evidential base for new forms
of pedagogy, and ways of understanding student engagement and
approaches to mathematical topics like graphing.
Along with potential new knowledge, su a study has many potential
pitfalls inherent in its design as well. For example, are students consistent in
their ways of gesturing a graph—do they always gesture in the same way?
What is meant by “beer” mathematics students? If the hypothesis were
conﬁrmed, would it be applied (inappropriately) to standardized testing of

students? (I have already had several private sool teaers approa me
with the idea of creating a mathematics entrance examination based on
assessing applicants’ gestured graphs…!)
Rather than taking up this topic immediately, I opted for a diﬀerent
(though related) resear decision: to work with whole mathematics classes
at the senior elementary and secondary levels, using pedagogical design
experiments to learn which elements of pedagogy might help all learners to
engage in more fully embodied ways with graphs as they learned about
aspects of mathematical functions. e decision to focus on pedagogic
experimentation at this stage of the resear was based on my own
commitment to developing more accessible and inclusive approaes to the
teaing and learning of mathematics. My own earlier work as a secondary
sool and adult education teaer has aﬀected my resear agenda: I take
very seriously the responsibility of oﬀering thoughtful, well-designed
pedagogical alternatives to mathematics teaers who are working with
groups of students in sool and community seings. Pedagogical design
experiments give the opportunity to design and test pedagogic innovations
based in theoretical and experimental principles, and this is the course the
project has taken in Years 3 to 8.
Design Experiments in Schools, Years Three to Eight
In this stage of the project, I began to work with an academic colleague,
Kathryn Ries, who is both a literacy educator and an acclaimed modern
dancer and oreographer. e collaboration brought together my
baground in mathematics education and Kathryn’s knowledge and
experience of pedagogy in body and movement work. We also brought
several graduate students from mathematics education and interactive arts
and technology onto the research team.
Our hypothesis in this work was based on Gaegno’s maxim, “only

awareness is educable” (Gaegno, 1987, p. 158). We hypothesized that,
through greater aention to mathematical properties of graphs via
embodied, visceral gesture, movement, and voice, as well as through vivid
imagery, narrative, and metaphor, all students could improve their
awareness and understanding of the graphs of mathematical functions.
Rather than focusing on diﬀerentiating between learners who had already
acquired this kind of awareness and those who had not, we aimed to raise
the awareness of whole groups of students to the level of those “best”
mathematics students, and to see whether this would help everyone learn
mathematics in a deeper way.
In ea year, we worked with diﬀerent groups of students in both public
and private sools in greater Vancouver, Canada and Torino, Italy, and
focused on several mathematical topics related to the graphs of functions:
Year ree, Sool H (Vancouver public secondary sool): Grade 8 math class composed of 2/3
designated “gied” students and 1/3 “regular” students. Topic: Polynomial functions, their
roots, and extrema.
Year Four, Sool H (Vancouver public secondary sool): Grade 9 math class of students
designated “reluctant math learners”, many of whom were dealing with addictions and family
dysfunctions, and many of whom missed sool frequently. Topic: Polynomial functions, their
roots, and extrema.
Year Five, Sool G (Vancouver private elementary sool): Grades 6, 7, and 8 classes in a
school for students designated “dyslexic.” Topic: The absolute value of functions.
Years Six & Seven, Sool K (Vancouver public secondary sool): Two students (Grades 10/11
and 11/12) and one vision teaer who were all blind from birth, along with sighted vision
teachers and Braille translator. Topic: Transformations of functions.
Year Eight, Sool L (Torino public secondary sool of commerce): Grade 12 mathematics
day class and Grade 12 mathematics adult education evening class at a high sool of
commerce. Ea of the classes included one blind student whose had gradually lost his or her
vision. Topic: Maximum regions in quadratic functions.
In all cases, we worked ﬁrst to create a comfortable context for students
and teaers to work with large physical movements, gestures, and voice,
something rather rare in mathematics classes. Creating this comfortable
context included using spaces where walls and furniture would not get in

the way of movement (for example, sool drama rooms, the sool gym,
hallways, outdoor spaces in the soolyard, or even the regular
mathematics classroom with furniture moved to the edges of the room).
We ose props and materials that were appealing in their visual, auditory,
and tactile qualities: rolls of colorful sewing elastic, heavy brass plumb bobs,
oversized “wiki stis” (wax-saturated string), and buons, ping pong balls,
slides of colorful geometric paintings, and films of roller coasters.
More particularly, we worked initially to acclimatize students to
movement and voice through collaboratively designed warm-ups that
brought together aspects of movement (core engagement, working with
balance, spiraling, crossing the center line of the body, increasing heart rate
and breathing), voice (pit, volume, rhythm, vocal timbre) and aspects of
the mathematics we would be addressing (slope, intersections of lines,
reﬂections, translations, maximum/minimum points, asymptotes). Warm-
ups used familiar movement metaphors from sports (“throwing a ball”) and
everyday life (a qui spiral turn with the words “who’s there?”; a
horizontal “smoothing the tablecloth” gesture with the word “safe”).
rough these non-threatening, familiar gestures, whole classes of students
gained ease and ﬂuency with movements that engaged spine, core, and
viscera, moved them slightly oﬀ balance, got them vocalizing, and
established correspondences between particular gestural movements, vocal
sounds, and mathematical elements. In the context of our guest
teaing/resear classes (typically, ﬁve or six one-hour classes with groups
averaging 25 students over the course of ﬁve months in ea of eight
years), only a handful of students expressed any discomfort or asked to be
excused from using movement and voice in mathematics class.
Aer the warm-up, we engaged in design experiments aimed at raising
learners’ awareness of particular mathematically salient features of graphs
related to the mathematical topic at hand. Activities involved the use of
multisensory materials (visual, tactile, and auditory), metaphors, images,

and narratives, along with engagement in various kinds of movement,
gesture, and vocalizations, individually and in groups. e activities and
materials were carefully osen to draw students’ aention to particular
features of the graphs.
For example, in Sool H, working on polynomial functions, students
took turns placing bright orange dots on the roots of functions on projected
slides of graphs. en, using a streted length of fusia elastic to
represent the x-axis, the whole group gestured the shape of the graph in
unison, with the whole group using student-osen vocal sounds to
represent the slope and roots of the function. e orange dots and the
special sound for the roots (“pah”), along with tangible contact with the
elastic x-axis and a slight pause in movement at the roots served to
highlight the signiﬁcance of these points on the curve of the polynomial
graphs. e activity of placing the orange dots in consultation with the
whole group, and of gesturing and vocalizing the shapes of the graphs
together, helped students sort out the diﬀerence between the salience of the
roots (x-intercepts) for the work we were currently doing, and the
nonsalience of the y-intercepts for this work.
In another exercise with the Sool H classes in Years ree and Four,
we worked on having all students engaging with the graphs as if they were
landscapes they could “be” in or travel across (an approa I had noticed in
the metaphors of the students who were “being the graph” in the Year Two
pilot project). In this activity, we projected images of landscape paintings
that used shapes very similar to those of polynomial and other
mathematical functions. Students started by thinking and then writing
about an imagined experience of entering into the landscape of the
painting, and picturing what it would feel like, smell like, sound like, and
how it would feel to move over that terrain. en the slide of the painting
was replaced by a slide of the graph of the similarly shaped function, whi
was introduced as a kind of map of the terrain in the previous painting.

Once again, students were asked to imagine and write about how it would
be to walk or ride over that terrain. Were there sudden drops and
precipitous canyons, or was the landscape gently rolling, or a steep climb?
Their responses were similar in quality to the metaphorical descriptions that
I recorded university calculus lecturers using when they described the
graphs of functions in their lectures (Gerofsky, 1996). e secondary sool
students’ vivid descriptions of the graphs as landscape served to highlight
mathematically salient features of our discussion (slope, extrema,
continuity/discontinuity) through 
metaphorical 
and 
imaginative
engagement “as if” the graphs were maps of an appealing or mysterious
place.
Work with identiﬁed dyslexic, reluctant, and blind or low-vision students
developed as we became interested in the potential for movement-
enhanced mathematics learning to oﬀer rier, more multisensory contact
with mathematical concepts than is typically on oﬀer in sool mathematics
classes. Key ﬁndings included the observation that many identiﬁed
educational problems and disabilities (dyslexia, hyperactivity, reluctance to
learn) seem to disappear once students are released from the conﬁnes of
rows of desks and the requirement to sit still and quiet for hours. rough
multiple potential bodily engagements with mathematical topics through
whole-body movement, voice, and metaphor/narrative, most students were
willing to try out mathematical experimentation and inquiry. Using
posesting of mathematical topics, we found that even as mu as a year
later, students were able to reconstruct their learning with a high degree of
accuracy, employing gestures, sounds, and metaphors introduced in our
design experiment sessions as cognitive resources to remember and make
sense of the mathematics.
We ose to work with blind and low-vision learners in researing
multimodality and multisensorality in the pedagogy of graphing. Since
these students were not able to access the visual representations that are so

typically part of mathematics instruction, our resear team needed to
work with the other senses—sound and tou, including proprioception,
movement, balance, and haptics (Paterson, 2007)—in our experimental
pedagogy. By learning about the (sometimes scanty and inadequate)
existing resources for visually impaired mathematics learners, and
developing new resources and approaes based on our earlier work, we
were able to start a process of creating beer mathematics pedagogies for
blind learners. Beyond this laudable but limited result, we were also able to
work with the visually impaired students’ sighted classmates and teaers
in nonvisual, multimodal, and multisensory ways that have the potential of
enriing cognitive resources for understanding graphing, not only for blind
students, but for most or all students.
Future Directions for the Graphs & Gestures Project
In Years 3 to 8 of this resear project in embodied mathematics learning
theory and practice, certain lines of inquiry were followed more intensively,
while others were set aside. e lines of inquiry that were followed, and
which might be further advanced, include:
developing and testing new, more fully embodied and multisensory
pedagogies of graphing;
through 
these 
pedagogies, 
increasing 
democratic 
access 
to
mathematics through embodied ways of knowing for learners who do
not learn well in “typical” visually biased, sedentary, less participatory
mathematics instruction. ese learners might include students
identified as dyslexic, hyperactive, attention-deficit, reluctant, and low-
vision learners among others, and experimentation could be extended
to include other groups oen excluded in some way from access to
mathematics.

Some lines of inquiry that were introduced in the pilot projects of Years
One and Two but not yet followed up on include:
consideration of the potential importance of other movement aspects
of gestured graphs—for example, symmetrical movement, movement
that crosses the center line of the body, movement from high-to-low
or low-to-high;
consideration of the potential importance of students producing a
variety of diﬀerent metaphors or narratives for a graph, rather than a
singular one;
more rigorous testing of the informally tested hypothesis that gestural
movements for graphs that engage the spine, body core, and viscera,
that cross the center line of the body and that put the body oﬀ balance
draw aention more powerfully to salient mathematical features than
do arms’-length gestures limited to fingers and hands.
Other possible directions include the following:
Up till now, a number of topics related to graphs of mathematical functions have been the focus
of the resear team’s experimentation. Other mathematical topics, from elementary, secondary
and/or post-secondary levels, could also be taken on as part of a more complete resear program
in developing a pedagogy for embodied mathematics.
Our team has experimented with developing computer-assisted tenologies using haptic
interfaces and movement-sensor gaming tenologies (the Kinect) and the programming of
exercise bicycles’ onboard computers as ways of bringing together embodied mathematics and
computer interfaces (Gerofsky, Savage, & Maclean 2009). Further work could be carried out in
this area.
I have worked on developing theoretical approaes that integrate the
insights of the Graphs & Gestures Project with broader topics in
mathematics, culture, the arts, and education (for example, Gerofsky, 2009,
2011c, 2013; Nicol & Gerofsky, 2009). ere is certainly more work needed
in this area, and the development of theory may open up new approaes

to the practice of mathematics teaching and learning.
Conclusion
is apter has outlined a number of philosophical issues underlying
questions of embodiment/disembodiment in mathematics and mathematics
education. I have speculated on the reasons for the spectacular rise in
academic and societal interest in issues of embodiment at this particular
time in history, based largely on my extension of McLuhan’s theories of
culture and technology.
e intellectual “landscape” of recent work in embodied mathematics
education, from theoretical bases in a number of diﬀerent disciplines, has
contributed to a rather wild proliferation of disparate works in this area,
and these differing approaches have been outlined and exemplified.
Finally, I have given the example of my own multiyear Graphs &
Gestures Project as a particular exempliﬁcation of the trajectory one might
take as a researer interested in developing a resear program in
democratic access to mathematics learning through embodied ways of
knowing.
I hope that this account will help new researers in this area make sense
of the burgeoning resear in embodied mathematics learning, and give
courage to those who are interested in further pursuing this line of inquiry.

References
Abelson, H. & diSessa, A. (1986). Turtle Geometry: e computer as a medium for exploring
mathematics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Abrahamson, D. (2004). Embodied spatial articulation: A gesture perspective on student negotiation
between kinesthetic semas and epistemic forms in learning mathematics. In Proceedings of the
Twenty Sixth Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for
the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 791–797). Windsor, Ontario: Preney.
Abrahamson, D. (2007, June). From gesture to design: Building cognitively ergonomic learning tools.
In Proceedings of the annual meeting of the International Society for Gesture Studies (pp. 18–21).
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University.
Abrahamson, D. (2009). Embodied design: Constructing means for constructing meaning.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(1), 27–47.
Abrahamson, D. (2010). A tempest in a teapot is but a drop in the ocean: Action-objects in analogical
mathematical reasoning. In K. Gomez, L. Lyons, & J. Radinsky (Eds.), Learning in the disciplines:
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference of the Learning Sciences (Vol. 1, pp. 492–499).
Chicago: University of Illinois, ISLS.
Alibali, M. W., & Nathan, M. J. (2012). Embodiment in mathematics teaching and learning: Evidence
from learners’ and teachers’ gestures. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(2), 247–286.
Alibali, M. W., Nathan, M. J., Wolfgram, M. S., Chur, R. B., Jacobs, S. A., Johnson Martinez, C., &
Knuth, E. J. (2014). How teaers link ideas in mathematics instruction using spee and gesture:
A corpus analysis. Cognition and Instruction, 32(1), 65–100.
Alibali, M. W., Young, A. G., Crooks, N. M., Yeo, A., Wolfgram, M. S., Ledesma, I. M., Nathan, M. J.,
Chur, R. B. & Knuth, E. J. (2013). Students learn more when their teaer has learned to
gesture effectively. Gesture, 13(2), 210–233.
Antle, A. N., & Wang, S. (2013, February). Comparing motor-cognitive strategies for spatial problem
solving with tangible and multi-tou interfaces. In Proceedings of Tangible, Embodied and
Embedded Interaction (pp. 65–72), Barcelona, Spain: ACM Press.
Appelbaum, P. (2010). Sense and representation in elementary mathematics. Supporting Independent
Thinking Through Mathematical Education, (pp. 10–17).

Arzarello, F., & Edwards, L. (2005). Gesture and the construction of mathematical meaning. In H. L.
Chi & J. L. Vincent (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th Conference of the International Group for
the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 123–154). Melbourne: PME.
Arzarello, F., Paola, D., Robui, O., & Sabena, C. (2009). Gestures as semiotic resources in the
mathematics classroom. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 97–109.
Arzarello, F., Robui, O., & Bazzini, L. (2005). Acting is learning: focus on the construction of
mathematical concepts. Cambridge Journal of Education, 35(1), 55–67.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how maer comes to
matter. Signs, 28(3), 801–831.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Barsalou, L. W. (2009). Simulation, situated conceptualization, and prediction. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364(1521), 1281–1289.
Baudrillard, J. (1994). Simulacra and simulation. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Bavelas, J. B. (1987). Permiing creativity in science. In D. N. Jason & J. P. Rushton (Eds.),
Scientific excellence: Origins and assessment (pp. 307–327). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
belcastro, s.-m. & Yael, C. (Eds.) (2008). Making mathematics with needlework. Wellesley, MA: A.
K. Peters.
belcastro, s.-m. & Yackel, C. (Eds.) (2011). Crafting by concepts. Wellesley, MA: A. K. Peters.
Bergson, H. (2004). Matter and memory. Mineola, NY: Courier Dover Publications.
Boorstin, J. (1990). The Hollywood eye: What makes movies work. New York: Harper Collins.
Borba, M., & Villarreal, M. E. (2005). Humans-with-media and the reorganization of mathematical
thinking. New York: Springer.
Bordo, S. (2003). Unbearable weight: Feminism, Western culture, and the body . Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter: On the discursive limits of “sex.” New York: Routledge.
Butler, J. (2010). Performative agency. Journal of Cultural Economy, 3(2), 147–161.
Castelnuovo, E., & Gori-Giorgio, C. (1976). La géometrie projective à l’école. Educational Studies in
Mathematics 7, 443–463.
Chomsky, N. (1993). A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In K. L. Hale & S. J. Keyser, (Eds.)
e view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger (pp. 1–52).

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cienki, A. & Müller, C. (Eds.). (2008). Metaphor and gesture. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Conquergood, D. (2002). Performance studies: Interventions and radical resear. TDR/e Drama
Review, 46(2), 145–146.
Csordas, T. J. (Ed.). (1994). Embodiment and experience: e existential ground of culture and self .
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Decety, J., & Grèzes, J. (2006). e power of simulation: Imagining one’s own and other’s behavior.
Brain Research, 1079, 4–14.
De Freitas, E. (2008). Mathematics and its other: (Dis)locating the feminine. Gender and Education
20(3), 281–290.
De Freitas, E. (2010). Making mathematics public: Aesthetics as the distribution of the sensible.
Educational Insights, 13(1).
De Freitas, E., & Sinclair, N. (2012). Diagram, gesture, agency: eorizing embodiment in the
mathematics classroom. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(1–2), 133–152.
De Freitas, E., & Sinclair, N. (2013). New materialist ontologies in mathematics education: e body
in/of mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 83(3), 453–470.
De Freitas, E. & Sinclair, N. (2014). Mathematics and the body: Material entanglements in the
classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dehaene, S. (1999). e number sense: How the mind creates mathematics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Deleuze, G. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and sizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Denzin, N. K. (2003). Performance ethnography: Critical pedagogy and the politics of culture.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Denzin, N. K. (2006a). e politics and ethics of performance pedagogy: Toward a pedagogy of hope.
In D. S. Madison & J. Hamera, (Eds.) e Sage Handbook of Performance Studies (pp. 325–338).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Denzin, N. K. (2006b). Pedagogy, performance, and autoethnography. Text and Performance
Quarterly, 26(4), 333–338.
Descartes, R. (1641). Meditations on ﬁrst philosophy. (J. Coingham, Trans./Ed.) Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Devlin, K. (2006). The math instinct. New York: Basic Books.
Dienes, Z. P. (1963). On the learning of mathematics. The Arithmetic Teacher 10(3), 115–126.
Dissanayake, E. (1995). Homo aestheticus: Where art comes from and why. Seale: University of
Washington Press.
Edwards, L. D. (2003, April). A natural history of mathematical gesture. In Proceedings of the
American Educational Research Association Annual Conference, Chicago.
Edwards, L. D. (2009). Gestures and conceptual integration in mathematical talk. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 127–141.
Edwards, L., & Moore-Russo, D. (2012, July). Embodiment, gesture and multimodality in
mathematics. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education (p. 161).
Euclid. (1956). The thirteen books of the Elements (Vol. 1, T. L. Heath, Trans.). Mineola, NY: Dover.
Fernandes, S.H.A.A, & Healy, L. (2010). Embodied mathematics: Relationships between doing and
imagining in the activities of a blind learner. In M.M.F Pinto & T. F. Kawasaki (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 345–352). Belo Horizonte, Brazil: PME.
Ferrara, F. (2006, July). Remembering and imagining: Moving back and forth between motion and its
representation. In Proceedings of the 30th Conference of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 3, pp. 65–72).
Ferrara, F. (2013). How multimodality works in mathematical activity: Young ildren graphing
motion. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 12, 917–939.
Ferrara, F., & Nemirovsky, R.(2005). Connecting talk, gesture, and eye motion for the microanalysis
of mathematics learning. 29th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 137–142). Melbourne, Australia.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish. Toronto: Random House.
Francaviglia, M., & Servidio, R. (2011). Gesture as a cognitive support to solve mathematical
problems. Psychology, 2, 91.
Frant, J. B., Acevedo, J. I., & Font, V. (2005). Metaphors in mathematics classrooms: Analysing the
dynamic process of teaching and learning graph functions. In Proceedings of the Fourth Congress

of the European Society for Research in Mathematics Education (pp. 82–91).
Frege, G. (1980). e foundations of arithmetic. (J. L. Austin, Trans.). Chicago: Northwestern
University Press.
Frye, N. (1980). Creation and recreation. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Gadanidis, G., & Borba, M. (2008). Our lives as performance mathematicians. For the Learning of
Mathematics 28(1), 44–51.
Gadanidis, G., Hughes, J., & Borba, M. C. (2008). Students as performance mathematicians.
Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, 14(3), 168–175.
Gallese, V., & Lakoﬀ, G. (2005). e brain’s concepts: e role of the sensory-motor system in
conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22, 455–479.
Gattegno, C. (1987). The science of education. New York: Educational Solutions.
Gerofsky, S. (1996). Selling mathematics: e language of persuasion in an introductory calculus
course. In Proceedings of the 1996 Meeting: Psyology of Mathematics Education (pp. 409–417).
Valencia, Spain.
Gerofsky, S. (2007). Performance space & time. In Gadanidis, G. & Hoogland, C. (Eds.), Digital
Mathematical Performance. Proceedings of a Fields Institute Symposium, Faculty of Education,
University of Western Ontario.
Gerofsky, S. (2008). Gesture as diagnosis & intervention in the pedagogy of graphing: Pilot studies &
next steps. In International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education: Proceedings of
the Joint Meeting of PME 32 and PME-NA XXX (pp. 17–21).
Gerofsky, S. (2009). Performance mathematics and democracy. Educational Insights, 13(1). Special
issue, 
“Performing 
the 
Sign.” 
Retrieved 
from
www.ccfi.educ.ubc.ca/publication/insights/v13n01/toc.html (January 2015).
Gerofsky, S. (2010). Mathematical learning and gesture: Character viewpoint and observer viewpoint
in students’ gestured graphs of functions. Gesture, 10 (2–3), 322–344.
Gerofsky, S. (2011a). Seeing the graph vs. being the graph. Integrating Gestures: e Interdisciplinary
Nature of Gesture, 4, 245–256.
Gerofsky, S. (2011b). “Without emotion, there is nothing le but burden”: Teaing mathematics
through Heathcote’s improvisational drama. In R. Sarhangi & C. Sequin (Eds.), Proceedings of
Bridges 2011 Coimbra: Mathematics, Music, Art, Aritecture, Culture (pp. 329–337). University

of Coimbra, Portugal.
Gerofsky, S. (2011c). Ancestral genres of mathematical graphs. For the Learning of Mathematics,
31(1), 14–19.
Gerofsky, S. (2013). Learning mathematics through dance. In G.W. Hart & R. Sarhangi (Eds.),
Proceedings of Bridges 2013 Esede, NL: Mathematics, Music, Art, Aritecture, Culture (pp.
337–344). Enschede, NL: Saxon University.
Gerofsky, S., Savage, M. & Maclean, K. (2009). ‘Being the graph’: Using haptic and kinesthetic
interfaces to engage students learning about functions. In Bardini, C. & Fortin, P. (Eds.)
Proceedings of ICTMT 9: e Ninth International Conference on Tenology in Mathematics
Teaching, Université de Metz, Metz, France.
Gerofsky, S., Sinclair, N. & Davis, B. (2003). Mathematics and the arts. In B. Davis and E. Simmt
(Eds.) Proceedings of the 2002 Meeting of the Canadian Mathematics Education Study Group.
Givry, D., & Roth, W. M. (2006). Toward a new conception of conceptions: Interplay of talk, gestures,
and structures in the setting. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 43(10), 1086–1109.
Gödel, K. (1992). On formally undecidable propositions of Principia Mathematica and related
systems. Mineola, NY: Dover.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Resilience of language: How gesture creation in deaf students can tell us
how all children learn language. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Hearing gesture: How our hands help us think. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2014). How gesture works to ange our minds. Trends in Neuroscience and
Education, 3(1), 4–6.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S. D., & Wagner, S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing
lightens the load. Psychological Science, 12(6), 516–522.
Grossberg, L., Nelson, C. & Treichler, P.A. (Eds.) (1992). Cultural studies. New York: Routledge.
Grosz, E. (1994). Volatile bodies: Toward a corporeal feminism. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Hall, S. (1993). What is this “black” in black popular culture? Social Justice, 20(1–2), 104–114.
Haraway, D. (1987). A manifesto for cyborgs: Science, tenology, and socialist feminism in the
1980s. Australian Feminist Studies, 2(4), 1–42.
Haraway, D. (1999). e biopolitics of postmodern bodies: Determinations of self in immune system

discourse. Feminist theory and the body: A reader, 1(1), 203.
Havelock, E. (1982). Preface to Plato. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Healy, L. & Fernandes, S. H. A. A. (2011). e role of gestures in the mathematical practices of those
who do not see with their eyes. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 77, 157–174.
Healy, L., Fernandes, S. H. A. A., & do Rosário, C.N.S. (2008). e role of gestures in the
mathematical practices of blind learners. In Proceedings of the 32nd conference of the
international group for the psyology of mathematics education (Vol. 3, pp. 137–144). Morelia,
Mexico.
Healy, L. & Kynigos, C. (2010). Charting the microworld territory over time: Design and
construction in mathematics education. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics
Education, 42, 63–76.
Hegedus, S. J. & Moreno-Armella, L. (2011). e emergence of mathematical structures. Educational
Studies in Mathematics 77(2–3), 369–388.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. (J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, Trans.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Holbert, N. R., & Wilensky, U. (2012). Designing video games that encourage players to integrate
formal representations with informal play. In Proceedings of the10th International Conference of
the Learning Sciences: The Future of Learning, ICLS 2012. Vol. 1, pp. 119–126. Sydney, Australia.
Hoyles, C., & Noss, R. (2009.) e tenological mediation of mathematics and its learning. Human
Development, 52(2), 129–147.
Innis, H. A. (2008). The bias of communication. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Jackiw, N., & Sinclair, N. (2009). Sounds and pictures: Dynamism and dualism in dynamic geometry.
ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 41, 413–426.
Johnson, M. (1990). The body in the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, M. (2008). e meaning of the body: Aesthetics of human understanding. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kaput, J. J. (1994). e representational roles of tenology in connecting mathematics with
authentic experience. In R. Biehler (Ed.), Didactics of mathematics as a scientiﬁc discipline (pp.
379–397). Berlin: Springer.
Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism. New York: W. H. Freeman & Company.
Kendon, A. (2004). Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kita, S. (2000). How representational gestures help speaking. In D. McNeill (Ed.), Language and
gesture (pp. 162–185). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kristeva, J. (2002). The portable Kristeva. New York: Columbia University Press.
Kroker, A., & Kroker, M. L. (1987). Body invaders. Victoria, BC: New World Perspectives.
Lacan, J. (1966). Écrits. Paris: Le Seuil.
Lakoff, G. (1990). Women, fire and dangerous things. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoﬀ, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the ﬂesh: e embodied mind and its allenge to
Western thought. New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (2003). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes from. New York: Basic Books.
Latour, B. (2007). Can we get our materialism back, please? Isis, 98(1), 138–142.
Latour, B. (2009). A collective of humans and non-humans following Daedalus’s labyrinth. In
Pandora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies (pp. 174–215). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.Levi-Strauss, C. (1969). e raw and the cooked . (J. Weightman & D.
Weightman, Trans.) London: Jonathan Cape.
Lewis, T. E., & Kahn, R. (2010). Education out of bounds: Reimagining cultural studies for a
posthuman age. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lindgren, R., & Johnson-Glenberg, M. (2013). Emboldened by embodiment: Six precepts for resear
on embodied learning and mixed reality. Educational Researcher 42(8), 445–452.
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). e postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. (G. Bennington & B.
Massumi, Trans.) Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
MacLure, M. (2013). Researing without representation? Language and materiality in post-
qualitative methodology. International Journal of alitative Studies in Education, 26(6), 658–
667.
Massumi, B. (2002). Parables for the virtual: Movement, aﬀect, sensation. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Mauss, M. (1954). The gift. (I. G. Cunnison, Trans.). London: Cohen & West.
McCaﬀerty, S. G., & Stam, G. A. (Eds.). (2008). Gesture: Second language acquisition and classroom
research. Abingdon, UK: Taylor & Francis.
McLuhan, E., & Zingrone, F. (Eds.). (1995). Essential McLuhan. Toronto: House of Anansi.

McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: The making of typographic man. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: e extensions of man. Cambridge MA: MIT Press,
1994.
McLuhan, M. (1967). 1967 McLuhan television interview. Retrieved from www.youtube.com/watch?
v=OMEC_HqWlBY (December 2013).
McLuhan, M. (1974). At the moment of Sputnik the planet became a global theater in whi there
are no spectators but only actors. Journal of Communication, 24(1), 48–58.
McLuhan, M. (2010). Understanding me: Lectures and interviews. (S. McLuhan & D. Staines, Eds.)
New York: Random House.
McLuhan, M., & McLuhan, E. (1988). Laws of media: e new science. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
McNeill, D. (1992). Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
McNeill, D. (Ed.) (2000). Language and gesture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNeill, D. (2008). Gesture and thought. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mendi, H. (2004). A mathematician goes to the movies. Resear Into Learning Mathematics, pp.
43–48.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945). Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962.
Morgan, C., & Alshwaikh, J. (2008). Imag(in)ing three-dimensional movement with gesture: ‘Playing
turtle’ or pointing? In Proceedings of the British Society for Research into Learning Mathematics,
28(3), 136–141.
Müller, 
C. 
(2002). A 
brief 
history 
of 
the 
origins 
of 
the 
ISGS. 
Retrieved 
from
www.gesturestudies.com/history.php (December 2013).
Nemirovsky, R. & Borba, M. (2003) Perceptual-motor activity and imagination in mathematics
learning. In Pateman, N., Dougherty, B., & Zilliox, J. (Eds.). Proceedings of the 27th Conference
of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education held jointly with the
25th Conference of PME-NA. Honolulu: University of Hawaii.
Nemirovsky, R., & Ferrara, F. (2009). Mathematical imagination and embodied cognition.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 159–174.

Nemirovsky, R., Kelton, M. L., & Rhodehamel, B. (2012). Gesture and imagination: On the
constitution and uses of phantasms. Gesture, 12(2), 130–165.
Nicol, C. & Gerofsky, S. (2009). Mapping multiple worlds: Imagining sool mathematics beyond the
grid. In Liljedahl, P., Oesterle, S. & Abu-Bakare, V. (Eds.), Proceedings of CMESG 2009: Canadian
Mathematics Education Study Group annual meeting (pp. 111–116). Toronto: York University.
Noble, T., Nemirovsky, R., Wright, T., & Tierney, C. (2001). Experiencing ange: e mathematics
of change in multiple environments. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 85–108.
Núñez, R. (2004a). Do real numbers really move? Language, thought, and gesture: e embodied
cognitive foundations of mathematics. Embodied artiﬁcial intelligence (pp. 54–73). Berlin &
Heidelberg: Springer.
Núñez, R. (2004b). Embodied cognition and the nature of mathematics: Language, gesture, and
abstraction. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 36–37). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Núñez, R. E. (2008). A fresh look at the foundations of mathematics: Gesture and the psyological
reality of conceptual metaphor. In A. Cienki & C. Müller (Eds.), Metaphor and gesture (pp. 93–
114). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L. D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition as grounding for situatedness
and context in mathematics education. Educational Studies in Mathematics 39, 45–65.
Papert, S. (1993). Mindstorms. New York: Basic Books.
Paterson, M. (2007). The senses of touch: Haptics, affects and technologies. New York: Berg.
Plato. (1976). The meno. (G.M.A. Grube, Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
Plato. (2004). The republic. (C.D.C. Reeve, Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
Presmeg, N. C. (1997). A semiotic framework for linking cultural practice and classroom
mathematics. In J. A. Dossey, J. O. Swaﬀord, M. Parmantie, & A. E. Dossey (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 19th Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the
Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 151–156).Presmeg, N. (2003). Beliefs about the
nature of mathematics in the bridging of everyday and sool mathematical practices. In Beliefs:
A Hidden Variable in Mathematics Education? (pp. 293–312). Amsterdam: Springer.
Presmeg, N. (2005). Metaphor and metonymy in processes of semiosis in mathematics education. In
Activity and sign (pp. 105–115). New York: Springer US.

Presmeg, N. C. (2006). Research on visualization in learning and teaching mathematics. Handbook of
research on the psychology of mathematics education, 205–235.
Presmeg, N. (2008). Spatial abilities resear as a foundation for visualization in teaing and
learning mathematics. In Critical Issues in Mathematics Education (pp. 83–95). New York:
Springer US.
Radford, L. (2002). e seen, the spoken and the wrien: A semiotic approa to the problem of
objectification of mathematical knowledge. For the Learning of Mathematics, 22(2), 14–23.
Radford, L. (2009). Why do gestures maer? Sensuous cognition and the palpability of
mathematical meanings. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 70(2), 11–126.
Radford, L. (2010). e eye as theoretician: Seeing structures in generalizing activities. For the
Learning of Mathematics, 30(2), 2–7.
Radford, L. (2013). Sensuous cognition. In D. Martinovic, V. Freiman, & Z. Karadag (Eds.), Visual
mathematics and cyberlearning (pp. 141–162). Dordrecht: Springer.
Radford, L., Edwards, L., & Arzarello, F. (2009). Introduction: beyond words. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 70(2), 91–95.
Radford, L., & Puig, L. (2007). Syntax and meaning as sensuous, visual, historical forms of algebraic
thinking. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 66(2), 145–164.
Rancière, J. (2004). e politics of aesthetics: e distribution of the sensible . (G. Rohill, Trans.).
New York: Continuum.
Robui, O. (2006). Motion, tenology, gestures in interpreting graphs. International Journal for
Technology in Mathematics Education, 13(3), 117–125.
Robui, O., Edwards, L., & Ferrara, F. (2012, July). Enrica’s explanation: Multimodality and gesture.
In Proceedings of 36th Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics
Education (p. 27). Taipei, Taiwan.
Roth, W. M. (2001). Gestures: eir role in teaing and learning. Review of Educational Resear,
71(3), 365–392.
Roth. W. M. (2010). Incarnation: Radicalizing the embodiment of mathematics. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 30(2), 8–17.
Roth, W. M., & Bowen, G. M. (1998). Decalages in talk and gesture: Visual and verbal semiotics of
ecology lectures. Linguistics and Education, 10(3), 335–358.

Roth, W. M., & McGinn, M. K. (1998). Inscriptions: Toward a theory of representing as social
practice. Review of Educational Research, 68(1), 35–59.
Rotman, B. (2005). Gesture in the head: mathematics and mobility. In Proceedings of the
Mathematics and Narrative Conference. Mykonos, Greece.
Sabena, C., Radford, L., & Bardini, C. (2005). Synronizing gestures, words and actions in paern
generalizations. In Proceedings of the 29 PME Conference (Vol. 4, pp. 129–136). Melbourne,
Australia: University of Melbourne.
Salk, J. (1983). Anatomy of reality: merging of intuition and reason (Convergence series). New York:
Columbia University Press.
Schechner, R. (2003). Performance theory. London: Routledge.
Sener, R. (2011). Between theater and anthropology. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (1999). The primacy of movement. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sinclair, N. (2001). The aesthetic is relevant. For the Learning of Mathematics, 21(1), 25–32.
Sinclair, N. (2009). Aesthetics as a liberating force in mathematics education? ZDM—The
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 41(1–2), 45–60.
Sinclair, N., De Freitas, E., & Ferrara, F. (2013). Virtual encounters: e murky and furtive world of
mathematical inventiveness. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (2),
239–252.
Sinclair, N., Pimm, D., & Higginson, W. (2006). Mathematics and the aesthetic: New approaes to
an ancient affinity. New York: Springer.
Slingerland, E.E.G. (2008). What science oﬀers the humanities. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Stewart, K. (2007). Ordinary affects. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Streeck, J. (2009). Gesturecraft: The manu-facture of meaning. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Swanson, D. M. (2007). Cultural beads and mathematical AIDS: A critical narrative of disadvantage,
social context and sool mathematics in post-apartheid South Africa, with reﬂections and
implications for ‘glocal’ contexts. Philosophy of Education Journal, 21(2), 1–78.
Taimina, D. (2009). Crocheting adventures with hyperbolic planes. Wellesley, MA: A. K. Peters.
Tarde, G. (2010). Gabriel Tarde on communication and social inﬂuence: Selected papers. University

of Chicago Press.
Toulmin, S. (1992). Cosmopolis: e hidden agenda of modernity . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Turkle, S. (1984). The second self: Computers and the human spirit. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Turner, V. (1986). From ritual to theater: e human seriousness of play . New York: PAJ
Publications.
Tyler, I. (2000). Reframing pregnant embodiment. In S. Ahmed, J. Kilby, C. Lury, M. McNeil & B.
Skeggs (Eds.), Transformations: Thinking through feminism (pp. 288–301). New York: Routledge.
Walkerdine, V. (1998). Counting girls out: Girls and mathematics. Abingdon, UK: Psychology Press.
Walshaw, M. (Ed.) (2004). Mathematics education within the postmodern. Charloe, NC:
Information Age Publishing.
Weaver, J. A. (2010). Educating the posthuman: Biosciences, ﬁction, and curriculum studies.
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Whitehead, A. N., & Russell, B. (2011). Principia mathematica. Seaside, OR: Rough Draft Printing.
Wilde, M. H. (1999). Why embodiment now? Advances in Nursing Science, 22(2), 25–38.
Yaglom, I. M. (1981). Elementary geometry, then and now. In C. Davis, B. Grünbaum, & F. A. Sherk
(Eds.), The geometric vein (pp. 253–269). New York: Springer.
Zevenbergen, R. (2000). Craing the “code” of mathematics classrooms: Sool success as a function
of linguistic, social and cultural baground. In J. Boaler (Ed.), Multiple Perspectives on
Mathematics Teaching and Learning (pp. 201–223). Westport, CT: Ablex.
Zizek, S. (1997). The plague of fantasies. London: Verso.

4 Configuring Learning Theory to
Support Teaching1
David Kirshner
Louisiana State University
Paradigms, wholly new ways of going about things, come along not by the century, but by the
decade; sometimes, it almost seems, by the month. It takes either a preternaturally focused,
dogmatical individual, who can shut out any ideas but his or her own, or a mercurial, hopelessly
inquisitive one, who can keep dozens of them in play at once, to remain upright amidst this
tumble of programs, promises, and proclamations.
(Geertz, 2000, p. 188)

Introduction
is apter addresses the multiparadigmatic aracter of social sciences
that Geertz (2000) laments, particularly the presence of multiple,
independently conceived notions of learning that educators somehow must
negotiate to establish a sound and coherent basis in psyology for
theorization of teaing. For education, learning constitutes the essential
goal of professional practice. us, its diverse theorization in distinct
branes of psyology poses a considerable allenge not faced by
paradigmatic professions like medicine and engineering, those informed by
what Kuhn (1970) called paradigmatic sciences (e.g., physics, emistry,
biology, genetics, anatomy, etc.) that have aieved a consensus about
theory and method. As Kennedy (1999) observed, “e relationship
between teaing and learning is the most central issue in teaing, and it is
also the most perplexing and least understood” (p. 528).
For the most part, educators’ strategy for dealing with psyology’s
multiple paradigms has consisted simply in identifying with one or another
extant bran in an eﬀort to derive guidance for educational practice.
rough the past century educators, variously, have found inspiration in
behavioral psyology, Gestalt psyology, Dewey’s functional psyology,
Piagetian developmental psyology, Vygotskian sociocultural theory,
ecological psyology, information processing psyology (Gardner, 1987),
conceptual ange theory, situated cognition theory, and various
constructivist and constructionist theories (Spivey, 1997), among others.
e central consequence for education of selecting a single bran from
among psyology’s oﬀerings might be labeled the Babel Eﬀect. Given a
diverse menu of psyological approaes, educators in a given era vary in
their oice of preferred paradigm. As a consequence, theorists are
speaking many diﬀerent languages as they aempt to articulate
foundations for pedagogy, and they are robbed of the opportunity to build

a professional discourse of teaching together.
e Babel Eﬀect manifests itself within our pedagogical discourse
primarily as complementary tendencies toward conﬂict and confusion.
Conﬂict arises when educators guided by alternative visions of learning
formulate models of teaing practice that are seen as antithetical to one
another. Historically, the key example is the conﬂict between Progressive
Educators rallying under the banner of John Dewey’s functional psyology
and Traditionalists guided by the more reductive sense of stimulus-response
learning advanced by Edward orndike and his colleagues (Lagemann,
1989). Contemporary conﬂicts include the “Reading Wars” and the “Math
Wars” (Loveless, 2001; these conflicts are analyzed later in the chapter).
Less salient for our community, but more debilitating in its consequence,
is the sense of confusion and eventually dissipation that ensues from
multiple sources for pedagogical precepts. Within ea pedagogical enclave
things may not seem terribly amiss. Whether we are behaviorists or
constructivists or situativists or critical theorists (to name a few prominent
sools) we have coherent and convergent conversations about learning
and teaing, and perhaps a sense that we are making progress. But in
aggregate, this Balkanization of educational thought is dysfunctional. Unless
teaers locate themselves squarely within a single tradition of pedagogical
theory—and most don’t—they are faced with a discordant array of
pedagogical advice:
Learning requires continual practice.
Repetitive practice is the antithesis of learning.
Learning is facilitated by group work.
Individualized study allows each student to
progress optimally and at their own rate.
Lecture is the most efficient method to
transfer knowledge to students.
Knowledge doesn’t transfer but has to be
constructed by each individual student.
From this aotic assembly, only the most general and platitudinous of
invocations—“Care about the ildren. Prepare well for class. Be ‘with-it.’”
(Pressman, 2007)—escape censure and emerge as uncontested advice for

teaers. Our general pedagogical discourse is a poor and pale reﬂection of
the intense intellection within the various enclaves of theory.
To be clear, what is at stake here is not just the rhetoric of pedagogy, but
the very aracter and quality of pedagogical thought and practice.
Consider the ain of reasoning underlying development of a
emotherapeutic treatment for cancer. To begin, cell biologists provide
insight into cell pathology relevant to this ailment. en a strategy, say, for
interfering with cancer cell reproduction is theorized, and experiments are
initiated with lab animals to determine if the strategy has merit. Finally,
clinical trials are established to verify eﬃcacy with humans, and to
empirically address maers su as dosage levels that theory is
insufficiently refined to determine (Arthur & Hancock, 2007).
At the foundation of this collective enterprise is broad agreement across
the medical ﬁeld as to the underlying meanisms of disease and health. It
is this consensus that ensures practitioners are educated in the relevant
theories and prepared to expertly perform their assigned role in the
treatment process. Surely inductive generalization—noting unexpected
successes—and even blind lu have a role to play, but “medicine is a
rational enterprise built on a scientiﬁc tradition that operates with logical
arguments, the laws of causality and the epistemic strategies of observation
and experimentation” (Kottow, 1992, p. 19).
In the case of education, the entire infrastructure for rational organization
of practice is undermined by the presence of unreconciled theorizations of
learning, as emblematized by the typical educational psyology textbook
in which the diverse offerings of learning theorists are presented as separate
apters together with recommendations for practice (e.g., Eggen &
Kauak, 2013; Ormrod, 2009). Su an approa abdicates collective
responsibility for rationally organized educational practice, leaving
individual teaers to ﬁnd their own way through the thiet of diverse and
competing claims (Wojcikiewicz & Wenzel, 2012).

Nothing drives home the ineﬀectiveness of the current utilization of
psyology more strongly than the fact that researers looking into
practices of good teaing ignore learning theory. For instance, in an
OECD-funded multinational project in the early 1990s, teaers noted for
their excellence were carefully studied to determine eﬀective teaing
practices. A synthesis of ﬁndings from ea country carried out by Hopkins
and Stern (1996) identiﬁed the six most important aracteristics of
excellent teachers, as summarized in Nuthall (2004):
1. a passionate commitment to doing the very best for their students
2. a love of children enacted in warm, caring relationships
3. pedagogical content knowledge, e.g., knowing how to identify,
present, and explain key concepts
4. use of a variety of models of teaching and learning
5. a collaborative working style with other teaers to plan, observe, and
discuss each other’s work
6. a constant questioning of, reﬂecting on, and modifying of their own
practice. (p. 282)
Su an approa to identifying eﬀective teaing practices is the
educational equivalent of seeking a cure for cancer by observing the
practices of successful physicians. What it yields, as we see, is lile more
than a catalog of education’s bedside manner.
With the exception of educational practices nurtured under the auspices
of teams of theorists (e.g., as in design resear; see Design-Based Resear
Collaborative, 2003), to be discussed later, this kind of focus on the surface
structure of educational practice is endemic to educational practice: For the
most part, “teaers are not explicitly concerned with student learning as
they manage student participation in classroom activities … [based on the
belief that] ‘student interest and involvement constitutes both a necessary

and suﬃcient condition for worthwhile learning’ (Prawat, 1992, p. 389)”
(Nuthall, 2004, p. 276). As Windsitl (2002) noted in an incisive review,
even reform pedagogy designed to perturb conventional ideas about
teaing and learning is enacted as a kind of mimicry of prescribed
methods: “activities, as opposed to ideas, are the starting points and basic
units of planning” (p. 138). Except in rare cases, the ri insights into
learning that psyologists have generated within psyology’s many
branches simply are being lost to the profession of teaching.
ese travails of educational practice stemming from the multiplicity of
learning theories are broadly misunderstood, both by educators and by
policy makers. For policy makers (and others in the academy) teaing and
the solarship of teaing is “low-status work” (Lagemann, 2000, p. xii);
educators are simply too dull wied (or else too ideologically driven) to
ﬁgure out what seems a relatively straightforward maer of determining
and implementing eﬀective practices. e current policy solution in the U.S.
context directs resear dollars to the ﬁnal empirical phase of scientiﬁc
resear—ﬁne-tuning and validating of proposed practices—completely
ignoring the need for sound theoretical foundations (Soenfeld, 2007).
Educationists, on the other hand, alk up the allenges of educational
theorizing to the “irreducible complexity” of our domain, seeing theoretical
heterogeneity as an index of this complexity, rather than as a fundamental
problem in its own right: “What we know about teaing is always
contingent on a vast array of intervening variables that mediate between a
teaer’s action and a student’s response” (Labaree, 2000, p. 231; see also
Otterness, 2009; Regehr, 2010).2
e purpose of this apter is to articulate a new strategy for exploiting
the ri insights into learning that psyology, in its diverse paradigms, has
uncovered, without generating the competing prescriptions that divide and
weaken the educational enterprise. Given the long-standing and intractable
problematic of education’s uptake of learning theory, the strategy proposed

here is surprisingly straightforward: accept, rather than resist, the
multiparadigmatic character of learning theory.
When we educators adopt a single theorization of learning as a basis for
pedagogical practice, we are failing to anowledge that psyology itself
has not resolved the multiplicity of learning theory. We are pinning our
educational fortunes on the learning theory we hope and believe eventually
will prevail, ignoring that psyology, in its multiple paradigms, has
produced several distinct theorizations of learning that motivate us as a
community.
e alternative proposed here is to work across education to identify the
distinct notions of learning that motivate educational practice. Honoring
ea of these as legitimate, the strategy is to articulate pedagogical practice
in genres, ea addressing a single notion of learning, and ea informed by
a theorization speciﬁc to that particular notion of learning. is simple
move of aligning learning goal → learning theory → pedagogical genre
puts educational practice on the same footing as paradigmatic professions
like medicine and engineering, in whi a single theoretical framework
informs prescribed professional practices. e professional educator,
therefore, can be sooled in the relevant theorizations for ea separate
genre and can practice teaing based on a rational plan that explicates
how recommended practices are intended to lead to the desired learning
outcome. e genres approa yields diversity, but without conﬂict or
confusion endemic to our current discourse.
Before proceeding, it is best to anticipate an objection that may be
forming for some readers: how can we take seriously a proposal to
construct learning as separate, independent processes in the face of its well-
established standing as a complex whole (Regehr, 2010)—multifaceted, to
be sure, but composed of mutually interdependent elements (Bransford,
Stevens, Swartz, et al., 2006; Greeno, 2011). Yet the history of psyology
does not bear out the current wisdom of learning as a complex whole.

Behavioral psyology did not establish itself as a complement to
mentalistic approaes, but as an alternative (Watson, 1913). Likewise
sociocultural psyology, cognitive psyology, developmental psyology,
and other foundational theories have worked mightily to establish
independent claims to account for learning/development. In the current era
of dialectical, integrative, and holistic theorizing learning tends to come to
us as a complex whole; in a previous era, learning more oen came to us as
a unitary meanism (rooted in conditioning, or in developmental semas,
or in serial information processing). My point here is not to sele the
maer in advance, but to forestall a priori judgment. A case for the utility
of independent theorizations of learning is demonstrated in the current
chapter, and it can be assessed directly, on its merits.
e foregoing provides a general rationale for the genres approa, but
two clariﬁcations are needed to see the contours of the proposed strategy:
the ﬁrst addresses the role of values decisions in a discursive space that
legitimizes separate interpretations of learning; and the second addresses
the special aracter of multiparadigmatic science and its implications for
uptake of psychology’s learning theories.
Values Decisions
To be sure, the one-to-one alignment of goals to theories to practices
advocated does not suddenly transform psyology into a paradigmatic
science, nor education into a paradigmatic profession. Indeed, organizing
pedagogical practice into independent genres crystallizes a new problematic
for education not paralleled within the paradigmatic professions: the need
for values decisions pertaining to selection of the teaing genre(s)
appropriate for a given student, classroom, subject area, sool, or
educational jurisdiction.
Values issues concerning learning goals already are implicated in our

current educational discourse, as evidenced by conﬂicts like the Reading
Wars and Math Wars (Loveless, 2001). However, in our current discourse in
whi ea sect of theorists recognizes only one’s own paradigm as
legitimate, one’s opponents are cast not only as wrong-headed in their
oice of learning goals, but also as misguided in their teaing methods
(e.g., Draper, 2002; Klein, 2005). Reifying several distinct theorizations of
learning as legitimate, and establishing recognized standards for
pedagogical practice associated with ea, means that diﬀerences about
goals no longer bleed over into criticisms of the competence and eﬃcacy of
professionals making diﬀerent values decisions. Teaing assumes a more
professional demeanor.
Legitimating various notions of learning and associated genres of
teaing also should have the eﬀect of removing the theorist from the fray
of values decisions. e learning theorist provides tenical knowledge
relevant to the shaping of pedagogical practices. However, the genres of
teaing are not alternative paths to the same end—this is not about
diﬀerent learning styles (North, 2015; Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, & Bjork,
2009)—they lead to diﬀerent ends, and it is properly the province of the
world of practice to make the decisions as to what form(s) of learning are
to be valued in a given circumstance.
is devolution of values decisions to the world of practice creates a new
political dimension of educational policy that may have far-reaing
consequence for the organization of sooling: Do teaers decide within
their own classrooms? Are these sool- or district-level decisions? Do we
develop a decentralized model of sooling to allow for more parent
oice? Su questions are beyond the scope of the current apter, but it is
worth keeping this consequence of the genres approach in mind.
Theorization in Multiparadigmatic Science

e ﬁnal issue to be addressed in this introduction concerns the nature of
theory development in multiparadigmatic sciences like psyology. Our
assumption as educators has been that theorizing in psyology follows the
same basic strictures and adheres to the same basic standards as theorizing
in any other science. In the next section, I subject this assumption to critical
scrutiny from a sociology of science perspective, ﬁnding instead that
learning theorists are prone to overextension and exaggeration of results,
and to systematically minimizing and eliding diﬀerences between
theoretical approaches.
e consequence for the genres strategy is that aer identifying the
notions of learning motivating educational practice we cannot simply adopt
a ready-made learning theory for ea from whi to derive guidance for
pedagogical practice. Rather, we must compose these theorizations of
learning ourselves, drawing selectively from the corpus of results
psyologists have obtained relevant to that notion of learning. is
usurpation of psyology’s traditional role as interpreter of learning theory
for educators is bound to create tension between the two ﬁelds. However,
as we shall see in the sociology of science section, our practice over the past
century of selecting one learning paradigm to inform pedagogy, rather than
coordinating several paradigms, always has been in the service of
psyology’s interest in aieving a uniﬁed paradigm. Adopting the genres
approa in the interests of regularizing our own discourse requires that we
step out from behind the shadow of that great science.
Outline of this apter: Following this introduction, “A Sociological
Glimpse at eorization of Learning” approaes the nature of theory
construction in psychology from a sociology of science perspective based on
Kuhn’s (1970, 2000) analysis of the competitive process through whi
multiparadigmatic sciences aieve the initial consensus that marks the
transition to the status of a mature science. e next section, “Education’s
Uptake of Learning eory,” reviews the history of education’s uptake of

learning theory, noting a succession of four phases of thinking about this
problem. e following section, “e Genres Approa,” identiﬁes the
valued notions of learning that motivate educational practice and lays out
the constraints on utilizing psyological theory. e next section, “e
Crossdisciplinary Framework” (the heart of the apter), articulates the
theorizations of learning and associated genres of teaing. e penultimate
section, “Crossdisciplinary Analysis of Pedagogical Practice,” applies this
coordinated framework of theories and pedagogies to analyzing—and
providing new insights into—a wide variety of issues and problems of
educational practice. is is intended to make plausible the claim that the
genres approa, rather than elaborating a new regime of thought for
educational practice, serves to untangle the strands of ideation knoed
together within our current integrative discourse about learning and
teaing. A concluding section, “Problems and Prospects,” reviews the
intentions of the apter and argues for taking the considerable risks
associated with this genres approach.

A Sociological Glimpse at Theorization of
Learning
e overall theme of this apter is that psyology has amassed brilliant
and powerful insights into learning that are being underutilized as resources
for educational practice owing to the multiparadigmatic aracter of that
science. is is not a problem we can solve by looking to the paradigmatic
professions or to the paradigmatic sciences for guidance. We need to
carefully and independently analyze the processes of knowledge creation in
multiparadigmatic psyology as a ﬁrst step to outlining a strategy for
utilization of its knowledge products. In this section, I take a Sociology of
Scientiﬁc Knowledge (SSK) perspective to understand the sociological
constraints that guide the development of learning theories (Barnes, 1985;
Collins & Pinch, 1993).
Sociology of science, and SSK in particular, seeks to identify not only
how institutions of science are shaped within the broader cultures in whi
they are embedded, but how the very knowledge products of those sciences
bear the marks of the societal context (Shapin, 1995). e idea that
sociological factors constrain scientiﬁc theorizing is not one that scientists
generally welcome. As Danziger (1990) remarked, psyologists oen are
uncomfortable with the suggestion that “personal, cultural, and historical
factors play important roles in the elaboration and acceptance of
psyological theory, … this state of aﬀairs is hardly compatible with the
claims by the discipline for the objectivity of its insights into human
behavior” (p. 5). Indeed, sociology of science perspectives can be
“profoundly destabilizing” for scientists whose ﬁeld of study comes in for
critique (Pinch, 2007, p. 266). This is sensitive terrain we traverse.
My analysis of the development of psyological theory is rooted in
omas Kuhn’s (1962, 1970, 2000) well-known theory of scientiﬁc
paradigms. Taking issue with the long-standing image of scientiﬁc progress

as an ongoing accumulation of knowledge and tenique, Kuhn (1970)
distinguished between two kinds of scientiﬁc progress. During periods of
normal science, there is broad agreement among scientists as to the nature
of their subject maer and appropriate methods for advancing the science.
Indeed, during these periods of paradigmatic consensus progress is
cumulative—a kind of extended puzzle-solving activity (p. 35). However, as
Kuhn (1970) pointed out, normal science is powerful precisely because it is
very focused and limited in its scope. As a consequence, it has no way to
assimilate “new and unsuspected phenomena [that] are … repeatedly
uncovered by scientiﬁc resear” (p. 52). Eventually, someone may take up
one or more of these anomalies as sites of investigation outside of the
strictures of the existing paradigm. In some cases, these investigations lead
to a new theoretical and methodological frame for the science, seing the
ground for a period of paradigm conﬂict and possible scientiﬁc revolution,
after which a new period of normal science ensues (Kuhn, 1970).
In addition to detailing how mature sciences cycle through periods of
normal science and revolution, Kuhn (1970) described the process whereby
proto-sciences—what he called preparadigm (p. 17) sciences—mature into
paradigmatic sciences. Preparadigmatic sciences are aracterized by a
multiplicity of scientiﬁc sools, ea with its own perspective on the new
science. The transition from preparadigmatic to paradigmatic coincides with
aievement of the science’s initial paradigmatic consensus, and hence the
ﬁrst period of normal science. e process is very similar to scientiﬁc
revolution, except instead of two conﬂicting paradigms—the established
one and the allenger—there are several contenders, all allengers, none
already established. It is this process of paradigm competition that will
concern us in this section.
ere has been considerable discussion as to whether social sciences in
general, and psyology in particular, ﬁt Kuhn’s deﬁnition of
preparadigmatic. Driver-Linn (2003) notes that “Kuhn used psyology as

an example of a pre-paradigmatic science (to be compared with
paradigmatic sciences su as physics)” (p. 272; see Rosenberg, 2005, p. 272,
and Staats, 1981, for concurring viewpoints).3 Nevertheless, opinions have
varied.
One point of view that seems to me to be popular with psychologists was
voiced by Weimer and Palermo (1973), who observed that psyology
aieved an initial consensus around behaviorism and has since had a
revolution (cognitive psyology) so it therefore must be paradigmatic. To
update the record, we can note that cognitive psyology itself has
subsequently clashed with newer upstarts like situated cognition theory
(Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996, 1997; Greeno, 1997).
e contrary point of view is that whereas behaviorism has fallen from
dominance in psyology, it still continues as an active paradigm as
evidenced by the continuing presence of journals, conferences, and
organizations of its advocates (see Leahey, 1992). Certainly, from our point
of view as educators, we experience psyology as preparadigmatic, in that
contemporary eﬀorts to inform pedagogical practice reference theories of
learning in many diﬀerent branes of psyology (e.g., Eggen & Kauak,
2013). I proceed with this sociological analysis of learning theory, mindful
that psyologists may object to the very idea that psyology is
preparadigmatic. Ironically, as we shall see, the act of construing one’s ﬁeld
as paradigmatic may itself be a strategy of preparadigmatic competition!
Incommensurability
What is most striking about Kuhn’s (1970) theory is his portrayal of the
conﬂicting paradigms as “incommensurable” (p. 4): theorists engaged in
diﬀerent paradigms “see diﬀerent things, and they see them in diﬀerent
relations to one another” (p. 150). Because the very problems that scientists

oose to address are tied to their paradigmatic perspectives, diﬀerences of
viewpoint can never be resolved through rational debate or adjudicated
through empirical evidence. e scientiﬁc revolution succeeds if and when
the new sool is able to oﬀer a suﬃciently compelling account of the
subject maer to aract established researers from other sools—and
especially new researers just entering the ﬁeld—to the new paradigmatic
perspective. For the defeated paradigms, “their disappearance is caused by
their members’ conversion to the new paradigm. But there are always
some men who cling to one or another of the older views, and they are
simply read out of the profession” (Kuhn, 1970, pp. 18–19). Paradigm shi is
ultimately a sociological event as the prior viewpoint is abandoned, not
overturned.
Kuhn’s notion of incommensurability has been subject to intense critique.
Davidson’s 
(1974) 
mu-cited 
essay 
argued 
that 
the 
idea 
of
incommensurable theories is incoherent, thereby raising fundamental
allenges to Kuhn’s thesis. Davidson (1974) objected to Kuhn’s (1962)
statements that suggested incommensurability implies incomprehensibility
across paradigm lines, for example, Kuhn’s suggestion that “aer
discovering oxygen Lavoisier worked in a diﬀerent world” (1962, p. 118).
However, as Oberheim and Hoyningen-Huene (2013) noted, “Kuhn
developed and reﬁned his initial idea over the following decades,
repeatedly emphasizing that incommensurability [does not] impl[y]
incomparability” (p. 3).
My own interpretation is informed by the perceptual dynamics revealed
through bi-stable ambiguous ﬁgures like the famous vase-faces graphic
developed by Danish psyologist Edgar Rubin, see Figure 4.1; one can
experience it as a vase or as faces, but not simultaneously. By analogy, the
fact that incommensurable theories cannot be brought into the same
intellectual frame does not imply an inability for scientists oriented by
diﬀerent paradigms to understand one another, but it does imply that the

diﬀerences in point of view cannot be resolved within a shared scientiﬁc
perspective. us the process of resolution inevitably has to play out in a
broader sociological arena (Kuhn, 1970). is viewpoint is consistent with
Kuhn’s belief that “revolutionary ange in science requires a gestalt
switch” (Driver-Linn, 2003, p. 272).4
Figure 4.1 Bi-stable ambiguous figure, vase-faces graphic.
Paradigm Competition
A preparadigmatic science advances to paradigmatic status if and only if
one of its paradigms is able to establish itself so completely as to lead to the
demise of its competitors. us the competition among paradigms is
existential, and winning out (or at least fending oﬀ aaers) forms the
central imperative of ea paradigmatic sool.5 As we shall see, this
competition among incommensurable paradigms sets up dynamics with
respect to both the presentation of psyological theory and the trajectory
of such theories that define the very character of preparadigmatic science.
What incommensurability does is create separate intra- and inter-
paradigm dynamics of scientiﬁc resear. Within the paradigm, one is
working with colleagues who share one’s paradigmatic perspectives to
advance knowledge in the ﬁeld. is work adopts conservative standards of
incremental progress and methodological rigor that are hallmarks of
normal science and a principal source of its credibility and success (Kuhn,
1970, Chapter 8). But externally, as noted earlier, the bale for supremacy

plays out in the sociological realm and depends primarily on one’s ability to
aract new researers just entering the ﬁeld to one’s own paradigm.
Because the superiority of one position over another cannot be established
through rational argument (a consequence of incommensurability), the
tendency for theorists is to exaggerate the accomplishments of their sool
and minimize the uncertainties. is exuberant and optimistic posture
marks preparadigmatic science as a distinct kind of scientific enterprise.6
We see this discursive dynamic mostly easily in the case of the dominant
paradigm in a given era, the one best positioned to establish hegemony
over the ﬁeld. As illustrated with behaviorism and cognitive science, the
trajectory for these paradigms moves from initiation to (conservative)
extension to (incautious) projection:
Paradigm Initiation: To begin, a paradigm is established around a
powerful and distinctive accomplishment that illuminates some aspect of
psyological functioning. For behaviorism it was Pavlov’s (1897/1910,
1927) discovery of the “conditional reﬂex” (Murray, 1988) and orndike’s
(1898) discovery of the Law of Eﬀect that formed the eventual basis for
classical and operant conditioning, respectively (Hunt, 1993). Based on their
studies of animal behavior, these authors established the comparative
psyology principle of parsimony ﬁrst introduced by Morgan (1894/1903)
that higher mental processes should not be invoked if the behavior can be
explained by lower mental processes. is established a strong break with
the mentalism then prevailing in psyological resear (Benjamin, 2007, p.
137).
For cognitive science, developments in a variety of ﬁelds (neuroscience,
logic, anthropology, psyolinguistics, and computer science) coalesced into
a new interdisciplinary ﬁeld allenging the antimentalism enshrined in
behavioral psyology (Hunt, 1993). Particularly, the serial digital computer
provided an inspectable model of how symbolic elements could be encoded
and manipulated computationally to simulate human problem solving

(Newell & Simon, 1972). e Information Processing (IP) model became the
“guiding metaphor” for cognitive psychology (Hunt, 1993, p. 516).
Paradigm Extension: Next ensues a period of conservative and careful
resear and theory construction in whi the initial insight is extended
over the domain of phenomena to whi it most directly and obviously
applies. For behaviorism, we have reﬁnement and elaboration of classical
and operant conditioning extended through experimental resear into an
antimentalist psyology of human behavior (Murray, 1988). For cognitive
science, IP simulation was successfully applied to various domains of logical
problem solving and decision making, as well as to subcognitive processes
like visual processing (e.g., Marr, 1982), even as cognitive psyologists
developed and ﬁne-tuned the basic cognitive structures underlying a wide
range of functions: paern recognition, aention, categorization, and
semantic and procedural memory (Gardner, 1987; Smith, 2001).
Paradigm Projection: Eventually, however, to establish hegemony, the
paradigm must project itself to phenomena of interest in the broader ﬁeld
remote from its initial sphere of insight. is eﬀort at a big leap in theory
distinguishes preparadigmatic science from the incremental progress of
normal science, wherein the scientist “concentrate[s] his aention upon
problems that he has good reason to believe he will be able to solve”
(Kuhn, 1970, p. 164). At this point, preparadigmatic theory tends to move
from relative clarity toward opacity, and claims for the accomplishments of
the paradigm are most likely to be exaggerated, with hoped-for advances
touted as faits accomplis. Reliably, this hegemonic eﬀort is met with push-
ba from other paradigms, and/or establishment of new paradigms that
hope to address these phenomena more successfully.
For behaviorism, this played out in Skinner’s (1958a) aempt to extend
operant theory from unmediated response conditioning to verbal behavior.
is eﬀort was rewarded with a withering critique in whi Chomsky
(1959) identiﬁed su severe weaknesses in Skinner’s theory construction as

to constitute “play-acting at science” (p. 559). Indeed, this episode is cited as
ushering in the ascendancy of cognitivism over behaviorism (Gardner,
1987).
For cognitive psyology, the aempt to project the successes of
decontextualized puzzle solving to contextual reasoning critiqued by Lave
(1988) generated defections from traditional cognitive science to situated
cognition theory (e.g., Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Greeno, 1993; Hirst
& Manier, 1995), a conﬂict in points of view that remains unresolved
(Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996, 1997; Anderson, Greeno, Reder, & Simon,
2000; Greeno 1997).
As noted earlier, this paern of aempting big leaps in theory is
unaracteristic of normal science but is consistent with the sociological
process of preparadigmatic competition (Kuhn, 1970). What we can draw
from this analysis is that educators should be critical and discerning
consumers of psyology’s knowledge products: not all claims by
psyologists are equally well grounded or credible. But, as we shall see,
Education has its own history with respect to Psyology, whi conditions
obedience and subservience, rather than critical scrutiny.
Psychology and Education
Historically, since the founding of scientiﬁc psyology in the late 1800s,
education and psyology have been closely intertwined. One of the ﬁrst
preoccupations of the new science was to investigate the educational belief
in “transfer of training” (e.g., orndike & Woodworth, 1901). Prior to that
time, educators had relied on Aristotle’s doctrine of Faculty Psyology
(reworked over the millennia) as guidance for pedagogy. According to this
belief system, the mind could be thought of as consisting of relatively
independent “mental faculties” ea of whi could be strengthened, like a

muscle, through exercise. Crucially, “a mind so sharpened and so stored
with knowledge was believed ready for any calling; indeed, it was
considered ‘trained’ and equipped for life. us … transfer of training
resulted from sharpening the ‘faculties’ or powers of the mind, instead of
from the speciﬁc beneﬁts derived from a particular subject or method of
study” (Rippa, 1971, p. 208).
What orndike and his colleagues established is that educators had
greatly overestimated transfer of training effects (Hall, 2003). These findings
discredited education’s claims to prepare students for daily life, in the
process eﬀectively stripping education of its intellectual authority. Over a
short span of years educational psyology emerged as a “guiding science
of the sool” (Cubberly, 1920, p. 206). Nor was this interest without
practical beneﬁt to psyology: “e promise of providing useful answers
to practical educational questions may have been the impetus for the
establishment of psyology departments in colleges and universities
around the turn of the [20th] century” (White, 1991, quoted in Beay, 1996,
p. 102).
It is in this historical context that we need to understand the role that
education plays in the psyologists’ life-world. Rather than a disinterested
senior partner, psyology has maintained a keen interest in how education
incorporates psyological theory. As orndike (1910) put it, “sool-room
life itself is a vast laboratory in whi are made thousands of experiments
of the utmost interest to ‘pure’ psyology” (p. 12), and many psyologists
have actively participated in applying their theories to education.
But it is a mistake for us to interpret the psyologists’ contributions to
education outside of the general sociological imperatives of their ﬁeld.
Asserting inﬂuence over education is an important advertisement of the
ﬁtness of one’s paradigm. If fear of push-ba from other paradigms may
serve 
to 
moderate 
rhetorical 
embellishment 
of 
one’s 
scientiﬁc
accomplishments, no su restraint is evident in pronouncements regarding

educational applications. For instance in their landmark Academy of
Sciences publication, Bransford, Brown, and Coing (2000) declare
foundations for educational practice that rest on “a new theory of learning
[that] is coming into focus” (p. 3). Clearly no responsible paradigmatic
science formulates applications to another ﬁeld based on emergent
theorizing. Su pronouncements can only be sensibly interpreted in the
context of preparadigmatic competition in whi “capturing” education
serves to enhance the caet and credibility of one’s paradigm (Beay,
1996).
I need to stress that what I’m suggesting here is not the outlines of a
conscious strategy of subterfuge or exaggeration on the part of
psyologists but rather the dynamics of how preparadigmatic competition
shapes the discursive practice of psyological theorizing. Psyologists,
confronted with intra- and inter-paradigmatic imperatives of their science,
simply have accommodated their world view to enable these two
imperatives to be met, the tensions between them being borne internally as
part of the cultural practice of preparadigmatic science. As a departure from
the conservative norms of paradigmatic science, psyologists make bold—
even reless—claims for their paradigm because in their practice of science
they have come to sit on the proverbial “edge of their seats” respecting the
emergent potential and promise of their paradigm: “Researers become
emotionally involved in their paradigm; it becomes part of their lives”
(Hergenhahn, 2009, p. 11). Psyologists’ pronouncements reﬂect the truth
they experience.
Education’s Uptake of Learning Theory
Having presented a picture of how psyology functions as a
preparadigmatic science, and of how education is positioned with respect to

psyology, I conclude this sociological overview with an analysis of four
strategies educators have used to deal with the multiple theorizations of
learning that psyology has oﬀered. ese strategies are sequential, in the
sense that they have been introduced at distinct historical moments in
response to problems encountered with previous strategies; however, none
has replaced its predecessors and all continue to be utilized today.
Foundational eory: e initial strategy is to accept guidance for
educational practice from advocates of what might be called foundational
paradigms spawned by major branes of psyology—for example,
behavioral, functional (Dewey), Gestalt, developmental, cognitive,
sociocultural. Foundational paradigms articulate a focused and coherent, but
specialized, vision of the learning process. As Alexander (2007) noted,
adherents of su theories tend to deny the legitimacy of other theories and
other visions as they stake a claim for the suﬃciency of their paradigm. As
noted earlier, the principal allenge of su theories is one of scope, as
theorists seek to convince the ﬁeld that their seemingly limited
paradigmatic perspective actually encompasses remote concerns of the ﬁeld
addressed in other paradigms.
Integrative eory: Partly as a response to the inability of any
foundational paradigm to prevail against its competitors, psychologists have
developed what might be termed integrative theories like social
constructivism and situated cognition that aempt to weave together
perspectives from the foundational theories (Alexander, 2007, makes
essentially the same distinction between foundational and integrative
theories, though using a diﬀerent terminology). Su theories oﬀer
education relief from the exclusionary politics of the foundational theories,
laying the groundwork for a rier and more encompassing vision of
learning, and hence of teaing. at new theories can be created from the
combination of existing theories was noted by Kuhn (1970) in his discussion
of the preparadigm period before the science of optics coalesced around

Newton’s Opticks. At that time there were “a number of competing sools
and sub-sools, most of them espousing one variant or another of
Epicurean, Aristotelian, or Platonic theory … and other combinations and
modiﬁcations besides” (p. 12, emphasis added). However, the allenges of
theorizing linkages across paradigms are not to be underestimated. As Lave
(1988) noted, for a true synthesis “units of analysis, though traditionally
elaborated separately, must be defined together and consistently” (p. 146).
Holistic eory: Alternative to the notable eﬀorts of integrative
theorists to create a true synthesis, there is a tendency in the literature to
provide pedagogical frameworks encompassing a multiplicity of learning
paradigms, without resolving their contradictory aspects and implications.
is holistic tendency is most notably evident in canonical texts of the
learning sciences community, How People Learn (Bransford, et al., 2000),
and How Students Learn (Donovan & Bransford, 2005), wherein the authors
embrace 
behaviorism, 
cognitive 
psyology, 
cultural 
psyology,
developmental psyology, Gestalt psyology, information processing
theory, neuropsyology, situated cognition, and sociocultural psyology.
As noted earlier, all of these are coalescing into “a new theory of learning
[that] is coming into focus” (Bransford, et al., 2000, p. 3), a state of aﬀairs
that apparently obviates the need to resolve theoretical divergences.
Dialectical Relations and Postpositive Fragmentation: As noted
earlier, bona ﬁde integrative theorizing across paradigmatic divides is a
allenging undertaking. However, in many current cases, the theories to
be integrated are not only understood as incommensurable with one
another, but also as dialectically related. For instance, a central assumption
of situated cognition theory is that “practice is constituted in a dialectical
relation between persons acting and the seings of their activity” (Lave,
1988, p. 145). Likewise, Ernest (1998) ﬁnds that “at the center of social
constructivism lies an elaborated theory of both individual or subjective
knowledge and social or objective knowledge—equally weighted … and the

dialectical relation between them” (p. 241). Dialectic relations imply
“reﬂexivity” as described by Cobb (2007): “is is an extremely strong
relationship that does not merely mean that the two perspectives are
interdependent. Instead, it implies that neither exists without the other in
that ea perspective constitutes the baground against whi
mathematical activity is interpreted from the other perspective” (p. 29).
What dialectical relations do is lo the theories together into a ﬁxed
mutual interdependence, but without ever resolving the discrepant
viewpoints. is, I would argue, makes a true integrative theory impossible.
For example, as Kuhn (1970) noted with respect to the wave/particle
dialectic of light, “the period during whi light was ‘sometimes a wave
and sometimes a particle’ was a period of crisis—a period when something
was wrong—and it ended only with the development of wave meanics
and the realization that light was a self-consistent entity diﬀerent from both
waves and particles” (p. 114). Similarly, a true synthesis of social and
cognitive notions of learning must get beyond their dialectical opposition to
one another.
Mindful of the severe allenges of integration across paradigms, some
of our most sophisticated theorists are coming to question whether
establishing epistemic foundations for learning and teaing is even
possible. As Sfard (1998) lamented in her essay on incommensurable
learning metaphors, we’d best “give up the hope that the lile pates of
coherence will eventually combine into a consistent global theory. It seems
that the sooner we accept the thought that our work is bound to produce a
patwork of metaphors rather than a uniﬁed, homogeneous theory of
learning, the beer for us and for those whose lives are likely to be aﬀected
by our work” (p. 12).
Similarly, in framing mathematics education as a design science, Cobb
(2007) explicitly rejects the possibility of epistemic knowledge as the
product of theory/resear. For Cobb (2007), the theorist is recast as

“bricoleur … a handy man who invents pragmatic solutions in practical
situations…. Similarly, I suggest that rather than adhering to one particular
theoretical perspective, we act as bricoleurs by adapting ideas from a range
of theoretical sources” (p. 29). Indeed, Cobb (2007) “question[s] the
assumption 
that 
theory 
consists 
of 
decontextualized propositions,
statements, or assertions that are elevated above and stand apart from the
activities of practitioners” (p. 5), and consequently, he “sh[ies] away from
the approa of ﬁrst surveying currently fashionable philosophical [and
psyological] positions and then deriving implications for mathematics
education research and practice from them” (pp. 6–7).7
In my view, abandoning the pretension that psyological theory has
provided epistemic foundations for educational practice is an intellectually
responsible answer to our inability to coherently marshal the divergent
epistemic knowledge of learning that psyology has generated in its
varied paradigms. Still, the postpositive turn away from epistemic
knowledge is a drastic step.8 For in reifying knowledge of learning and
teaing as ineluctably local we abandon the possibility that the knowledge
base for teaing ever can be systematized, that teaer expertise can be
scaled-up beyond the local regime of theory within whi it is nurtured,
and consequently that teaing ever can aain to the stature and authority
of professions whose knowledge base is informed by epistemic science. is
is a verdict we shall try to avoid.

The Genres Approach
e foregoing review of education’s uptake of psyological theory
highlighted four strategies:
Foundational theory: adopt a single foundational paradigm that
provides a clear, but limited, vision of learning.
Integrative theory: adopt an integrative theory struggling to bridge
across inconsistent units of analysis.
Holistic approa: ignoring incommensurability, in eclectic fashion,
create pedagogical ensembles that draw from a broad range of
learning theories.
Postpositive approa: abandoning the possibility of epistemic
theorization of learning, reconstitute theory as local to the particular
situational interests in a given educational setting.
e genres approa constitutes a new strategy designed to beer
exploit the signiﬁcant insights into learning forged within the foundational
paradigms. e strategy involves identifying the distinct notions of learning
that inspire educational practice, determining the psyological theorization
that best explicates ea of these, and then using the theorizations to inform
the articulation of genres of teaing—distinct pedagogical methods, ea
speciﬁc to one of the identiﬁed notions of learning. Of course, a theory of
learning does not determine a teaing method, any more than a theory of
cell pathology determines a cure for cancer. Nevertheless, in both cases
having a clear understanding of underlying meanisms is a major asset in
formulating sound professional methods. e strategy of aligning learning
goals with learning theories with pedagogical practices is intended as an
alternative to the current strategies that have led to conﬂict, confusion,
banality, and abandonment, respectively.

Culturally Shared Metaphors for Learning
e ﬁrst allenge of the genres approa is to identify the notions of
learning explored by psyologists that capture our fundamental interests
as educators. My personal exploration of the learning theory landscape has
evolved over the past 18 years, ﬁnally seling into three metaphors for
learning: Learning as habituation, informed primarily by behavioral
psyology; 
learning 
as construction, informed by developmental
psyology 
(Piaget); 
and 
learning 
as enculturation, informed by
sociocultural psyology. Remarkably, essentially these same metaphors
have been identiﬁed by other researers (Bredo, 1994; Case, 1992; Greeno,
Collins, & Resni, 1996; Riey, Klein, & Tracey, 2011; Shulman, 1987, p. 7;
Wojcikiewicz, 2010). Furthermore, these metaphors for learning dovetail
with the canonical goals of learning—skills, knowledge (concepts), and
dispositions (cultural practices), respectively—that have been identiﬁed by
the U.S. National Council for Accreditation of Teaer Education (NCATE,
2002; see also AERA, 2005).
Rather than write oﬀ this happy convergence to coincidence, I am
mindful of the observation of many commentators that psyology oen
draws from our culture’s basic metaphors for its foundational images and
intuitions (Fleter, 1995; Leary, 1994; Olson & Bruner, 1996; Sternberg,
1997). As Fleter (1995) put it, our culture’s “folk psyology is built into
scientiﬁc psyological theories in a more thoroughgoing fashion than is
commonly realized” (p. 97).
Following these observations, the genres approa takes as its working
premise that the learning goals motivating educational practice reﬂect
notions of learning that psyologists also have pursued. us my intention
in articulating genres of teaing is not so mu to provide new
foundations for pedagogical practice as to disentangle the existing intuitions
about teaing and learning knoed together within an integrative theories

discourse (Kirshner, 2002). If fully successful, the system of genres that I
outline presents a reﬁned and organized version of the varied streams of
ideation that already constitute pedagogical thought and practice across the
broad spectrum of education.
Utilizing Learning Theory
e second allenge of the genres approa is to identify and utilize the
learning theories that best illuminate the metaphors for learning that
motivate educators. Given the shared wellspring of metaphors for learning
that nourish both education and psyology (Fleter, 1995; Leary, 1994;
Olson & Bruner, 1996; Sternberg, 1997), the obvious strategy would be to
adopt extant theories of learning from the menu of available paradigms.
ere are two problems with that approa: (A) Although psyology’s
major learning paradigms do seem to be driven by the metaphors for
learning adopted for the genres approa, the mat-up is not quite neat.
Sometimes more than one bran of psyology is informed by a given
metaphor, in whi case our theorization of learning may draw from more
than one paradigm. Other times, a theory of learning, though inspired
primarily by the learning metaphor at hand, adopts a more complex unit of
analysis. Su cases may necessitate forays beyond psyology into
neighboring disciplines.
(B) As discussed earlier under “Paradigm Projection” (p. 106), the
trajectory of learning theory projects beyond the natural, intuitive
paradigmatic boundaries in an aempt to encompass notions of learning
pursued in other paradigms. Su projection is a necessary part of the
competitive process whereby psyology may hope one day to become
paradigmatic, but it runs counter to our interest in articulating coherent and
distinct theorizations of learning.

ese concerns are not just hypothetical; they directly impact the
theorizations of all three learning metaphors addressed in the genres
approach:
Habituation: (A) e habituation metaphor for learning of skills is
informed not only by behaviorism, but also by implicit learning theory
of cognitive psyology. (B) Furthermore, despite the nonmentalist
rhetoric of behaviorism, applications to education have implicated the
learning of “facts” (Skinner, 1958b), whi constitutes encroament of
behaviorism onto the terrain of concept learning.
Construction: (B) For the construction metaphor for learning of
concepts, both Piaget’s developmental psyology (Piaget, 1965/1995)
and its interpretation in radical constructivism (von Glasersfeld, 1995)
resist the natural solipsistic limitations of the theorizations as they seek
to embrace some sense of intersubjectivity.
Enculturation: (A) Despite the clear sociogenetic orientation of
sociocultural theory as a basis for theorizing learning of cultural
practices, Vygotsky’s (1978) vision ultimately is dialectical, thereby
necessitating a reliance on sociological theory to explicate the
enculturation metaphor.
All of these issues are explored, in depth, in the next section. eir
relevance here is to explain the necessity of moving beyond the simple and
straightforward strategy of adopting an intact theory of learning from
psyology for ea of the three learning metaphors. Instead, the genres
strategy is to identify the learning theories relevant to ea metaphor and,
drawing selectively from their results, to assemble a theorization of
learning particular to the learning metaphor at hand. A priority in this
constructive process is to establish clear boundaries between the learning
metaphors. In our current discourse, we typically talk of “understanding the

skill,” “inculcating thinking skills,” and “practicing the concept,” ea of
whi intermixes the learning metaphors. A system of genres works only if
the learning goals for the genres are distinct from one another, and the
selective activity of assembling theorizations works toward that goal.
e result of this selective process, presented in the next section, is a set
of theoretical framings of learning that are assembled from psyological
theory, but do not directly mat the authorized versions of extant theories.
eir purpose is to present for educators as clear and focused an analysis as
possible of ea learning metaphor, as informed by psyological theory.
Yet, these sketes of learning are not comfortably part of educational
psyology, whi as a bona ﬁde bran of psyology “is mu
determined by the larger ﬁeld of psyology” (Pressley & Roehrig, 2003, p.
340), and seeks ﬁrst and foremost to promote the authorized knowledge
products of that science. Rather, these sketes of learning come from the
education side of the relationship with psyology, a new assertion of
autonomy for educators to interpret learning for our own purposes.
Of course this interpretive eﬀort could beneﬁt from positive participation
of psyologists, but given the tribal aracter of science (McRae, 2011) this
is improbable. Rather, psyologists are likely to view these unauthorized
framings of learning as “weak” psyological theorizing, or perhaps, more
generously, simply as “wrong” psychological theorizing.
Educational theorists, too, are likely to be hesitant in embracing the
genres approa. As noted earlier, education, has hitherto gained mu of
its intellectual authority through co-participation with psychology in pursuit
of its goals (Lagemann, 2000). As well, as we have evolved into the current
era of integrative and dialectical theorizing, philosophical and theoretical
breadth and depth have become our markers of academic ﬁtness (see
Lester, 2010, p. 82, for a long list of theories invoked by mathematics
educators). e reduction of theory to a small set of psyological
approaes proposed here goes against this grain. Of course, it is precisely

this reduction and organization of theory that enables educational resear
to aain to what Nuthall (2004) called “pragmatic validity … resear that
actually answers the question of how teaing is related to learning in a
way that is comprehensible and practically useful for teaers” (p. 273).
Still, this new approa disrupts our hieraries of status and
accomplishment.
In the next section I present the framework of learning theorizations and
associated pedagogical methods. I then use the framework as a refractive
lens to analyze the learning theory foundations of a wide range of
educational 
practices 
and 
problems—from 
Skinner’s 
programmed
instruction to the Reading Wars and the Math Wars to critical pedagogies to
metacognitive interests to identity development to ethical issues—in ea
case bringing a sense of clarity to what otherwise are experienced as deeply
complex and sharply contested problematics. In this way, I press the case
that the genres approa, though disruptive to our internal and external
relations, captures a level of simplicity from whi our work as educators
can progress.

The Crossdisciplinary Framework
As noted earlier, the genres approa seeks to assemble theorizations of
learning as habituation, construction, and enculturation, ea clearly
demarcated from the others. In this respect, the three theorizations can be
said to constitute a framework of learning theories relevant to the practices
of teaing. I use the modiﬁer crossdisciplinary (as opposed to
interdisciplinary) to emphasize that the branes of psyology (behavioral,
developmental, sociocultural) are being coordinated (as opposed to
integrated) together, at the same time highlighting their independence from
one another as separate sub-disciplines of psyology. Table 4.1 provides an
overview of the crossdisciplinary framework, whi includes three
metaphors for learning, associated theoretical resources and theorists,
learning goals and processes, and teaching genres.
Table 4.1 Crossdisciplinary framework.
LEARNING
METAPHOR
Habituation
Construction
Enculturation
WHAT IS ACQUIRED
Skills
Concepts
Dispositions
THEORETICAL
RESOURCES
Behaviorism; Implicit
Learning Theory
Developmental
Psychology;
Radical
Constructivism
Sociocultural Theory;
Sociological Theory
KEY THEORISTS
Thorndike; Skinner;
Reber
Piaget; von
Glasersfeld
Vygotsky; Parsons
LEARNING PROCESS
Subcognitive
connections
among
input/output
elements
Discrepant
experience →
conceptual
restructuring
Osmosis and/or
emulation of forms
of engagement
PEDAGOGICAL
OBJECTIVE
Proficiency With
Routine Exercises
More Viable
Concept
Culturally Normative
Participation
STUDENT-
CENTERED
PEDAGOGY
Extrinsically
Motivated
Repetitive Practice
Hypothetical
Learning
Trajectory
Nurture Classroom
Microculture
TEACHER-

CENTERED
PEDAGOGY
Repetitive Practice
Lecture
Modeling/Coaching
(Acculturation)
NECESSARY
STUDENT
CHARACTERISTIC
Independently
Motivated
Learners
Metacognitively
Sophisticated
Learners
Culturally Identified
Learners
Student-Centered and Teacher-Centered Pedagogies
As can be seen in Table 4.1, ea learning metaphor yields two teaing
approaes, depending on whether or not the students possess a key
aracteristic that facilitates aievement of the given learning goal. e
idea is that a student endowed with this characteristic is positioned to utilize
instructional resources independently. In this case, a teaer-centered
pedagogy is appropriate in whi the teaer need only focus on providing
the learning resources. However, if students la the key aracteristic, a
student-centered pedagogy expands the teaer role to include facilitating
student uptake of instructional resources. e relevant student aracteristic
is indexed to the speciﬁc learning metaphor; there is a separate teaer-
centered and student-centered pedagogy for ea metaphor. is usage
diﬀers from standard usage in whi student centered (or learner centered)
a n d teaer centered are code for reform-oriented instruction and
traditional instruction within a polarized discursive frame (McCombs, 2003).

Learning as Habituation
In keeping with orndike’s connectionism, habituated learning is
understood as the association between sense impressions constituting a
stimulus and impulses to action constituting a response. Associations are
strengthened with use (Law of Exercise), particularly when the behavioral
response is closely followed by a satisfying result (Law of Eﬀect; orndike,
1911). With repetition, responses to stimuli can become established paerns.
is creates the possibility of shaping behavior through administration of
rewards and punishments, a maer extensively and productively
researched in behavioral psychology (e.g., Ormrod, 2000).
Having ﬁrst been discovered and studied in the context of (non-human)
animal resear, a critical aspect of learning from a behaviorist perspective
is its operation below the level of conscious thought or intention. As
Watson (1913) laid it out in his inaugural vision for the new approa, “I
believe we can write a psyology, deﬁne it as [the science of behavior],
and never go ba upon our deﬁnition: never use the term consciousness,
mental states, mind, content, introspectively veriﬁable, imagery, and the
like” (p. 166).
As the dominant paradigm of psyology through mu of the
early/middle part of the 20th century, behaviorism exerted a strong
inﬂuence over education, its antimentalist premise conﬂicting with
educational traditions rooted in notions of mind and consciousness that
trace ba to Plato (Egan, 1997); indeed, many commentators have
lamented the eﬀect that behaviorism had in reducing curriculum to
mindless behavior (e.g., von Glasersfeld, 1987; Soenfeld, 1992). In fact,
however, behaviorists rarely have been rigorous in their antimentalist
educational projects, most oen seeking to aribute acquisition of (low
level) information to behavioral learning: “Resear that has studied
teaing and learning in didactic environments has conﬁrmed the

assumptions of behaviorist theory regarding conditions that favor learning
o f components of information and routine skills” (Greeno, Collins, &
Resni, 1996, p. 28, italics added). Indeed, even Skinner (1958b, p. 974)
promoted learning of “facts.”
Certainly, rote memorization of a string of words (e.g., a telephone
number) can be learned as a behavior, and sometimes educators insist on
verbatim memorization of say, deﬁnitions, in science. “Facts,” in this sense,
are behaviors. But even in the heyday of behaviorism, behaviorist educators
rarely intended or enforced verbatim memorization. For example, in their
textbook on behavioral objectives, Sund and Picard (1972) oﬀered as an
exemplar: “e ild is able to identify the stages of mitosis and to describe
in his own words the anges whi occur in the cell at ea stage” (p. 2).
As Chomsky (1959) argued, behaviorists’ tolerance for stimuli and
responses that are not objectively deﬁned simply imports conceptual
content through the back door.
Implicit Learning eory: For purposes of the crossdisciplinary
framework, we need to adhere rigorously to learning of skills as a
subcognitive accomplishment. To gain a beer sense of habituated learning
at the subcognitive level we supplement behavioral theory with the implicit
learning domain of cognitive psyology. is area of resear
demonstrates the scope and power of the cognitive processor to establish
complex correlations among stimuli and responses through repetitive
engagement in a task domain (Kirsner, Speelman, Maybery, et al., 2013;
Reber, 1967). As Reber (1993) noted:
ere are remarkably close ties between the typical experiment on implicit learning and the
standard study of conditioning. e commonality lies in the detection of covariation between
events, whi, I will argue, is the deep principle in processes as seemingly disparate as classical
conditioning and implicit learning. Moreover, this conceptual parallel can be shown to hold, even
though on the surface the implicit learning experiment appears to be one of abstract induction
and the conditioning experiment one of simple association.
(p. 7)

In this tradition of resear, complex correlations among stimuli and
responses are established through repetitive exposure. In a typical study,
subjects are provided some pretext for aending to a stimulus set, without
reference to underlying structures that are the actual learning target. For
instance, subjects may be directed to memorize a list of leer strings
without being told the strings have been generated by a ﬁnite state
grammar according to ﬁxed rules (Reber, 1967). With suﬃcient exposure,
subjects show evidence of having acquired competencies related to the
grammar, for instance, they can identify grammatical strings they’ve not
encountered more frequently than nongrammatical strings consisting of the
same leers. Interestingly, subjects in su studies typically have no
conscious awareness that they have learned a paern, or even that there is
a paern to be learned—at least, when conscious knowledge is ascertained
through self-reports (Fu, Fu, & Dienes, 2008, p. 186).9
Skills Versus Concepts
is idea that habituated learning plays out unconsciously, as paerns of
co-occurrence and covariation become operationally linked in the cognitive
system, is emphasized in Reber (1993):
When a cognitive scientist constructs a stimulus environment, he or she may do so on the basis
of some set of principles that have the eﬀect of creating an environment that reﬂects particular
paerns of co-occurrence and covariation among its elements. But [for subjects] there are no
rules here, just paerns of co-occurrence and covariation. e cognitive scientist may think that
there are rules that aracterize these covariations, and in fact, she or he is certainly entertaining
a particular clutch of these—namely, the ones begun with.
(p. 116)
Complicating the distinction between skills and concepts is the fact that
conscious processes and explicit instruction can play a facilitative role in
habituated learning. What explicit instruction about underlying relations

does is to focus the perceptual apparatus on relevant aspects of the stimulus
display thereby facilitating the implicit process of feature correlation, and
consequently increasing the rate of learning. Yet this facilitative eﬀect is
independent of actually understanding the underlying relations:
e most plausible interpretation [of our study] here, and the one that has interesting
applications for theories of instruction, is that the function of providing explicit instructions at
the outset is to direct and focus the subjects’ aention. It alerts them to the kinds of structural
relations that aracterize the stimuli that follow and permits appropriate coding semes to be
implemented. Yet, these instructions do not tea the grammar in any full or explicit fashion;
instead they oriented the subjects toward the relevant invariances in the display that followed.
(Reber, 1993, p. 51)
e fact that instructors may use a set of rules to generate a stimulus set,
for example a set of math problems, and that students beneﬁt from explicit
presentation of those rules, has led to considerable confusion about the
nature of the learning that ensues from repetitive practice. Educators oen
conclude that students demonstrating intended skills have understood the
rules conceptually, and that this understanding is the basis for successful
performance (see Kirshner & Awtry, 2004, for an extended discussion).
Neither of these conclusions is warranted given the interpretation of
habituated learning presented here. Habituated learning is necessarily and
exclusively a subcognitive process.
Skills Versus Dispositions
To demarcate skills from dispositions, we return to the issue of objectivity
that Chomsky (1959) raised respecting Skinner’s (1958a) eﬀorts to extend
the analysis of behavior to include verbal behavior. e issue is primarily
methodological. Experimentally, or instructionally, one can set out to shape
behavior instrumentally only to the extent one can objectively aracterize
stimulus and response events for organizing regimes of practice and

feedba (Ormrod, 2000). For instance, one can shape the habituated
response of raising one’s hand in class and being recognized by the teaer
before speaking because the discrete elements that comprise this event can
be objectively aracterized. Similarly, one can interpret, say, solving of
mixture problems or factoring of polynomials as skills in that ea involves
discernible, codified problem types and routine solution steps.
However, su methods break down when stimuli and/or responses
cannot be objectively demarcated. For instance, nonroutine mathematics
problems resist rigid codiﬁcation, in that expertise in solving requires
ﬂexible use of heuristics (Polya, 1957). Use of su rules-of-thumb is best
conceived of as a cultural disposition rather than a skill, and eﬀective
instruction needs be framed in terms of cultural participation rather than
repetitive practice. As Stanic and Kilpatri (1988) noted, 1980s curricula
that “reduc[ed] the rule-of-thumb heuristics to procedural skills” (p. 17)
failed to nurture in students the art of problem solving. Similarly, one can
teach individual behaviors of classroom participation as habituated learning,
but classroom citizenship conceived beyond discrete rules of behavior
requires an enculturational frame (Millei, Griffiths, & Parkes, 2010).
Habituationist Pedagogies
Teaer Centered: Because habituation learning is based on gradual
establishment of feature correlation over repetitive exposure to a stimulus
set, the basic requirement of habituationist instruction is to organize
systematic repetitive practice across the range of stimulus conditions.
Additionally, as noted earlier, demonstration of procedures can serve to
activate certain features of the stimulus set that are thereby increasing the
rate of habituated learning. Finally, corrective feedba can be crucial for
learning, assuring that correct performances are being practiced and learned

(Thorndike & Gates, 1929).
Student Centered: e student’s motivation to persist with repetitive
practice is a crucial determinant of instructional method. If the student is
independently motivated, the teaer-centered instructor’s work is simply
to provide appropriately structured opportunities to practice. If not, the
student-centered habituationist instructor uses a variety of devices to
extrinsically motivate students. Behavioral psyology provides signiﬁcant
guidance for provision of rewards and perhaps punishments to sustain
engagement, including judicious use of praise and encouragement, game
formats and competition, beneﬁts and payment, and the like (Ormrod,
2000).

Learning as Construction
e metaphor of learning as construction is elaborated through Piaget’s
theorization of conceptual development. Piaget is best known for his
macrogenetic studies of how individuals pass through stages of intellectual
development. However, it is his microgenetic studies of development in
particular conceptual domains (e.g., space, time, number, etc.) that became
drivers of pedagogy and research for mathematics and science educators.10
What we pi up on in Piaget’s system of ideas is his basic approa to
genetic epistemology, his viewpoint on the genesis and evolution of our
ability to gain knowledge of the world through experience. Rather than an
empiricist view in whi the structure of the world is directly perceived,
Piaget understands knowledge as constructed through our actions on the
world:
In order to know objects, the subject must act upon them, and therefore transform them: he must
displace, connect, combine, take apart, and reassemble them. From the most elementary
sensorimotor actions (su as pulling and pushing) to the most sophisticated intellectual
operations, whi are interiorized actions, carried out mentally (e.g., joining together, puing in
order, puing into one-to-one correspondence), knowledge is constantly linked with actions or
operations.
(Piaget, 1970/1983, p. 104, quoted in Paz & Leron, 2009, p. 20)
For Piaget, conceptual structures have their basis in the experienced
regularities of our actions as they form “action semas, … whatever there
is in common between various repetitions or superpositions of the same
action” (Piaget, 1971, p. 7). Su semas form the base of hierarically
organized structures that enable knowledge construction up and down the
abstraction ladder:
If logic and mathematics are so-called “abstract” sciences, the psyologist must ask, Abstracted
from what? … e origin of these logicomathematical structures should be sought in the
activities of the subject, that is, in the most general forms of coordination of his actions, and,
ﬁnally, in his organic structures themselves [basic infant action reﬂexes like suing and

grasping].
(Piaget, 1970/1983, p. 106)
From his initial training as a zoologist, Piaget approaed conceptual
development as adaptation, whi he understood as complementary
processes of assimilating elements of the environment to our existing
conceptual structures, and accommodating our cognitive structures to better
ﬁt with elements of the environment (Piaget, 1977a). e process is
dynamically driven by disequilibrium with the environment, whi Piaget
theorized in terms of cognitive conﬂicts, contradictions, or discrepancies
within cognitive structures, or between expectations and actual events
(Sigel, 1979). It is the aempt to aieve a higher equilibrium, or
equilibration, that produces learning: “what Piaget calls ‘equilibration’ is a
form of learning … that is motivated by conﬂict and reinforced by conﬂict
reduction” (Berlyne, 1970, p. 968, quoted in Cantor, 1983, p. 44).
Crucially, conﬂicts must be experienced (in some sense, at some level) in
order for them to become productive of conceptual restructuring (Inhelder,
Sinclair, & Bovet, 1974). Piaget developed a highly reﬁned set of constructs
to understand how experience is recorded in conscious and nonconscious
ways within the cognitive system (von Glasersfeld, 1991). Non-conscious
empirical abstraction involves the isolating of one’s experience of sensory
properties of an object or situation that can be used to recognize it at a later
time. However, for learning to happen—for semas to be coordinated
together into higher level constructs—one needs to reproduce the
experience independently of its physical instantiation. is reflective
abstraction involves a “limited form of awareness” (von Glasersfeld, 1991).
is is still diﬀerent from reﬂected abstraction, a “process of retroactive
thematization” (Piaget, 1977b) that we normally associate with conscious
reﬂection. From this we glean that cognitive conﬂict, as intended by Piaget,
is not necessarily what we associate with conscious struggle with an idea or

conundrum.
Radical Constructivism: As noted earlier, Piaget’s motivating interest
was in elaborating the macrogenesis of stages of intellectual development,
and his microgenetic studies of conceptual development in particular
domains subserved that objective. In this respect, the redirecting of Piaget’s
genetic epistemology toward microgenesis dramatically extended the scope
of the framework from just the core structures of development to include
conceptual development in any and all domains (Steﬀe & Kieren, 1994).
Radical 
constructivism 
is 
the 
epistemological 
position 
(or
postepistemological position, Noddings, 1990) that takes that broadened
mandate of genetic epistemology to heart.
at all concept development is rooted in structures derived from our
actions upon the world implies the impossibility of any direct knowledge of
the world. For intelligence that serves the organism’s adaptation to the
world, the question is never “Do my constructed understandings mat
what is really out there?” but rather, “Do they ﬁt the world in su a way
as to enhance my viability?” Constructions that produce dissonance with
the world cause perturbations to the cognitive system that may lead to
conceptual restructuring and more viable knowledge structures (von
Glasersfeld, 1987, 1995).
e idea that all knowledge, including knowledge of other people, is
constructed by the individual has led to vociferous criticism of radical
constructivism as solipsistic, and consequently as unable to account for
intersubjective knowledge (e.g., Gergen, 2002; Howe & Berv, 2000; Lewin,
1995; McCarty & Schwandt, 2000; Phillips, 1995). Piaget, too, faced criticisms
that his theory failed to account for the social aspects of human knowledge
(e.g., Vygotsky, 1934/1986, pp. 154–155).
Perhaps it was in anticipation of and/or response to su criticisms that
both Piaget and von Glasersfeld argued that their theories do account for
intersubjective knowledge: “Piaget placed great emphasis on the idea of

decentering, or attempting to adopt a viewpoint that differs from your own.
He used the term intersubjective operations to describe thoughts that are
directed at another” (ompson, 2013, pp. 62–63). Likewise, von Glasersfeld
(1995), in fending oﬀ arges of solipsism, talked of an “intersubjective
level” that “reaes beyond the ﬁeld of our individual experience into that
of others” (p. 120).
e complication of one’s basic ontology, in an eﬀort to account for
intersubjective knowledge, may be necessary for psyological or
philosophical theories framed in competitive relation with other theories.
However, in this crossdisciplinary project, whi seeks aer local
coherence, the solipsistic limitation of radical constructivism is a crucial
asset in framing a constructivist pedagogy that highlights the teaer’s
isolation from the student—the tentative, conjectural nature of her or his
model of students’ conceptual structures, and the impossibility of
transferring one’s own ideas to them.
Student-Centered Constructivist Pedagogy11
Once we learn to think within the severe epistemological and theoretical
constraints imposed by Piagetian psyology and radical constructivism, the
basic approa of student-centered constructivist pedagogy is fairly
straightforward to understand (even if dauntingly difficult to enact).
Shorn of intersubjective possibility, the student is seen to learn only from
goal-directed encounters with the world, particularly those encounters in
whi they come to experience dissonances within their conceptual
structures. Su a vision of learning would seem to leave lile, if any, role
for a teaer. Indeed, “for Piaget, the key ingredient of construction
episodes was the active self-discovery of discrepancies between current
concepts and actual outcomes. He argued that this is absolutely essential for

ildren to stumble across su discrepancies on their own if cognitive
development is to occur” (Brainerd, 2003, p. 271).
Nevertheless, constructivist researers, working within his basic
framework, have adapted Piaget’s clinical interview methods to occasion
transitions in ildren’s conceptual structures (i.e., learning) (Cobb & Steﬀe,
1983; Steﬀe & ompson, 2000). is constructivist teaing experiment
methodology provides grounding for student-centered constructivist
methods in this crossdisciplinary framework.
e key point is that the teaer-researer acts only indirectly to
produce learning by shaping a task environment in whi the student
encounters experiences that may be productive of conceptual restructuring.
Learning ensues from the student’s actions and reﬂective dynamics within
the task environment: “Learning is not spontaneous in the sense that the
provocations that occasion it might be intentional on the part of the
teaer-researer. In the ild’s frame of reference, though, the processes
involved in learning are essentially outside of his or her awareness” (Steﬀe
& Thompson, 2000, p. 290). This is the solipsistic principle in action.
As accounted by Steﬀe and ompson (2000), the ﬁrst requirement for
shaping su a task environment is for the teaer to come to have a model
of the student’s current conceptual structures, including the limitations of
those structures relative to a mature understanding of the content to be
taught (as construed by the teaer). Whereas this model has on occasion
been formulated using Piaget’s own theoretical constructs (e.g., Steﬀe, 1994;
ompson, 1994), mu of the detail of Piaget’s theory has proven “too
vague to provide satisfying explanations” (diSessa, 2006, p. 535; see also
Goodson-Espy, 1998). Historically, a variety of framings have served as
guides for this modeling including cognitive science (e.g., Sloboda &
Rogers, 1987); “conceptual metaphor” (Lakoﬀ & Núñez, 2000); “embodied
objects” (Gray & Tall, 2001); and in science education, ﬁxed misconceptions
(based on Kuhn), and malleable preconceptions (diSessa, 2006).

Even though Piaget’s theoretical apparatus is rarely used, his basic
framework of ideas has been deeply informative as to (A) the nature of a
useful model, (B) the aracteristics of eﬀective task environments, and (C)
the teacher’s supporting role in the constructive process.
(A) In concert with Piaget’s emphasis on the subject’s actions as the
foundation of conceptual semas, to the extent possible a model should
trace the student’s intuitions and preconceptions to physical and perceptual
operations. As Lakoﬀ and Núñez (2000) put it, “for the most part, human
beings conceptualize abstract concepts in concrete terms, using ideas and
modes of reasoning grounded in the sensory-motor system” (p. 5).
Probative models of students’ understanding should trace ba to these
perceptual and sensory-motor underpinnings.
(B) In concordance with this ﬁrst principle, task environments designed
to produce conceptual learning should establish activity systems that evoke
this perceptual and sensory-motor level of grounding. For, as noted earlier,
it is su activity systems that can lead to “reﬂective abstraction” through
whi semas are realigned. is rules out “‘conﬂict’ models of
instruction” (diSessa, 2006) that merely provide empirical evidence to
contradict the student’s explanations or predictions (Confrey, 1990; Simon
& Tzur, 2004). Su empirical approaes rely instead on conscious
“reﬂected abstraction,” whi for Piaget is derivative (von Glasersfeld,
1995). Rather, what is needed are full-blooded activity systems that
penetrate to the perceptual and sensory-motor level of conceptual structure,
as it is this engagement that provides the positive resources the student
draws upon in the reconstructive process. Empirical contradiction is not
sufficient.
(C) Finally, for a teaer to eﬀectively support the constructive process
she/he must be equipped with more than a model of the initial state of the
student’s understanding, the end goal of a mature understanding, and
perhaps intermediate states the student should pass through en route. e

teaer also should be able to anticipate how the student’s understanding
will be transformed by the tasks that are developed to help move the
student forward. is total paage sometimes is referred to as a
Hypothetical Learning Trajectory that “consists of the goal for the students’
learning, the mathematical task that will be used to promote student
learning, and hypotheses about the processes of student learning” (Simon &
Tzur, 2004, p. 91). is interest in the process of conceptual ange is
motivating revision in the conception of the constructivist teaing
experiment:
In some teaing experiments (e.g., Steﬀe, 2003), the aim of the retrospective analysis is the
aracterization of the understandings of the student at diﬀerent points in the learning
process…. In our adaptation of the teaing experiment … the aim of our analyses is to
aracterize the ﬂow of the students’ (anging) thinking, as opposed to only aracterizing the
resulting understandings.
(Simon, Saldanha, McClintock, et al., 2010, pp. 91–92)
Pulling all of this together, the teaer/researer in a constructivist
teaing experiment needs a signiﬁcant knowledge base to develop a
working model of the student’s conception of the content domain, devise a
task environment for the student to restructure that understanding, and
perceive, through the student’s eyes, how the task domain might facilitate
conceptual development.
As well, there are interactive competencies that need to play out as the
teaer/researer facilitates student engagement with the task: ﬁrst,
monitoring uptake of the task, making minor adjustments and redirection
to try to ensure the student encounters the task as intended; second,
assessing whether engagement with the task is progressing along the lines
envisioned (one always needs to be ready to rethink and revise both the
model of the student’s understanding, and the eﬃcacy of the task
environment); third (but very tentatively, without disrupting engagement),
helping to juxtapose discrepant elements in the student’s workspace so as to

enhance the transformative potential of the task; and fourth, encouraging
the student through the frustrations that arise when conceptual obstacles
are encountered (Steﬀe, 1991). Finally, excluded from this list is the
requirement that the teaer provide a neat and tidy summation of the
completed activity. In many cases, the experience should be left raw, so that
it can continue to work its magic on the restructuring of semas.
“Retroactive thematization” (Piaget, 1977b, Vol. 1, p. 6) should be allowed
to happen spontaneously, or prompted only aer a delay; premature
closure can curtail the mulling-over process that extends reﬂective
abstraction.
Classroom Implementation
e pedagogical model just described is rooted in a clinical resear
methodology in whi a teaer-researer aends minutely to the
conceptual structures of one or two students engaging with tasks devised
speciﬁcally for them (Steﬀe & ompson, 2000). Given an ontology that
understands ea person’s conceptual structures as the unique product of
his/her individual experience, how could this pedagogy possibly have
application in a classroom context? e solution to the conundrum is that
although constructivism theorizes learning as rooted in individual
construction, there turns out to oen be great commonality in adaptive
structures across individuals; Piaget aributed this to constraints on
construction imposed by biological and physical reality (Brainerd, 2003;
Glick, 1983).12
In practice, though, the classroom is a complicated place to aend to
student conceptual construction. Having students work on tasks at their
own desks may enable individual students to engage with the task, but it
limits the possibilities for verbal expression and teaer mediation. Small-

group formats provide opportunity for students to express their
understandings, but the group’s response to a student’s ideas generally will
not be tailored toward productive reﬂection by that student. Whole-class
instruction enables a teaer to mediate the conversation, but limits the
degree of student expression.
To further complicate maers, the conceptual landscape is comprised not
of discrete conceptual structures, but of vertically and horizontally
interconnected structures (Hiebert & Carpenter, 1992), including vertical
linkages created through reiﬁcation of processes at one level into
conceptual objects at another level (Goodson-Espy, 1998; Sfard &
Linevski, 1994). us, in addition to designing lessons that target speciﬁc
concepts, the student-centered constructivist teaer is constantly alert to
opportunities that arise in teaing to support emergence of understanding
through connections across contents; one’s conceptual agenda oen is
established interactively. e teaer competencies outlined with respect to
the constructivist teaing experiment are crucial; however, their
deployment often is highly adaptive to the circumstances at hand.
Despite these limitations and complexities, it seems that student-centered
constructivist classroom teaing is fairly robust. Given the wide variety of
possible implementation modes, many researers interested in classroom
applications of a psyological constructivist ontology have avoided
specifying pedagogical methods at all. For example, in their work with
teaers, Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) researers simply educated
teaers with respect to ildren’s mathematical constructions and then
observed the eﬀects on pedagogy, documenting impressive learning gains
for these teaers’ students (Carpenter, Fennema, Peterson, & Carey, 1988;
Moscardini, 2014). Similarly, in science education, “the very general
constructivist heuristic of paying aention to naïve ideas seems powerful….
Interventions that merely tea teaers about naïve ideas have been
surprisingly successful” (diSessa, 2006, p. 276).

Teacher-Centered Constructivist Pedagogy
e pedagogy of student-centered construction just described is highly
demanding, requiring intensive problem solving, a signiﬁcant knowledge
base, and real-time responsiveness on the part of the teaer to orestrate
cognitive dissonances and help make them salient for the learner. This high-
intensity eﬀort is needed because of the ancy aracter of conceptual
construction:
Although the eﬀectiveness of cognitive conﬂict in leading to subjects’ conceptual ange is
corroborated both in the literature on science education and reading education … its eﬀect is not
automatic. e eﬀectiveness of cognitive conﬂict depends on the way comprehension is
monitored. It depends, ﬁrst, on the individual noticing the inconsistency and, second, on the
way it is resolved.
(Otero, 1998, p. 149)
Otero’s (1998) observation points to the facilitative eﬀect that
metacognitive sophistication can bestow upon the learner, as being
sensitive to subtle incongruities is the key to stimulating the process of
reﬂective abstraction that can lead to conceptual learning (Simon, Tzur,
Heinz, & Kinzel, 2004). In this case, a mu simpler teaer-centered
constructivist pedagogy can be employed, utilizing the most obvious
tenique for teaing concepts: lecture, in the form of direct explanation of
the mature form of a concept. (Note, this is a very particular version of
lecture. Lecture also can include interactive elements, can be delivered with
sensitivity to students’ likely preconceptions, and can provide other
supports for student understanding that push mu more toward student-
centered constructivist instruction, Brown, Manogue, & Sadownik, 2001.)
For the metacognitively sophisticated student, lecture can succeed
because the student, sensitive to tensions between elements of the teaer’s
explanation and their own intuitions, orestrates their own cognitive
conﬂicts by generating hypothetical situations that create dissonances with

their current conceptual structures. In this case, the teaer’s role is limited
to organizing and delivering the mature form of the concept. She/he need
not have a model of the student’s understanding, nor design and mediate
tasks relative to that model. Indeed, the teaer need not even adopt a
constructivist perspective on learning and teaching, but may happily believe
him or herself to be transmitting their understanding directly to the student.
It should be noted that the level of metacognitive capability needed is
indexed to the conceptual complexity of the content being taught. Lecture
is fully appropriate as a pedagogical method whenever the student’s
metacognitive sophistication is suﬃcient to accommodate the gap between
current and mature forms of the concept. Students who are relatively
sophisticated metacognitively may be unable to productively integrate
lecture material concerning very diﬃcult concepts. And even students who
are relatively unsophisticated metacognitively can beneﬁt from lecture for
simple conceptual content.

Learning as Enculturation
I take enculturation to be the process of acquiring dispositions through
enmeshment in a cultural community. I interpret dispositions broadly as
culturally particular ways of engaging with people, problems, artifacts, or
oneself. Alternatively, one might say that enculturation is the acquisition of
cultural practices, except that as analytic objects, practices are located in the
culture, and distributed across actors (Hutins, 1995; Nardi, 1996), whereas
dispositions are properties of an individual. For the purposes of
crossdisciplinary theorizing, it seems advantageous to identify learning as
aained at the level of the individual (even if the process of learning is
social).
e likelihood of acquiring a disposition may be inﬂuenced by genetic
predispositions. For instance, one might say of someone they have a
predisposition toward logical thinking, or they’re naturally inclined to be
shy. However, predispositions to engage only ﬁnd expression as
dispositions within a cultural context. is interpretation is consistent with
the personality theory of German psyologist William Stern, who believed
that “all aracteristics of personality are properly regarded not as ﬁxed
determinants, whether partial or complete, of behavior or states of
psyological being … but rather as potentialities…. It is only through
extended interaction with the world that the range of such potentialities can
gradually become constricted, so that what is initially but a mild tendency
in one direction allowing for many other possibilities can become a relative
inclination”(Lamiell, 2013, pp. 108–109).
is sense of disposition diﬀers from the more typical cognitive science
rendering in whi cognitive practices (e.g., critical thinking, metacognition,
general problem solving strategies) are naturalized as capabilities of the
cognitive apparatus, rather than understood as manifestations of culture at
the level of the individual (Scribner & Cole, 1977). Dispositions, thus, are

reduced to inclinations or tendencies to employ those capabilities. For
instance, Perkins and Rithart (2004) present a framework for good
thinking based on “viewing dispositions as initiators and motivators of
abilities rather than [thinking] abilities themselves” (p. 179).
Internalization of culture is vigorously theorized in the work of Soviet-
era psyologist Lev Vygotsky, his many students and collaborators, and in
the sociocultural and activity theory sools that ensued. e sociogenetic
orientation of Vygotsky’s work is clearly expressed in his Genetic Law:
“Any function in the ild’s cultural development appears on stage twice,
on two planes. First it appears on the social plane, then on the
psyological, ﬁrst among people as an interpsyical category and then
within the child as an intrapsychical category” (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 57).
However, the sociogenetic orientation of Vygotsky’s work is complicated
by his desire to provide a comprehensive theory of human development
and learning that accounts for both shaping and being shaped by culture.
us he rejected “a static notion of social determination” (Penuel &
Wertsch, 1995, p. 84). As Cole (1996) put it, for Vygotsky,
e dual process of shaping and being shaped through culture implies that humans inhabit
“intentional” (constituted) worlds within whi the traditional diotomies of subject and
object, person and environment, and so on cannot be analytically separated and temporally
ordered into independent and dependent variables.
(p. 103)
What is more, Vygotsky (1978) understood development (i.e.,
internalization of higher mental cultural practices) and learning (skills and
concepts) as mutually interdependent: “Our hypothesis establishes the unity
but not the identity of learning processes and internal developmental
processes. It presupposes that the one is converted into the other” (pp. 90–
91).

Sociological Theory
Although Vygotsky comes closest in psyology to a pure sociogenetic
position, his dialectical stance and the integrative complexity of his theories
limit the utility of this body of theory as a framework for the enculturation
metaphor for learning (though I do draw on speciﬁc aspects of sociocultural
psyology, and also ﬁnd great resonance with Vygotsky’s own
pedagogical insights). Indeed, Western social science has su a strong
individualist slant that even in sociology, “most sociologists, both
individualists and collectivists, … [accept the] position … known as
ontological individualism: the ontological position that only individuals
exist” (Sawyer, 2002a, p. 555). Still, within sociology, ideas of irreducible
emergence stemming from the work of Emile Durkheim are consistent
with a social causation position I take to be the essence of the enculturation
metaphor: “Durkheim’s ([1895] 1964) emergentist account of the autonomy
of sociology was foundationally based on emergent (or ‘sui generis’) social
properties having causal force on the individual” (Sawyer, 2002a, p. 558; see
Sawyer, 2002b, for a fuller discussion of Durkheim’s legacy).
e social psyology of personal space, or proxemics (Hall, 1966; Li,
2001), provides a paradigm example of social causation. Proxemics is the
tendency for members of a national culture to draw speciﬁc perimeters
around their physical bodies for various social purposes. For example,
natives of France tend to prefer closer physical proximity for conversation
than do Americans (Remland, Jones, & Brinkman, 1991). Clearly, proxemic
dispositions are acquired by natives of a culture without volition or
conscious awareness, through enmeshment in the cultural milieu.
Indeed, according to sociologist Talco Parsons (1951), for social norms
to be “normative” they have to be outside the realm of conscious reﬂection,
or they become merely additional instrumental resources for action:
ere is a range of possible modes of orientation in the motivational

sense to a value standard. Perhaps the most important distinction is
between that aitude of expediency at one pole, where conformity or non-
conformity is a function of the instrumental interests of the actor, and at the
other pole the ‘introjection’ or internalization of the standard so that to act
in conformity with it becomes a need disposition in the actor’s own
personality structure, relatively independently of any instrumentally
signiﬁcant consequences of conformity. e laer is to be regarded as the
basic type of integration of motivation with a normative paern-structure
of values. (p. 37)I take unconscious introjection in Parsons’ sense as the
essential meanism of enculturation. However, this pure form of
enculturation is possible only in a unitary culture in whi a single
dispositional variation is salient for the subject. One also can come to be
enculturated into a subculture with practices that are distinctive among a
range of alternative subcultures (e.g., being a jo, being a scientist, being a
gang member). In su instances, inductees may actively acculturate
themselves to a subculture by emulating its distinctive cultural practices.
Although acculturation is the more salient process, and historically was
identiﬁed mu earlier (Powell, 1883), it needs to be understood as
supplementary to the basic unconscious processes of enculturation going on
around it all the time. A culture is comprised of innumerable cultural
practices, of whi only a limited number can be addressed through
conscious strategies of emulation (Kirshner & Meng, 2011).
Student-centered Enculturation Pedagogy
e enculturation/acculturation distinction deﬁnes the two pedagogical
genres associated with the enculturation metaphor, a student-centered
enculturation pedagogy appropriate for all students, and a teaer-centered
acculturation pedagogy appropriate for students who are identified with the

reference culture and seek to become part of it. In the enculturation
pedagogy, the teaer begins by identifying a reference culture and target
disposition(s) within that culture. e instructional focus is on the classroom
microculture, whi the enculturationist teaer works to shape so that it
comes to more closely resemble the reference culture with respect to the
target dispositions. Students, thus, come to acquire approximations of the
target dispositions through their enmeshment in the surrogate culture of the
classroom through the same unconscious processes by whi proxemic
dispositions are acquired in a national culture. Vygotsky (1926/1997) clearly
articulated the foundations of enculturation pedagogy:
From the psyological point of view, the teaer is the director of the social environment in the
classroom, the governor and guide of the interaction between the educational process and the
student…. ough the teaer is powerless to produce immediate eﬀects in the student, he is all-
powerful when it comes to producing direct eﬀects in him through the social environment. e
social environment is the true lever of the educational process, and the teaer’s overall role
reduces to adjusting this lever…. us, it is that the teaer educates the student by varying the
environment.
(p. 49)
Yael and Cobb (1996) provide valuable perspectives on how su a
pedagogy is structured. In their discussion of sociomathematical norms as
targeted dispositions of mathematical culture (e.g., the appreciation of
mathematically elegant solutions) that come to be “interactively constituted
by ea classroom community” (p. 475), they note what amounts to a
“ien and egg” problem: students can acquire the target dispositions
only to the extent these practices already are constituted within the
classroom microculture. Yael and Cobb (1996) borrow the construct of
“reﬂexivity” from ethnomethodology (Leiter, 1980; Mehan & Wood, 1975)
to elucidate the problem:
With regard to sociomathematical norms, what becomes mathematically normative in a
classroom is constrained by the current goals, beliefs, suppositions, and assumptions of the
classroom participants. At the same time these goals and largely implicit understandings are

themselves inﬂuenced by what is legitimized as acceptable mathematical activity. It is in this
sense that we say sociomathematical norms and goals and beliefs about mathematical activity
and learning are reflexively related.
(p. 460)
e solution to this problem constitutes the critical expertise of the
enculturationist teaer. As Yael and Cobb (1996) illustrate, through
subtleties of aention and encouragement the teaer, over time, exerts
considerable inﬂuence on the modes of engagement manifest within the
classroom 
microculture 
(Vygotsky, 
1926/1997). 
For 
signiﬁcant
enculturational goals, this must be a progressive agenda in whi modes of
engagement initially encouraged by the teaer rea a level of general
currency in the classroom microculture, eventually to be replaced by yet
more sophisticated forms of engagement.
Supposing, for instance, one wishes to tea the aracteristic mode of
argumentation known as mathematical proof (Pedamonte, 2007; Stylianides
& Stylianides, 2009) to young students who typically support their
arguments with reference to the authority of textbook and teaer—Harel
and Sowder (2007) refer to these as “external conviction proof semes” (p.
809). By betraying signs of interest whenever internal conviction arguments
are oﬀered (regardless how unsophisticated), the teaer may gradually
shi the norms of classroom argumentation toward “empirical proof
semes,” even though what ultimately is sought are “deductive proof
semes” (p. 809). As in this case, learning of signiﬁcant cultural practices
may require a coordinated effort over months and years.
In keeping with the aracterization of enculturation, the critical
aracteristic of enculturation pedagogy is that the teaer’s agenda for
participation remain implicit. is does not mean the enculturationist
teaer is limited to the (relatively passive) tools of encouragement. As a
member of the classroom community, the teaer can introduce modes of
engagement through her or his own participation. However, in either case

the teaer’s agenda for participation must remain implicit (Parsons, 1951).
As soon as it becomes explicit, we enter into a politics of cultural identity
that demarcates a shift to acculturation pedagogy.
Teacher-Centered Enculturation Pedagogy
(Acculturation Pedagogy)
In keeping with the aracterization of acculturation, the critical student
aracteristic that authorizes acculturation pedagogy is self-identiﬁcation
with the reference culture. In this case, the teaer’s primary pedagogical
role is to model the aracteristic practices of the culture. is instructional
process provides students who are identiﬁed with the reference culture and
seek to become part of it an opportunity to appropriate these cultural
resources and incorporate them into their evolving repertoire of
participatory practices. e instructional process can be informally
structured interactively as cultural participation of the teaer with the
student (for example, when a mathematician leading investigations with a
math club exhibits modes of thinking, values, and problem solving practices
that are particular to mathematics culture). In this case, the agenda for
appropriation of cultural practices can remain tacit. Alternatively, the
teaer can coa the inductee with respect to performance of target
cultural practices, in whi case the curriculum of cultural practices
becomes explicit.
e prerequisite for the acculturationist teaer is that she/he be
suﬃciently well embedded within the reference culture to model cultural
practices eﬀectively—in Ma’s (1999) words, “only teaers who are
acculturated to mathematics can foster their students’ ability to conduct
mathematical inquiry” (p. 106). Beyond that, she/he must signify for the
student as a bona ﬁde member of the reference culture, so that cultural

practices modeled by the teaer are experienced as worthy of emulation.
Note, this is a diﬀerent requirement than that speciﬁed for the
enculturationist teaer whose knowledge of the aracteristic practices of
the culture must be explicit, and must also include developmental
perspectives on those practices.
In sool seings, acculturationist pedagogy has obvious application to
aer-sool clubs or to magnet programs into whi students have self-
selected based on their identity aspirations; however, it may be of limited
utility in general K-12 education—and even in mu undergraduate level
university education! A few years ago, I had the opportunity to cotea a
senior-level undergraduate mathematics course with two mathematics
colleagues. e purpose of the course was to help students understand,
appreciate, and participate more fully in mathematical culture. My
colleagues, both senior members of a highly ranked mathematics
department, had considerable experience in successfully mentoring doctoral
students. e approa they took in our course involved assigning the
students problems, discussing the problems with them, and in the process
modeling their own unprescripted solution approaes, following
fascinating tangents arising from the original problem, communicating their
broad perspectives on mathematics, and sharing their excitement and
passion for the ﬁeld. I presume these are methods they would typically
employ, with good eﬀect, with doctoral students—students already self-
identiﬁed as mathematicians. However, the senior undergraduate
mathematics majors in the course—many in a teaer education program—
generally were not self-identiﬁed as mathematicians, and hence were
unable to appreciate or make use of the ri cultural resources that these
instructors offered.
Identity Politics

As discussed earlier, acculturation pedagogy can be practiced through an
informal relationship of students with a teaer-as-cultural-representative,
or it can be a formal mentorship in whi the curriculum of cultural
practices to be mastered is explicit. In the laer case, it is possible to
configure instruction so that adoption of cultural practices is mandatory.
In the case of an explicit and mandatory acculturationist curriculum,
there is a risk if one applies the pedagogy to students who are not self-
identiﬁed with the reference culture that the cultural demands of the
instruction may produce “intrapersonal conﬂict” for the student (Brown,
2004, p. 810; see also, Bishop, 2012; Clark, Badertser, & Napp, 2013;
Gutiérrez, 2002; Kineloe & Steinberg, 2007; Nasir & Saxe, 2003; Rubin,
2007; Vågan, 2011). As Aikenhead and Jegede (1999) noted with respect to
science education,
When the culture of science is generally at odds with a student’s life-world, science instruction
will tend to disrupt the student’s worldview by trying to force that student to abandon or
marginalize his or her life-world concepts and reconstruct in their place new (scientiﬁc) ways of
conceptualizing. is process is assimilation. Assimilation can alienate students from their
indigenous life-world culture, thereby causing various social disruptions (Baker & Taylor, 1995;
Maddock, 1981); or alternatively, attempts at assimilation can alienate students from science.
(p. 274)
Ethical Principle: I don’t want to minimize the complexity of ethical
questions that ﬂow from the use of acculturationist pedagogy with students
who are not already identiﬁed with the reference culture—for example, to
suggest science should not be a universally required sool subject. ese
questions have a long and important history (Apple & Au, 2014) that is
beyond the scope of this apter. However, the enculturation/acculturation
distinction is newly introduced in the crossdisciplinary framework
(Kirshner, 2004; Kirshner & Meng, 2011), giving us an opportunity to
propose an important principle related to the two enculturation pedagogies:
Ethical concerns regarding intrapersonal cultural conﬂict that may arise for

acculturationist pedagogy do not arise for enculturationist pedagogy.
e crux of my argument is that in a pluralistic society, cultures are
always in transition under the inﬂuence of contact with other cultures.
Society is teeming with cultural inﬂuences that individuals are exposed to
in the course of normal social intercourse. In the process, identity structures
develop and morph. Yet, as Kim (1988) noted, there are inbuilt “stress-
adaptation-growth dynamics of cross-cultural experiences, whi bring
about cultural strangers’ gradual transformation toward increased
functional ﬁtness in the host milieu” (p. 200), dynamics that are adaptive to
new cultural inﬂuences, yet also responsive to the subject’s experienced
need for cultural continuity. us students involved in enculturation
pedagogy in which the curriculum of target dispositions is tacit, adapt to the
evolving culture of the classroom—or not!—at their own pace, and in their
own way.

Crossdisciplinary Analysis of Pedagogical Practice
The Method of Crossdisciplinary Analysis
e metaphors for learning as theorized in the preceding section are taken
to reﬂect our culture’s basic understandings of learning (Fleter, 1995), and
thus to drive our varied pedagogical enterprises across the broad spectrum
of education. In this respect, the crossdisciplinary framework is intended not
so mu to provide a new constellation of pedagogical practices, as to
organize and reﬁne the varied streams of ideation that currently are tangled
together within our integrative discourse (Kirshner, 2002).
To support this claim, I introduce a method of crossdisciplinary analysis
of 
pedagogy. 
is 
method 
involves 
examining 
the 
details 
of
implementation to assess whether skills are promoted, whether concepts
are promoted, and whether dispositions are promoted. If it seems the
answer to any of these is yes, it is incumbent upon the analyst to identify
the particular skills, concepts, or dispositions being addressed, to examine
the pedagogy to determine whether a student-centered or teaer-centered
approa is being used, and to evaluate the eﬃcacy of the pedagogy
according to the pedagogical principles laid out in the preceding section. In
case multiple pedagogical methods are invoked in the instructional
approa, the analyst determines whi learning goal predominates and
evaluates whether the coordination of pedagogical methods is organized in
a coherent and consistent fashion.
In this section, I apply this method to a broad array of key pedagogical
practices with the goal of demonstrating that crossdisciplinarity spans the
familiar terrain of pedagogical interests—many of whi are framed
through the integrative and holistic perspectives on learning that currently
dominate educational thought. e method of crossdisciplinary analysis
serves as a refractive lens, pulling apart the component strands of ideation,

oen revealing weaknesses and inconsistencies that have been obscured in
the prior viewpoint. As well, our current integrative frameworks lead to a
kind of homogeneity of thought. e spectrum of reform pedagogies, for
instance, involve a balance in whi “knowledge is personally constructed
and socially mediated” (Windsitl, 2002, p. 137), the variation residing in
the degree of emphasis given to ea. e crossdisciplinary approa has a
diﬀerent ethos in whi, yes, diverse agendas for learning can be
coordinated together—but there is no holistic or dialectical imperative to do
so. us the palee of pedagogical possibility can include wild singletons
oriented by a single learning metaphor that we’ve not previously been able
to recognize or appreciate; the ﬁnal subsection of this section, analyzes one
such pedagogical method.
Caveat emptor: Although the individual analyses presented here may be
compelling for readers, the broader intention for this section is to support
the proposal that a small set of theoretical tools spans (and expands) the
totality of our pedagogical interests in promoting student learning. Initially,
the analyses presented here may be experienced as independent critiques of
educational practices. But over time, and with the experience of performing
one’s own analyses (these examples are merely illustrative) the critiques
coalesce as part of a coherent educational viewpoint. e refractive lens of
crossdisciplinarity establishes itself, reﬂexively, as one’s only window to the
problems and possibilities of pedagogy.
B. F. Skinner’s Programmed Instruction
To illustrate the method of crossdisciplinary analysis, I begin with an
instructional method of historical importance. Skinner (1958b) introduced
individually paced programmed instruction as an application of behavioral
principles, one that he regarded as central to his legacy to education

(Morris, 2003). In this instructional format, students are presented with a
succession of text fragments (one or two sentences) ea with a blank in
place of a key word. e students’ role is to read the text and supply the
missing datum. e frames are sequenced in su a way as to promote
incremental progress from simple initial prompts to complex terminal
performance. In this way it is anticipated students easily can maintain the
95% success criterion for progress to the next programmed lesson. Feedba
is immediate and ongoing so as to reinforce participation (Morris, 2003).
To illustrate programmed instruction, Skinner (1958b, p. 973) presented a
science lesson dealing with electric currents and ﬂashlight circuitry (see also
Morris, 2003, pp. 242–243). The first few statements from the sequence of 35
statements are given in Table 4.2. We examine this instruction through the
three lenses of the crossdisciplinary framework to determine the nature and
quality of the learning opportunities provided to students.
Habituation: Given the authorship of these programmed instruction
materials, we might expect to ﬁnd that verbal response skills with respect
to science vocabulary are promoted in this curriculum in keeping with the
“traditional … belief that learning physics means memorizing facts,
deﬁnitions, and formulas” (White, 1993, p. 5). Indeed, Skinner’s (1958b)
description of his strategy does touch on repetition of terms:
Tenical terms are introduced slowly. For example, the familiar term “ﬁne wire” in frame 2 is
followed by a deﬁnition of the tenical term “ﬁlament” in frame 4; “ﬁlament” is then asked for
in the presence of the non-scientific synonym in frame 5 and without the synonym in frame 9.
(p. 974)
However, whereas word familiarity may be developed through this
lesson, and perhaps some weak association to proximal terms, there is no
rehearsal required or memorization being tested (in contrast to other
examples given in Skinner, 1958b, su as word spellings, p. 972). Indeed,
the learning outcomes Skinner (1958b) touts relate to goals of

understanding more so than response conditioning:
Table 4.2 Part of a programmed instruction unit used by Skinner (1958b) to illustrate teaching
machines.
Sentence to be Completed
Word to
be
Supplied
1. e important parts of a ﬂashlight are the baery and the
bulb. When we “turn on” a ﬂashlight, we close a swit
which connects … the battery with the ______________.
bulb
2.  When we turn on a ﬂashlight, an electric current ﬂows
through the ﬁne wire in the ______________ and causes it
to grow hot.
bulb
3. When the hot wire glows brightly, we say … it gives oﬀ or
sends out heat and ______________.
light
4. e ﬁne wire in the bulb is called a ﬁlament. e bulb “lights
up” when the ﬁlament is heated by the passage of a(n)
______________ current.
electric
5. When a weak battery produces little current, the fine wire, or
___________, does not get very hot.
filament
6.  A ﬁlament whi is less hot sends out or gives oﬀ
______________ light.
less
7. “Emit” means “send out.” e amount of light sent out, or
“emied”, by a ﬁlament depends on how ______________
the filament is.
hot
e net eﬀect of su material is more than the acquisition of facts and terms. Beginning with a
largely unverbalized acquaintance with ﬂashlights, candles, and so on, the student is induced to
talk about familiar events, together with a few new facts, with a fairly tenical vocabulary….
e emission of light from an incandescent source takes shape as a topic or ﬁeld of inquiry. An
understanding of the subject emerges whi is oen quite surprising in view of the
fragmentation required in item building.
(p. 974)

Construction: Examining the pedagogical method with respect to the
construction metaphor, we observe that the programmed text forms a kind
of lecture on electric current that the student is expected to read and
understand, the participatory activity of supplying the missing word serving
to ensure the student is aending to and processing ea sentence. e
primary pedagogical method, therefore, is teaer-centered construction
aimed at gaining an understanding of the physics of the light production in
a flashlight.
We might ask if a teaer-centered approa is appropriate given the
conceptual complexity of electrical current ﬂow. Indeed, Wandersee,
Mintzes, and Novak (1994) noted that current ﬂow is regularly
misunderstood by students who construct a variety of incorrect conceptual
models that science education needs to address:
Five distinct models of a simple circuit were employed by these students. e “single-wire”
notion suggests that current leaves the baery and travels through one wire to a bulb, whi
serves as a kind of electricity “sink.” In the “clashing currents” model, electricity leaves the
baery from both terminals and travels toward the bulb, where it is “used up.” In addition to
these ideas, three kinds of “unidirectional models” were identiﬁed…. “Unidirectional with
conservation” … is the scientifically acceptable view.
(p. 182)
us Skinner’s (1958b) science lesson aims toward a rather cursory
understanding of electrical circuits. In this respect, his instructional method,
teaer-centered construction, is well mated to the content. For, as noted
earlier, lecturing on complex conceptual content would be successful only
for students who are metacognitively sophisticated; otherwise, student-
centered construction methods would be required.
Enculturation: In addition to teaing the conceptual content,
programmed instruction was believed to “tea students to study, for
instance, to aend selectively to texts and to reject irrelevant material”
(Morris, 2003, p. 244). In the crossdisciplinary framing, these learning goals

would count as dispositions—culturally specific forms of engagement.
A full crossdisciplinary analysis would involve identifying the reference
culture (perhaps academic culture) in whi the intended dispositions are
normative, and examining the culture of participation of students in
working through this instruction. Students in my graduate course on
theories of learning, going through the full sequence of 35 text fragments,
report a tendency to word hunt to ﬁll in the blanks, with minimal linguistic
and semantic processing. So it is not obvious the extent to whi
enculturational goals intended by the curriculum are met.
Skinner (1958b) intended his exposition on teaing maines as an
illustration of the application of behavioral principles. This is consistent with
his eﬀort to interpret language production in behaviorist terms (Skinner,
1958a), whi Chomsky (1959) argued did not properly meet behaviorism’s
own criteria for objective analysis. From our current vantage point, and
with the assistance of crossdisciplinary analysis, it seems obvious that the
programmed materials presented an explanation of the physics of electrical
ﬂow in a ﬂashlight that students were expected to understand. ere is no
apparent habituated learning agenda being enacted. us, to a considerable
extent, Skinner was creating conceptually oriented instructional materials
without clear principles of learning to guide his efforts.
In the case of these programmed materials, we were luy: his
instructional materials did provide a coherent approach for students to learn
concepts, albeit at a rather unambitious level. However, ﬂying without
adequate maps is a risky business. As we point the lens of crossdisciplinarity
at contemporary education we oen ﬁnd normative curricular methods to
be deeply incoherent in their agendas for learning.
The “Reading Wars”

We turn to the Reading Wars, whi serves also as an introduction to the
next section on the Math Wars. In our current discourse these two
controversies are regarded as siblings, rehearsing basic disputes about
learning and teaing that trace ba over a century of conﬂict: “e
‘education sects’ that Dewey described so long ago still exist [today]—in
reading, in the proponents of ‘whole language’ and in ‘phonics,’ and in
math, in the advocates and opponents of ‘NCTM math reform’” (Loveless,
2001, p. 2). rough crossdisciplinary lenses, we come to see stark
diﬀerences in the structure of learning intentions underlying these
controversies, and in the quality of the pedagogical practices that ensue.
e Reading Wars pit advocates of “phonics” (Burns, Griﬃn, & Snow,
1999; Fox, 2000; Stanovi, 1986) against “whole-language” advocates (e.g.,
Dechant, 1993; Goodman, 1986; Serpell, 2001). The phonics method provides
repetitive practice in a systematic and sequential fashion starting with basic
linguistic elements (graphemes, phonemes), building up to words,
sentences, and more extended texts that incorporate the constituent
elements already practiced:
Phonics advocates see reading primarily as a allenging cognitive, psyolinguistic
accomplishment—knowing leers and sounds and being able to perform in a certain way when
asked to map one onto the other.
(Snow, 2001, p. 232)
Whole-language methods focus on dispositions of literate society,
including inclination to read and strategies of eﬀective reading. Whole-
language advocates insist that students’ involvement with text always be
meaningful in the twin senses that texts are comprehensible13 and that
activities of reading are motivated by personal interest and involvement.
e pedagogical method is to create a social community in whi ildren
engage with reading and writing in pursuit of their interests and
communicative needs:

Whole-language advocates see reading as a social, cultural activity—participating in
communities of practice within whi reading and writing are normal activities and thus are
acquired as needed by all members.
(Snow, 2001, p. 232)
From a crossdisciplinary reading, both of these pedagogical methods are
soundly constituted. Phonics approaes the skills of reading in a systematic
and eﬀective fashion through sequenced repetitive practice. Whole
language provides a coherent blending of acculturationist support for
students’ evolving self-identity as readers with the enculturationist strategy
of providing a social microculture within whi practices of literacy are
normative. Indeed, it is telling that antagonists in the Reading Wars rarely
criticize their opponents with respect to the learning outcomes actually
supported by instruction. Rather phonics advocates worry that whole
language leaves students without needed skills (e.g., Dahl, Sarer, Lawson,
& Grogan, 1999), while whole language advocates ﬁnd that phonics
methods neglect valued dispositions (e.g., Krashen, 2003).
At a pragmatic level, this might suggest the reasonableness of
coordinating these two pedagogies, a suggestion sometimes labeled “a
balanced approa” (Honig, 1996). However, our educational discourse,
whi countenances only one “true” account of learning (and hence of good
teaing), makes pragmatic accommodations diﬃcult to realize. e
incendiary bierness of the Reading Wars is well known, having spilled
over from the academy into the legislative arena (Boyd & Mitell, 2001;
Goodman, 1998), thereby materially constraining the autonomy of
educators to exercise professional judgment.
The “Math Wars”
e Math Wars pits traditionalists combining demonstration/lecture and

worksheet drills against reformers who prefer inquiry teaing approaes
(Draper, 2002; Klein, 2007; Soen, Fey, Hirs, & Coxford, 1999; Wilson,
2003). Traditional textbooks organize mathematics instruction topically,
with explanation of the current topic being followed by homogeneously
grouped problems related to the content. In this way, concepts and skills are
intended to reinforce one another. Reformers generally provide
collaborative work on open-ended tasks designed to foster valued
mathematical dispositions su as autonomy, creativity, and problem-
solving heuristics. As well, the tasks are centered around critical conceptual
content, aﬀording development of deep understanding of the content. us,
in contrast with the Reading Wars, the Math Wars features competing
blended pedagogies—skills and concepts versus concepts and dispositions.
Traditional Instruction
Characterizing the instructional position of the traditionalists in the Math
Wars is hampered by the fact that “the term ‘traditional’ was never clearly
deﬁned in the debates” (Klein, 2007). Indeed, the Math Wars arose as a
reaction to the NCTM’s (1989) Standards, so much of the traditionalist cause
has simply been to retain the traditional methods of U.S. mathematics
instruction, whi have been aracterized as follows: “Teaers present
deﬁnitions of terms and demonstrate procedures for solving speciﬁc
problems. Students are then asked to memorize the deﬁnitions and practice
the procedures” (Stigler & Hiebert, 1999, p. 27). What is not clear is the
extent to whi demonstration (Clark, Nguyen, & Sweller, 2006) and
memorization are intended by traditionalists to be supplemented by
explanation of underlying principles (lecture). However, since the ranks of
the traditionalists included many prominent university mathematicians
(Klein, Askey, Milgram, Wu, et al., 1999), perhaps explanation and
demonstration are intended to go hand-in-hand.

Construction: As explained earlier, from a crossdisciplinary view
demonstration of procedures serves habituationist, rather than conceptual
goals. Demonstration focuses the perceptual apparatus on relevant aspects
of the stimulus display, thereby facilitating subcognitive correlations that
are the basis of skilled performance (Reber, 1993). us the conceptual
agenda is supported only insofar as the instructor interweaves conceptual
explanation of why the procedure works along with demonstration of how
it works. In cases in whi explanation of principles supplements
demonstration of procedures, the instructional method is teaer-centered
conceptual pedagogy, eﬀective only for those students who are suﬃciently
sophisticated, metacognitively, to notice incongruities between their own
understanding and the explanations oﬀered by the teaer (Otero, 1998).
us the conceptual intentions of traditional instruction are inconsistently
supported, and even then only for a small minority of students.
Habituation: e habituationist agenda also is compromised in this
pedagogical approa. In order to focus on conceptual content, textbooks
are organized topically, with homogeneously grouped problem sets meant
to reinforce concepts presented in the current apter. e homogenous
grouping of exercises means that, with the exception of review practice
tests, there is no opportunity for students to learn to discriminate problem
types. Students learn howto apply routine solution methods, but not when
to apply them, making robust skill mastery problematic (Greeno, 1978;
VanderStoep & Seifert, 1993).
To understand this limitation of traditional mathematics textbooks it is
instructive to consider the method of “gentle repetition” developed in the
early 1980s by John Saxon. Saxon’s textbooks dispense with the trappings
of conceptual explanation, providing only a brief introduction of new
content, moving quily to engaging students in heterogeneous problem
sets. In this way, brags Saxon, “as the problems become familiar students
can look at a new problem and recognize it by type. is recognition

evokes conditioned responses that lead to solutions” (Saxon Publishers,
1992, inside front cover). From a crossdisciplinary perspective, the Saxon
approa is eﬀectively structured for habituation learning, and its
superiority to traditional approaes to skill development has been
empirically documented (e.g., Resendez & Azin, 2007). (As an interesting
historical footnote, so distraught was the mathematics education
establishment at Saxon’s dropping of the trappings of a conceptual agenda
that it was a request for advice concerning Saxon texts that prompted the
NCTM’s initial steps toward its 1989 standards, McLeod, Stake, Sappelle,
& Mellissinos, 1995.)
To summarize, traditionalists in the Math Wars support an instructional
format that simply juxtaposes problem sets (toward skill development) and
lecture (toward concept development), based on the pervasive belief that
“conceptual understanding … and operational procedures … are mutually
reinforcing” (National Mathematics Advisory Panel [NMAP], 2008, p. xix).
As discussed earlier, this is an illusory belief encouraged by the facilitative
eﬀect that explicit presentation of rules plays in the rate of skill acquisition
(Kirshner & Awtry, 2004; Reber, 1993). It has kept us from seeing how
deﬁcient is the support of both skill development and concept aainment,
and, indeed, how these elements of traditional instruction subvert one
another.
Reform Instruction
Mathematics education reform participates in a broader pedagogical reform
movement generally oriented by the learning metaphors of construction
and enculturation as framed in a spectrum of constructivist, social
constructivist, situated cognition, and sociocultural theorizations (Donovan
& Bransford, 2005). Infrequently, a purely (psyological) constructivist
agenda is advanced (Simon, Saldanha, McClinto, et al., 2010; ompson,

2013), or else one ﬁnds goals and methods that are entirely enculturational
(Mark, Cuoco, Goldenberg, & Sword, 2010). But these distinctions are not
easily marked owing to our current integrative discourse that regards
learning as a complex, multifaceted whole, with reform pedagogy “a useful
synthesis … [wherein] knowledge is personally constructed and socially
mediated” (Windschitl, 2002, p. 137).
Typically the reform classroom is structured around inquiry groups,
communities of learners, knowledge-building communities or other su
collaborative 
fora 
intended 
to 
promote 
deep 
understanding 
of
mathematical content in tandem with valued cultural practices, including
mathematics-speciﬁc practices like mathematical argumentation (proof),
problem solving heuristics, and aesthetic values, as well as more general
practices of intellectual autonomy, critical thinking, and creativity (e.g.,
Brown & Campione, 1994; Hutison, 2012; Mark et al., 2010; NRC, 2000,
2005; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2003). Instruction typically involves open-
ended questions, nonroutine problems, or projects that students work on
and discuss. e tasks are osen for their ri conceptual aﬀordances, so
that collaborative discussion and exploration can lead to in-depth
understanding of concepts as well as evolution of valued dispositions
(Brooks & Brooks, 1999).
From a crossdisciplinary perspective coordination of teaing genres is
viable as an instructional strategy, so long as the teaer understands that
the constituent teaing approaes are inherently inconsistent with one
another and hence inevitably lead to oice points in whi one agenda
advances only at the expense of the other. As discussed earlier, student-
centered construction is very mu a teaer-modulated pedagogy. e
teaer creates a task environment for the student based on a Hypothetical
Learning Trajectory along whi student engagement is anticipated to
progress. To support the unfolding of this trajectory, the teaer may need
to mediate students’ initial uptake of tasks and otherwise intensify students’

engagement with the task. In contrast, enculturational goals of student
autonomy and creativity require the teaer to foster a classroom culture in
whi students are empowered to pursue evolving interests as they arise in
the course of problem solving. Thus the effective reform teacher is in a state
of consternation, supporting the cultural dynamics of group interaction
while constantly monitoring the conversations, worrying that discussions
may not be productive conceptually, and making judicious moment-by-
moment decisions about whether (and how) to intervene as a mediator of
conceptual construction while doing minimal damage to the agenda of
student autonomy and exploration. As Lampert (1985) put it, “the
juxtaposition of responsibilities that make up the teaer’s job leads to
conceptual paradoxes” for whi there is no single right oice. e teaer
“brings many contradictory aims to ea instance of her work, and the
resolution of their dissonance cannot be neat or simple” (Lampert, 1985, p.
181, quoted in Ball, 1993, p. 377).
Metacognition
To understand how seriously this hybrid agenda of balancing and juggling
is compromised within a rhetoric of reform teaing rooted in integrative
or holistic visions of learning/teaing, it is instructive to examine the
central and crucial role that metacognition has come to play in
contemporary pedagogical theorizing. Indeed, in Bransford, Brown, and
Coing’s (2000) canonical text, How People Learn, metacognition is
emphasized as one of three fundamental aspect of instruction:
Integration of metacognitive instruction with discipline-based learning can enhance student
aievement and develop in students the ability to learn independently. It should be consciously
incorporated into curricula across disciplines and age levels.
(p. 21)
Current theoretical interests in metacognition trace ba to foundational

work of both Vygotsky and Piaget (Fox & Riconscente, 2008). As we have
discussed, for Vygotsky, metacognitive capabilities (and other higher
mental functions) arise from internalization of social/cultural practices.
Olson (2003) applies this perspective to explain how metacognitive
capabilities can develop in collaborative groups in that justiﬁcation of one’s
ideas to others comes to be internalized as a kind of self-scrutiny: “e
normative practice of reason giving and metacognition run together.
Explanation, the giving of explicit or public reasons, is … the route to
metacognition, that is, cognition about cognition” (p. 241).
For Piaget (1975), metacognition ﬁgured centrally in his genetic
epistemology, deeply implicated in the notion of reﬂective abstraction, the
primary mechanism for conceptual restructuring:
Reﬂective abstraction always involves two inseparable features: a “reﬂeissement” in the sense
of the projection of something borrowed from a preceding level onto a higher one, and a
“reﬂexion” in the sense of a (more or less conscious) cognitive reconstruction or reorganization of
what has been transferred.
(p.41, quoted in von Glasersfeld, 1991)
Pulling these two strands together, we can begin to see the contradictory
implications of Bransford, Brown, and Coing’s (2000) utilization of
metacognition in their framing of pedagogical practice, as quoted earlier.
On the one hand, “develop[ing] in students the ability to learn
independently” (p. 21) is an enculturationist goal of instruction that involves
developing students’ metacognitive capabilities. As we have discussed, su
enculturational agendas unfold over months and years. On the other hand,
the idea that “metacognitive instruction with discipline-based learning can
enhance student aievement” (p. 21) points to the facilitative role that
metacognition plays in concept development. us metacognition is
revealed as the so underbelly of reform pedagogy. Like a cat trying to
cat its tail, always just out of rea, metacognition is both a goal of
instruction and a requirement for its effective realization.

Pointing out the contradictory invocation of metacognition in reform
pedagogy is not meant to discredit the agenda of teaing concepts and
dispositions in tandem with one another, but rather to highlight the
problematic aracter of su instruction, and the concomitant necessity
that teaers be primed to recognize the contradictory imperatives of these
teaing genres. But, this need to juggle, to retreat and advance
simultaneously, is precisely what is elided in a discourse grounded in
holistic thinking based on assumed “synergies” (Bransford et al., 2006), or
on integrative sociocultural and situated cognition theorizations in whi
“the learning of a subject’s cognitive content is considered a process
embedded within the more comprehensive process of enculturation”
(Perrenet & Taconis, 2009, p. 182).
ere will always be some individual teaers like Lampert and Ball
who come to sense and engage with the problematic of multiple learning
agendas (see Green, 2014, for an analysis of their inﬂuence). But for most
teaers, reform is simply enactment of a format of classroom activity, the
hope of educational value sustained by “an inordinate amount of faith in
the ability of students to structure their own learning” (Windsitl, 2002, p.
138).
In summary, the Math Wars pits traditionalists valuing skills and
concepts against reformers intent on fostering concepts and dispositions. In
both cases, the good intentions of educators are stymied at the point of
intersection of these learning agendas for the simple reason that the
assumed concordance of skills and concepts or of concepts and dispositions
has not been subjected to critical theoretical scrutiny. In the case of the
Reading Wars our students have been luy; the unnecessary antagonisms
are between independently coherent pedagogical visions. In the case of
mathematics, in the United States a student’s ances of receiving
coherently conceived instruction—traditional or reform—are vanishingly
small.

Pedagogies of Societal Transformation
is subsection and the next are devoted to the enculturation metaphor as
theorized in terms of the enculturation/acculturation distinction. is
distinction, separating out unconscious adaptation from conscious
emulation, is newly introduced in the crossdisciplinary framework
(Kirshner, 2004; Kirshner & Meng, 2011). For instance, Yael and Cobb
(1996) presented a clear theorization of enculturation pedagogy in whi
the teaer’s selective receptivity to student responses fosters the diﬀusion
of desired cultural practices. But they also underscore “the critical and
central role of the teaer as a representative of the mathematical
community” (p. 475), a hallmark of acculturationist pedagogy, in whi the
teaer as cultural representative models desired practices for students to
emulate. As discussed earlier under “Identity Politics,” this distinction is an
important one for educators to focus on, as acculturationist instruction can
result in “intrapersonal conflict” (Brown, 2004, p. 810).
In the current subsection, the enculturation/acculturation distinction is
applied to pedagogies oriented toward improvement of the moral and
ethical fabric of the broader society. Collectively, I refer to these as
pedagogies of societal transformation, including democratic education,
liberatory pedagogy, values education, critical literacy, progressive
education, aracter education, and multicultural pedagogy, among others.
In our current educational discourse, these pedagogies tend to be
marginalized as peripheral to the true academic mission. For instance, in her
introduction to a paper on su pedagogies, Coran-Smith (2004) “takes
up the issue of the ‘outcomes question’ … arguing the case for a strong
focus on social justice as the necessary complement to an ongoing concern
with academic excellence and rigor” (p. 193).
In explaining the marginalization of equity discourses, “Secada [1995]
noted that mathematics education has traditionally appropriated theoretical

constructs from psyology. His basic claim was that resear that is not
cast in what he termed the ‘dominant psyological discourse’ is viewed as
marginal to the concerns of the field” (Nasir & Cobb, 2002, p. 94). But surely
no pedagogical method can aspire to improve the world directly; ea must
depend on students learning (in some sense). us pedagogies of societal
transformation ought to be accounted for within the same learning
framework as any other pedagogies that promote student learning.
Peering through crossdisciplinary lenses, two basic strategies are evident
across the broad range of societal transformation pedagogies: utopian
pedagogies 
and critical pedagogies. Utopian pedagogies (my term)—
including democratic education, progressive education, some versions of
multicultural pedagogy, and perhaps values education—adopt enculturation
teaing methods, creating within the classroom microculture a microcosm
of a more ideal society. Students enculturated into the norms of this
classroom society then carry their dispositions outward to political and
social engagement in the broader society. John Dewey’s educational vision
included such a utopian strategy:
When the sool introduces and trains ea ild of society into membership with su a lile
community, saturating him with the spirit of service, and providing him with the instruments of
eﬀective self-direction, we shall have the deepest and best guarantee of a larger society whi is
worthy, lovely, and harmonious.
(Dewey, 1900, p. 44, quoted in Hall, 2003, p. 16)
In contrast to utopian pedagogies that seek to transform society from
within, critical pedagogies su as liberatory pedagogy and critical literacy
seek to disrupt societal arrangements by having students come to
“formulate and agree upon a common understanding about ‘structures of
oppression’ and ‘relations of domination’” (Burbules & Berk, 1999, p. 53).
e pedagogical method here is acculturationist, the goal being to enlist
students as “‘transformative intellectuals’ (Giroux, 1988), ‘cultural workers’
(Freire, 1998) capable of identifying and redressing the injustices,

inequalities, and myths of an oen oppressive world” (Gruenewald, 2003, p.
4). us students are being guided toward an identity structure as social
ange agents, with the teaer serving as an authentic representative of a
culture of resistance.
From a crossdisciplinary perspective, the marginalization of equity
concerns needs to be understood as part of a broader diminution of the
enculturation metaphor within traditional psyological frameworks. We
already have noted the absence of any psyological paradigm focused
squarely on this metaphor, necessitating a turn to sociological theory as
grounding for enculturational learning. Similarly, one ﬁnds enculturational
interests diminished in integrative pedagogical framings in whi
enculturational goals always are couple with other learning goals. For
instance, Greeno, Collins, and Resni’s (1996) situative view is an umbrella
for “understand[ing] sool learning environments in two ways: their
eﬀects on the subject maer knowledge and ability that students acquire,
and their eﬀects on the kinds of learners that students become” (p. 31). e
crossdisciplinary approa redresses this neglect by ensuring that ea
learning metaphor informs a dedicated genre of teaing independent of
other genres and other theorizations.
e eﬀect of this crossdisciplinary approa is to draw pedagogies of
societal transformation into the same pool as other pedagogies that seek to
foster students’ dispositions. is includes high-status cognitive dispositions
like critical thinking, metacognitive sophistication, and logical reasoning
that oen have been naturalized as part of the cognitive aritecture
(Perkins & Rithart, 2004) rather than recognized as products of cultural
enmeshment (Burbules & Berk, 1999; Scribner & Cole, 1977). Furthermore,
the method of crossdisciplinary analysis insists that the reference culture for
targeted dispositions be identiﬁed. us, critical pedagogues have an
opportunity to point out that even su seemingly innocuous goals as
critical thinking reﬂect class, gender, and race-based priorities (Burbules &

Berk, 1999). Of course, the obligation to be explicit about cultural interests
applies equally to critical and utopian pedagogies, whi may draw
unwelcome scrutiny; but overall, the eliding of cultural interests is widely
recognized to have contributed to establishing and maintaining societal
positions of dominance (Delpit, 2006; Giroux, 1997; Gutstein, 2006; Lerman,
2009; Ostrove & Cole, 2003). us, making cultural agendas explicit in the
crossdisciplinary approa tends to level the playing ﬁeld for pedagogies of
societal transformation, whi hitherto have been more exposed as targets
of cultural critique (e.g., see Wasley, 2006, for a discussion of NCATE’s
dropping of its social justice requirements).
The Remarkable Pedagogy of Christopher Healy
I conclude this section with a crossdisciplinary analysis of Christopher
Healy’s “Build-A-Book Geometry” course, an unusual oﬀering in whi
students wrote the textbook collectively, deciding democratically what
topics would count as geometric content, and what results are soundly
reasoned. Healy began the ﬁrst of several iterations of his year-long course
in 1987 at the working-class California high sool where he taught. His
instructional format had students working together in small groups to
produce ideas related to geometry. Ea night, he pored over the reports
that the groups produced, selecting some student contributions to be taken
up by the class the next day. is did give him some inﬂuence on the
content addressed by students, but in the periodic meetings in whi group
members presented ideas to the whole class, he ceded any direct role in
adjudicating conclusions reached or the reasoning processes employed:
Aer ea presentation … there is a vote on whether the material presented is true and worthy
of entry into the book. is process produces some of the most diﬃcult moments for me, because
students have presented and voted down things that I feel are signiﬁcant parts of geometry. Still,
I believe it imperative that I not interfere.

(Healy, 1993a, p. 87)
Healy (1993a, 1993b) used a unique method of constructed journal entries
to report on the eﬀects of his course. As intuited by Healy, these journal
entries express the thoughts and feelings of his students as they engaged in
the course and reﬂected on various aspects of their lives outside of sool.
Although individual elements of these constructed journal entries might be
questioned on methodological grounds, his overall aracterization of the
course experience is consistent with actual student statements, as contained
in an appendix. Whatever the methodological faults and virtues, these
constructed journal entries provide us with a very clear window into what
Healy aended to and valued in his interaction with his students—just what
we need to perform a crossdisciplinary analysis.
Healy’s (1993a, 1993b) reports focus on how his students grappled with
the broad autonomy oﬀered to the class, and also how they dealt with
personal relations and life plans outside of sool. For many students, the
course was personally transformative, as illustrated with Chris. As we meet
Chris, she is a dependent personality, in need of outside approval through
her relationship with her boyfriend, David, and laing conﬁdence in her
mathematical ability: “I do beer when I have someone who will tutor
me…. someone who knows the right answer” (Healy, 1993b, p. 10); and
with no plans for further education: “I’ve got this counselor who thinks I’m
going to college (the poor guy just doesn’t understand). I don’t want to
disappoint him, but two more years of this education stuﬀ and I’m done
forever” (p. 10). As Healy commented, “At ﬁrst in my No Book geometry
class Chris was a noninvolved student. She just sat there and looked like she
was going to let this experience pass her by—until she ﬁnally felt strongly
enough about something that she got involved” (p. 85).
e key episode for Chris occurred when she became inspired by the
proposal that distance need not be defined relative to two points; it could be

deﬁned relative to two or more points. She was ready to argue for this, and
went up to the board to illustrate her ideas, convincing the class that they
needed to reconsider this issue. As Healy noted, “It was not a big deal to the
class, but to Chris it was a turning point that aﬀected the way she
approaed the entire experience. It gave her involvement, conﬁdence, a
positive interaction, and a feeling of belonging” (p. 85).
As the course progresses, we see evidence that Chris is reﬂecting on
contrasts between relations of authority in class and at home: “ere’s no
rules in the class, no right or wrong, no ultimates…. It’s kind of the opposite
of my house. In class what we say is important and we talk everything over
before we decide on anything. I think people should talk things over—one
person shouldn’t be dictator” (Healy, 1993b, p. 47). Later, sooling takes a
higher priority for her: “It’s funny, for some reason going to sool and
graduating are so important to me now” (Healy, 1993b, p. 80), and
eventually: “I’m going to college” (Healy, 1993a, p. 100). As she reﬂects
later, her anges stem from a sense of her own agency and revaluation of
her station in life: “e real miracle for me this year was learning that the
positive response that really counts doesn’t come from outside, it comes
from within, If I’m ever going to be someone (and I am), it won’t be to
please anyone else. I’ll do it for me” (Healy, 1993b, p. 163).
Analysis
is pedagogy presents a considerable allenge for crossdisciplinary
analysis (and the intrepid reader can pause to self-test their understanding
of the framework, by anticipating the crossdisciplinary analysis that
follows). Although students in the Build-A-Book course tended to do as
well on aievement tests as their peers, clearly the pedagogy itself oﬀered
no direct support for skills or for student construction of particular
conceptual content. (At best, these might be considered what I call

advertent learning outcomes that the teaer hopes and expects will occur,
but does not directly support.) What is more, the typically emphasized
mathematical practices—logical argumentation, problem solving heuristics,
aesthetic sensibilities—also are not supported; Healy does not mediate the
intellectual environment by expressing interest in or approval of particular
mathematical practices. Rather, it seems that something is going on in his
classes relative to students’ identities. But what is it, and how does Healy’s
pedagogy produce it?
Having examined what Healy is not doing, it’s time to turn to what he is
doing: constituting his classroom as a mathematical community. In this
community, students are provided the opportunity to experience
themselves as authors of mathematical knowledge and collectively as the
adjudicators of mathematical truth. Somehow, from this invitation, personal
identities and life aspirations are transformed.
In the crossdisciplinary framework, student self-identiﬁcation with the
reference culture is the prerequisite for an acculturationist pedagogy in
whi the teaer, as a representative of the culture, models cultural
practices. Clearly this is not the pedagogy being enacted in Healy’s
classroom. First, the students entering the class are not self-identiﬁed as
mathematicians. Second, Healy does not present himself as a
mathematician—he’s just perceived as a goofy teaer—nor does he model
mathematical dispositions.
Rather, we have to look toward enculturational teaing methods, in
whi dispositions are grown within the context of the classroom
microculture. In this case, the disposition being actively supported in the
classroom is mathematical self-identity itself. Indeed, self-identiﬁcation as a
mathematician is a consistent disposition of mathematicians (Burton, 2004),
and therefore can, itself, be a goal of enculturation pedagogy. But now we
are faced with a further conundrum: According to Healy’s (1993b) account,
there was only one student in his years of teaing Build-A-Book

Geometry who came to perceive himself as a mathematician and to
consider a career in that ﬁeld. Are we, then, to consider Healy’s pedagogy
as a failure?
Recall that the enculturationist teaer must be equipped not only with
an understanding of the target disposition, but also of the intermediate
practices students may have to traverse en route to aieving that target.
For the working-class students that comprised Healy’s classes, these steps
would pertain to social class. Mathematicians are part of a high-status
professional class. ey do not pun time clos, but work on problems of
their own oosing over extended time scales. Collectively, they provide
the analytical relations that form the language of science. In these respects,
the identity of the mathematician is remote from lower-class expectations
of a work life spent in the service of plans, semes, and enterprises of
others (Kenny & Bledsoe, 2005; Burton, 2004).
From this perspective, we can interpret the transitions in self-image and
ambition of students like Chris as indicative of a anging sense of class
identity. e disposition that Healy cultivated in his students was self-belief
in their intellectual eﬃcacy; his methodology, the intense and consistent
respect for the ideas they produced as he pored over their work products
each evening, until that spirit of importance invaded every nook and cranny
of his classroom. As a result, students began to experience themselves not
as mathematicians, per se, but as eﬃcacious thinkers and responsible
members of a knowledge community, aspects of self-identity that typically
demarcate professional-class social identities (Costello, 2005). at’s why
Healy did not intervene when students got the geometry wrong—not
because he didn’t care, but because his teaing agenda placed students’
own role as adjudicators of mathematical truth ahead of his desire for their
understanding of speciﬁc content. His pedagogy did not get students all the
way to mathematical self-identiﬁcation, but inﬂuencing students’ class
identity is in itself a major accomplishment14.

To appreciate the magnitude of Healy’s accomplishment, it is useful to
compare his methods and results with standard eﬀorts to socialize students
to more productive identities as solars, for instance, by having teaers
“serve as models and motivators for students … employ[ing] the use of [the
teaer’s] personal story and history in an eﬀort to provide their students
with windows into their experience as mathematics learners” (Clark et al.,
2013, pp. 1, 26). As noted earlier, su acculturationist methods have the
potential for creating intrapersonal conﬂict when used with students who
are not yet identiﬁed with the reference culture. Indeed, educators who
employ “upward mobility discourses construct classist hieraries in sools
and classroom practice … [that] may unwiingly alienate the very students
they hope to inspire” (Jones & Vagle, 2013, p. 129). Healy’s Build-A-Book
pedagogy is remarkable for its unique enculturationist pedagogy to foster
social-class identity, and for the profound eﬀects he aieved with his
students.
In sharing Healy’s (1993a) account of his pedagogy with graduate
students in my Education and Cognition course, the students (most of them
experienced teaers) tend to be uncomfortable with Healy’s total neglect
of skills and concepts in his Build-A-Book geometry course. In the modern
history of education, educators sometimes have been guided by behaviorist
learning theory (focused on habituationist learning) or by psyological
constructivist theory (focused on concept development); as noted in the
previous subsection, enculturation learning goals always have been
considered auxiliary to the academic mission of sooling. In the
crossdisciplinary approa, ea of the three learning metaphors is
independently theorized, and ea forms the basis for dedicated genres of
teaing. is enables us to broaden the palee of pedagogical possibility
and to appreciate the remarkable accomplishments of teaers like Healy,
who step out of the well-worn ruts of received pedagogical wisdom.

Problems and Prospects
e past two decades have witnessed a remarkable rise of the concept of “learning” with a
subsequent decline of the concept of “education.” … Despite the omnipresence of the concept of
learning in current educational discourse, it is important to see that the new language of
learning is not the outcome of one particular process or the expression of a single underlying
agenda. It rather is the result of a combination of diﬀerent, partly even contradictory trends and
developments.
(Biesta, 2009, pp. 37, 38)
at the intensiﬁcation of interest in learning over the past 20 years has not
lead to signiﬁcant improvement in the lives of students and teaers—
perhaps even a decline—is troubling. As Biesta’s statement suggests, and I
have argued, the cause of this malaise owes to a mismat between
psyology’s multiple theorizations of learning and education’s assumption
that good teaing must be aracterized as some mutually coherent set of
practices. We may disagree about the contents of this set; we may despair
at the complexity of ever being able to adequately aracterize it; but never
once, in a hundred years, has it crossed our minds that multiple,
independent 
theories 
of 
learning 
demand 
multiple, 
independent
theorizations of teaching.
Why this blind spot? I have argued that we have not osen to see
learning as separate, independently coherent processes, because psyology
has not wanted us to. Psyology’s historical imperative is to become
united around one paradigm, for only thus does an adolescent science rea
full paradigmatic maturity (Kuhn, 1970). Education is useful to that quest
only insofar as we join the partisan bale by siding with one or another of
the protagonists. Reify learning in its separate paradigms, and we subvert
the pretensions of suﬃciency that paradigms must project out to win
converts across paradigmatic boundaries.
At what cost, this acquiescence to psyology’s grand design? Instead of
leing learning theory, in its diverse paradigms, light the way to our varied

aspirations, clinging to the hope or the illusion of unity has brought conﬂict,
confusion, and banality to education. Our now ascendant design science
mode of pedagogical resear (Cobb, 2007; Lesh & Sriraman, 2005;
Wimann, 1995) mires us in theoretical particularism, it being suﬃciently
allenging just to assemble the theoretical tools to help guide one
classroom or one lesson idea. As English (2008) noted, citing Niss (2004),
“researers are not addressing issues that focus on shaping practice, rather
their issues focus on practice as an object of resear” (p. 10). e prospect
of any systematic prescriptive possibility for theory is fading.
Nor does the world of practice look upon the science of learning as a
privileged resource for teaing as educators seek foundations for
pedagogy oriented by philosophical premises, or political analyses, or
neurophysiological data, or moral ideals, or spiritual aspiration, or
psyoanalytic method—so that eventually, the marketplace of educational
ideas comes more to resemble a bazaar than the organized knowledge base
of an established profession.15 Lending to the carnival atmosphere, astute
educational entrepreneurs borrow the patina of scientiﬁc respectability—
tea the brain!—to bolster the litany of standard-issue pedagogical truisms
they are dispensing, reminiscent of the snake-oil salesmen of yore, before
medical practice had fully established its scientiﬁc basis (see Kirshner, 2012,
for a list of websites).
Nor are policy makers—in the United States at least—turning to us for
guidance as professional judgment about teaing is replaced by value-
added outcome measures of student learning, reduced to a single number,
as the determinant of whether a teaer has met her or his professional
obligations (Briggs & Domingue, 2011; Serer, 2011). (is is a narrative
we could counter, if only we would organize around the diversity of
learning, rather than skirmish among ourselves about its unity.) So
irrelevant has our expertise become that the U.S. federal No Child Le
Behind Act of 2001 redeﬁned “Highly aliﬁed Teaer” for middle or

secondary grades, removing any reference to pedagogical expertise or
training: “the teaer holds at least a baelor’s degree and has
demonstrated a high level of competency in ea of the academic subjects
in which the teacher teaches” (NICHCY, 2009).
In proposing a genres approa, I have argued that multiple theorizations
of learning should replace the vain hope that a single theorization can
prevail as a source of guidance for pedagogy. In support of that proposal, I
have identiﬁed diverse metaphors for learning that motivate both
psyology and education, formulated theorizations for ea, and
demonstrated the clarity—across a broad span of educational issues—that
can come from looking at educational practice through these multiple
lenses, rather than trying to force a unified viewpoint.
Yet, what likely will prove most allenging for educational theorists
about the genres proposal is not its multiple instantiations of learning, but
its insular aracter. We are braced by the open-ended nature of our
discourse, whi invites the allenges and the rewards of theoretical
erudition. As partners in psyology’s quest for the deﬁnitive learning
theory, we are engaging with the enduring problems of science. We are
part of the intellectual life of our era.
Or do we anowledge that psyology is an adolescent science, and we
share in its hoped-for future glory at the expense of securing a stable
knowledge base for teaching, today.

Notes
1. I am grateful to Steve Wojcikiewicz, whose collaboration in framing the arguments of this
chapter has been indispensable.
2. is sense of the complexity of the educational project actually is inherited from psyology
itself, where the diﬃculties in aieving a uniﬁed science are aributed to an unruly subject
maer: “It is the dilemma of psyology to deal as a natural science with an object that creates
history” (Boes, 1971, p. 9); “Psyology wants to be a natural science about non-natural
phenomena” (Vygotsky, 1927/1987, p. 190)–thanks to Mike Cole for these sources.
3. Indeed, Kuhn (1962) anowledged that “spending the year in a community composed
predominantly of social scientists confronted me with unanticipated problems about the
diﬀerences between su communities and those of the natural scientists among whom I had
been trained…. Aempting to discover the source of that diﬀerence led me to recognize the role
in scientific research of what I have since called ‘paradigms’” (pp. ix-x, note a).
4. Kuhn (1970) also referenced bi-stable ambiguous ﬁgures, but instead focused on a sense of
dissolution of the images that can ensue from eﬀorts to swit perspectives: “Aware that nothing
in his environment has anged, he directs his aention increasingly not to the ﬁgure … but to
the lines on the paper he is looking at” (p. 114). In this way, Kuhn used the idea of ambiguous
figures to reach the conclusion of mutual incomprehensibility across paradigms.
5. Although the competitive function is central to preparadigmatic science, it is rarely an active
concern of most psyologists. at’s because paradigmatic ange, as a sociological process, is
enacted over relatively long time periods, and because the competitive ethos conﬂicts with the
norms of paradigmatic science wherein scientists are engaged in a shared quest for truth
(excepting local competition over claims to discovery) (Merton, 1942/1973; Sarkar, 2007).
Although preparadigmatic science is underpinned by competitive goals, it shares in the espoused
ideals of cooperation, a factor that may mitigate against psyologists recognizing the
competitive imperative that animates their science. In what follows, I present compelling
evidence of preparadigmatic competition, but mindful that many psyological theorists do not
perceive their science in this light.
6. I have not found this analysis of distinct intra- and inter-paradigm dynamics of resear in the

sociology of psyology literature; however, the historical evidence of exaggerated, even reless,
claims reviewed in this chapter seems difficult to explain otherwise.
7. Cobb (2007) bases his objection to the idea of generalized psyological principles in part on his
reading of Kuhn’s (1962) “analysis of both the processes by whi scientists develop theory
within an established resear tradition and those by whi they oose between competing
resear traditions” (p. 5). For intra-paradigm reasoning, Cobb (2007) takes note of Kuhn’s
observation that “development and use of theory necessarily involves tacit suppositions and
assumptions that scientists learn in the course of their induction into their osen specialties” (p.
5). He then goes on to inter-paradigm reasoning with the observation that “Kuhn (1962)
extended this argument about the tacit aspects of scientiﬁc reasoning when he considered how
scientists oose between competing resear traditions by arguing that ‘there is no neutral
algorithm of theory-oice, no systematic decision procedure whi, properly applied, must lead
ea individual in the group to the same decision’ (p. 200)” (p. 6). Pulling these together, he
concludes, quoting Bernstein (1983, p. 47), that scientiﬁc reasoning really “is closer to those
features of rationality that have been aracteristic of the tradition of practical philosophy than
to many modern images of what is supposed to be the aracter of genuine episteme” (Cobb,
2007, p. 6).
   In my view, this is a misreading of Kuhn’s position. at intra-paradigm scientiﬁc reasoning
is a cultural practice guided by partly implicit norms does not make it equivalent to the value-
laden, socially mediated practices of selecting between competing paradigms. Indeed, Kuhn’s
(1970) whole point was not to “extend” from normal science to revolution, but rather to
distinguish between the practices of logic-based puzzle solving that are aracteristic of normal
science and “the competition between paradigms [whi] is not the sort of bale that can be
seled by proofs” (p. 148). Kuhn’s (1962/1970) re-aracterization of epistemic knowledge as
bounded by the paradigmatic world view within whi it is created (rather than as objectively
true) is not intended to erase the distinction between episteme and tene, nor to diminish the
structuring function epistemic knowledge offers for fields of application.
8. Indeed, Sfard’s (2008) commognitive framework oﬀering a synthesis of communication and
cognition signals her return to epistemic theoretical aspirations.
9. Various objective criteria also have been proposed that yield mixed results; or sometimes one’s

ability to consciously control deployment of one’s knowledge is taken to indicate conscious
knowledge (Fu et al., 2008).
10. Piaget’s microgenetic studies generally served to elaborate and strengthen his macrogenetic
theories. However, stage theory encountered problems of décalage or unevenness of expression
that allenged the essential idea of stages (Bruner, 1983; Fiser, 1980). is opened up a space
for researers to refocus developmental theory on sool contents: “at we ﬁnally came to
understand that we needed to make our own models to serve our educational purposes rather
than to use Piaget’s seemed to be a major breakthrough, and it was quite liberating. In fact, the
long-lasting eﬀects of this observation can be seen in contemporary constructivist resear in
whi the researers seek to observe and describe meanisms that … build up mathematical
knowledge in a particular learning space” (Steffe & Kieren, 1994, p. 716).
11. e landscape of constructivist learning perspectives is thi and ri (Spivey, 1997). Many have
spawned associated constructivist pedagogies, none of whi is identical with the version oﬀered
here.
12. is has been a point of criticism of the Piagetian approa: “By and large, American
educational psyologists were not satisﬁed by this qualiﬁcation, the reason being that the
limitations that are imposed by physical laws and biological structure are vague and general”
(Brainerd, 2003, p. 273). Nevertheless, 30 years of teaing experiments reveal that “theoretical
constructs that account for the learning of the participating students … prove useful when
accounting for the learning of other students” (Cobb, Jackson, & Dunlap, p. 483, in this volume).
13. To help clarify the distinction between the enculturation and construction metaphors, it is worth
inserting that the goal in reading instruction of having students draw meaning from texts (in
general) is an enculturation goal; a culturally speciﬁc form of engagement with texts is sought.
is is diﬀerent than the conceptual construction goal of having students understand a
particular text in a particular way, for example the relation of madness and femininity in Lady
Macbeth’s character (Thomas, 2004), which would require a different pedagogy.
14. at identity could be treated as a disposition, and addressed through the same pedagogical
methods as any other disposition, was a breakthrough in this analysis and a conﬁrmation of the
robust capability of the crossdisciplinary framework. I am grateful to my former graduate

student Marie Lord for the extensive discussions coproducing this insight into Healy’s pedagogy.
15. Of course, these are valid and valuable sources for pedagogical inspiration, but that inspiration
should be mediated by learning theory, insofar as the pedagogical goal is student learning.

References
AERA 
(2005). 
Annual 
meeting 
program. 
Retrieved 
from
www.aera.net/Portals/38/docs/Annual_Meeting/AM_2005_000_Full%20Program.pdf
Aikenhead, G. S., & Jegede, O. J. (1999). Cross-cultural science education: A cognitive explanation of
a cultural phenomenon. Journal for Research in Science Teaching, 36(3), 269–287.
Alexander, P. A. (2007). Bridging cognition and socioculturalism within conceptual ange resear:
Unnecessary foray or unaievable feat? Educational Psyologist, 42(1), 67–73. Retrieved from
www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00461520709336919.
Anderson, J. R., Greeno, J. G., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (2000). Perspectives on learning, thinking,
and activity. Educational Researcher, 29(4), 11–13.
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1996). Situated learning and education. Educational
Researcher, 25(4), 5–11.
Anderson, J. R., Reder, L. M., & Simon, H. A. (1997). Situative versus cognitive perspectives: Form
versus substance. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 18–21.
Apple, M. W., & Au, W. (Eds.) (2014). Critical education (Vol. 2). New York: Routledge.
Arthur, A., & Hanco B. (2007). Introduction to the resear process. e National Institute for
Health Research, Research Design Services for the East Midlands/Yorkshire & the Humber.
Baker, D., & Taylor, P.C.S. (1995). e eﬀect of culture on the learning of science in non-Western
countries: e results of an integrated resear review. International Journal of Science
Education, 17, 695–704.
Ball, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaing elementary
school mathematics. The Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373–397.
Barnes, B. (1985). About science. Oxford: Blackwell.
Beay, B. (1996). Rethinking the historical role of psyology in educational reform. In D. Olson &.
N. Torrance (Eds.), Handbook of education and human development: New models of learning,
teaching and schooling (pp. 100–116). Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Benjamin, L. T., Jr. (2007). A brief history of modern psychology. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bernstein, R. J. (1983). Beyond objectivism and relativism: Science, hermeneutics, and praxis.
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Biesta, G. (2009). Good education in an age of measurement: On the need to reconnect with the
question of purpose in education. Educational Assessment, Evaluation and Accountability, 21,
33-46.
Bishop, J. P. (2012). “She’s always been the smart one. I’ve always been the dumb one”: Identities in
the mathematics classroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 43(1), 34–74.
Boes, E. E. (1971). Zwisen zwei wirklikeiten. Prolegomena zu einer ökologisen psyologie.
Bern: Huber.
Boyd, W. L., & Mitell, D. E. (2001). e politics of the reading wars. In T. Loveless. (Ed.), e great
curriculum debate: How should we tea reading and math? (pp. 299–341). Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Brainerd, C. J. (2003). Jean Piaget: Learning, resear, and American Education. In B. J. Zimmerman
& D. Sunk (Eds.), Educational psyology: A century of contributions (pp. 251–287). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Coing, R. R. (Eds.) (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind,
experience, and sool (Expanded Ed.). Washington, DC: Commiee on Developments in the
Science of Learning, National Research Council.
Bransford, J. D., Stevens, R., Swartz, D. L., Meltzoﬀ, P. K., Pea, R. D., Roselle, J., Vye, N., Kuhl, P.,
Bell, P., Barron, B., Reeves, B., & Sabelli, N. (2006). Learning theories and education: Toward a
decade of synergy. In. P. A. Alexander & P. H. Winne (Eds.) Handbook of educational
psychology (2nd ed., pp. 209–244). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bredo, E. (1994). Reconstructing educational psyology: Situated cognition and Deweyan
pragmatism. Educational Psychologist, 29(1), 23–35.
Briggs, D., & Domingue, B. (2011). Due diligence and the evaluation of teaers. Boulder, CO:
National Education Policy Center.
Brooks, J. G., & Brooks, M. G. (1999). In sear of understanding: e case for constructivist
classrooms. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly
(Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229–270).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Brown, B. A. (2004). Discursive identity: Assimilation into the culture of science and its implications

for minority students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 41(8), 810–834.
Brown, G., Manogue, M., & Sadownik, L. (2001). Refreshing lecturing: A guide for lectures. Medical
Teacher, 23(3), 231–244.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.
Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Bruner, J. (1983). State of the child. New York Review, 30(16), 83–89.
Burbules, N., & Berk, R. (1999). Critical thinking and critical pedagogy: Relations, diﬀerences, and
limits. In T. Popkewitz & L. Fendler (Eds.), Critical theories in education. New York: Routledge.
Burns, M. S., Griﬃn, P., & Snow, C. E. (1999). Starting out right: A guide to promoting ildren’s
reading success. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Burton, L. (2004). Mathematicians as enquirers: Learning about learning mathematics. Dordret,
The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Cantor, G. N. (1983). Conﬂict, learning, and Piaget: Comments on Zimmerman and Blom’s “Toward
an empirical test of the role of cognitive conflict in learning.” Developmental Review, 3(1), 39–53.
Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., & Carey, D. A. (1988). Teaers’ pedagogical content
knowledge of students’ problem solving in elementary arithmetic. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 19, 385–401.
Case, R. (1992). Neo-Piagetian theories of ild development. In R. J. Sternberg & C. A. Berg (Eds.),
Intellectual development (pp. 161–196). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1959). A review of B. F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior. Language, 35(1), 26–58.
Clark, L. M., Badertser, E. M., & Napp, C. (2013). African American mathematics teaers as
agents in their African American students’ mathematics identity formation. Teaers College
Record, 115(2). Retrieved from www.tcrecord.org; ID number: 16835; date accessed: 7/26/2013
5:46:27 p.m.
Clark, R. C., Nguyen, F., & Sweller, J. (2006). Eﬃciency in learning: Evidence-based guidelines to
manage cognitive load. San Francisco: Pfeiffer.
Cobb, P. (2007). Puing philosophy to work: Coping with multiple theoretical perspectives. In Frank
K. Lester, Jr. (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 3–
38). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Cobb, P., & Steﬀe, L. P. (1983). e constructivist researer as teaer and model builder. Journal

for Research in Mathematics Education, 14, 83–94.
Coran-Smith, M. (2004). Deﬁning the outcomes of teaer education: What’s social justice got to
do with it? Asia-Pacific Journal of Teacher Education, 32(3), 193–212.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press.
Collins, H. M., & Pin, T. J. (1993). e golem: What everyone should know about science .
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Confrey, J. (1990). A review of the resear on student conceptions in mathematics, science, and
programming. In C. B. Cazden (Ed.), Review of resear in education (pp. 3–56). Washington,
DC: American Educational Research Association.
Costello, C. Y. (2005). Professional identity crisis: Race, class, gender, and success at professional
schools. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
Cubberly, E. P. (1920). The history of education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Dahl, K., Sarer, P., Lawson, L., & Grogan, P. (1999). Phonics instruction and student aievement
in whole language ﬁrst-grade classrooms. Reading Resear arterly, 34(3), 312–341.
doi:10.1598/RRQ.34.3.4.
Danziger, K. (1990). Constructing the subject. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, D. (1974). On the very idea of a conceptual seme. Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association, 47, 5–20.
Deant, E. (1993). Whole-language reading: A comprehensive teaing guide. Lancaster, PA:
Technomic.
Delpit, L. (2006). Other people’s children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New York: New Press.
Design-Based Resear Collaborative (2003). Design-based resear: An emerging paradigm for
educational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.
Dewey, J. (1900). School and society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
diSessa, A. A. (2006). A history of conceptual ange resear: reads and fault lines. In R. K.
Sawyer, (Ed.), e Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 265–281). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Donovan, M. S., & Bransford, J. D. (Eds.) (2005). How students learn: History, mathematics, and
science in the classroom. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Draper, R. J. (2002). Sool mathematics reform, constructivism, and literacy: A case for literacy

instruction in the reform-oriented math classroom. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy,
45(6), 
20–529. 
Retrieved 
from
http://jwilson.coe.uga.edu/EMAT7050/Students/Ramsey/DraperMathLiteracy.pdg.pdf.
Driver-Linn, E. (2003). Where is psyology going? Structural fault lines revealed by psyologists’
use 
of 
Kuhn. American 
Psyologist, 
58, 
269–278. 
Retrieved 
from
www.radford.edu/~tpierce/622%20files/Driver-Linn%20(2003)%20Kuhn.pdf.
Durkheim, E. (1895/1964). e rules of sociological method . New York: e Free Press. (Originally
published as Les règles de la mêthode sociologique. Paris: Alcan, 1895.)
Egan, K. (1997). e educated mind: How cognitive tools shape our understanding. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Eggen, P., & Kauchak, D. (2013). Educational Psychology: Windows on Classrooms. Boston: Pearson.
English, L. D. (Ed.) (2008). Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd ed.).
New York: Routledge.
Ernest, P. (1998). Social constructivism as a philosophy of mathematics. Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press.
Fiser, K. W. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: e control and construction of hieraries
of skills. Psychological Review, 87, 477–531.
Fleter, G. (1995). e scientiﬁc credibility of folk psyology . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Fox, B. J. (2000). Word identiﬁcation strategies: Phonics from a new perspective. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Merrill.
Fox, E., & Riconscente, M. (2008). Metacognition and self-regulation in James, Piaget, and Vygotsky.
Educational Psychology Review, 20(4), 373–389.
Freire, P. (1998). Teachers as cultural workers. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Fu, Q., Fu, X., & Dienes, Z. (2008). Implicit sequence learning and conscious awareness. Consciousness
and Cognition 17, 185–202.
Gardner, M. (1987). Riddles of the sphinx and other mathematical puzzle tales. Washington, DC:
Mathematical Association of America.
Geertz, C. (2000). Available light: Anthropological reﬂections on philosophical topics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Gergen, K. J. (2002). Social construction and pedagogical practice. In K. J. Gergen, Social construction
in context (pp. 115–136). London & Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Giroux, H. (1988). Teaers as intellectuals: Toward a critical pedagogy of learning . South Hadley,
MA: Bergin Garvey.
Giroux, H. (1997). Pedagogy and the politics of hope: eory, culture, and sooling . Boulder, CO:
West view.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1987). Learning as a constructive activity. In C. Janvier (Ed.), Problems of
representation in the teaing and learning of mathematics. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Publishers, 3–17.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1991). Abstraction, re-presentation, and reﬂection: An interpretation of
experience and Piaget’s approa. In L. P. Steﬀe (Ed.), Epistemological foundations of
mathematical knowledge (pp. 45–67). New York: Springer-Verlag.
von Glasersfeld, E. (1995). Radical constructivism: A way of knowing and learning. New York:
Falmer Press.
Gli, J. A. (1983). Piaget, Vygotsky, and Werner. In S. Wapner & B. Kaplan (Eds.), Toward a holistic
developmental psychology (pp. 35–52). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goodman, K. S. (1986). What’s whole in whole language? Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Goodman, K. S. (Ed.) (1998). In defense of good teaing: What teaers need to know about the
“Reading Wars.” York, ME: Stenhouse.
Goodson-Espy, T. (1998). e roles of reiﬁcation and reﬂective abstraction in the development of
abstract thought: Transitions from arithmetic to algebra. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
36, 219–245.
Gray. E., & Tall, D. (2001). Relationships between embodied objects and symbolic procepts: An
explanatory theory of success and failure in mathematics. Proceedings of PME 25, Ütret,
Holland: University of Ütrecht.
Green, E. (2014). Building a beer teaer: How teaing works (and how to tea it to everyone) .
New York: W. W. Norton & Company Inc.
Greeno, J. G. (1978). Understanding and procedural knowledge in mathematics instruction.
Educational Psychologist, 12(3), 94–143.
Greeno, J. G. (1993). For resear to reform education and cognitive science. In L. A. Penner, G. M.

Batse, H. M. Knoﬀ, & D. L. Nelson (Eds.), e allenges in mathematics and science
education: Psyology’s response (pp. 153–192). Washington, DC: American Psyological
Association.
Greeno, J. G. (1997). On claims that answer the wrong question. Educational Researcher, 26(1), 5–17.
Greeno, J. G. (2011). A situative perspective on cognition and learning in interaction. In T.
Koschmann (Ed.), Theorizing learning and practice (pp. 41–72). New York: Springer.
Greeno, J. G., Collins, A.M., & Resni, L. B. (1996). Cognition and learning. In D.C. Berliner & R. C.
Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 15–46). New York: Macmillan.
Gruenewald, D. A. (2003). e best of both worlds: A critical pedagogy of place. Educational
Researcher, 32(4), 3–12.
Gutiérrez, R. (2002). Enabling the practice of mathematics teaers in context: Toward a new
research agenda. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 4, 145–189.
Gutstein, E. (2006). Reading and writing the world with mathematics: Toward a pedagogy for social
justice. New York, NY: Routledge.
Hall, E. T. (1966) The hidden dimension. New York: Doubleday.
Hall, V. C. (2003). Educational psyology from 1820 to 1920. In B. J. Zimmerman & D. Sunk
(Eds.), Educational psyology: A century of contributions (pp. 3–40). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Harel, G., & Sowder, L. (2007). Toward comprehensive perspectives on the learning and teaing of
proof. In F. K. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of research on mathematics education (pp. 805–842).
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishers.
Healy, C. C. (1993a). Discovery courses are great in theory, but …. In J. L. Swartz, M. Yerushalmy,
& B. Wilson (Eds.), e Geometric Supposer: What is it a case of? (pp. 85–104). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.
Healy, C. C. (1993b). Build-A-Book Geometry: A story of student discovery. Berkeley, CA: Key
Curriculum Press.
Hergenhahn, B. R. (2009). An introduction to the history of psyology (6th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.
Hiebert, J., & Carpenter, T. P. (1992). Learning and teaing with understanding. In D. A. Grouws
(Ed.), Handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 65–97). New York:

Macmillan Co.
Hirst, W., & Manier, D. (1995). Opening vistas for cognitive psyology. In L.M.W. Martin, K.
Nelson, & E. Toba (Eds.), Sociocultural psyology: eory and practice of doing and knowing
(pp. 89–124). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Honig, B. (1996). How should we tea our ildren to read?: e role of skills in a comprehensive
reading program–A balanced approa. San Francisco: Far West Laboratory for Educational
Research and Development.
Hopkins, D., & Stern, D. (1996). ality teaers, quality sools: International perspectives and
policy implications. Teaching and Teacher Education, 12, 501–517.
Howe, K. R., & Berv, J. (2000). Constructing constructivism, epistemological and pedagogical. In D.C.
Phillips (Ed.), Constructivism in education: Opinions and second opinions on controversial issues.
Ninety-ninth Yearbook of the National Society of the Study of Education, Part I (pp. 19–40).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hunt, M. (1993). The story of psychology. New York: Doubleday.
Hutchins, E. (1995). How a cockpit remembers its speed. Cognitive Science, 19, 265–288.
Hutison, A. (2012). Mind the gap: Education reform policy and pedagogical practice. The
International Journal of Educational Organization and Leadership, 19, 1–12.
Inhelder, B., Sinclair, H., & Bovet, M. (1974). Learning and the development of cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, S., & Vagle, M. D. (2013). Living contradictions and working for ange toward a theory of
social class–sensitive pedagogy. Educational Researcher, 42, 129–141.
Kennedy, M. M. (1999). A test of some common contentions about educational resear. American
Educational Research Journal, 36, 511–541.
Kenny, M.E., & Bledsoe, M. (2005). Contributions of the relational context to career adaptability
among urban adolescents. Journal of Vocational Behaviour, 66(2), 257–272.
Kim, Y. Y. (1988). Communication and cross-cultural adaptation: An integrative theory.
Intercommunication 
Series, 
2. 
Clevedon, 
England: 
Multilingual 
Maers,
http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1988-97819-000.
Kineloe, J., & Steinberg, S. (2007). Cuing class: Socio-economic status and education. Boulder,
CO: Rowman & Littlefield.

Kirshner, D. (2002). Untangling teaers’ diverse aspirations for student learning: A crossdisciplinary
strategy for relating psyological theory to pedagogical practice. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 33(1), 46–58.
Kirshner, D. (2004). Enculturation: e neglected learning metaphor in mathematics education. In D.
McDougall & J. A. Ross (Eds.), Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual meeting of the
International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education, North American Chapter
(vol. 2, pp. 765–772), Toronto: OISE/UT.
Kirshner, D. (2012). e decline of learning theory as an inﬂuence on pedagogy: A crossdisciplinary
analysis. Paper presented at AERA Annual Meeting, Vancouver, Canada, April.
Kirshner, D., & Awtry, T. (2004). Visual salience of algebraic transformations. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 35(4), 224–257.
Kirshner, D., & Meng, L. (2011). Enculturation and acculturation. In N. M. Seel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
the sciences of learning (pp. 1148–1151). Berlin: Springer Publishing.
Kirsner, K. Speelman, C. Maybery, M., O’Brien-Malone, A., Anderson, M., & McCleod, C. (Eds.)
(2013). Implicit and explicit mental processes. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Klein, D. (2005). e state of state MATH standards . Washington, DC: Fordham Foundation.
Retrieved from www.math.jhu.edu/~wsw/ED/mathstandards05FINAL.pdf.
Klein, D. (2007). A quarter century of US ‘math wars’ and political partisanship. BSHM Bulletin:
Journal of the British Society for the History of Mathematics, 22(1), 22–33, doi:
10.1080/17498430601148762.
Klein, D., Askey, R., Milgram, R. J., Wu, H., Sarlemann, M., Tsang, B., et al. (1999, November 18).
An open letter to United States Secretary of Education, Richard Riley. The Washington Post.
Koow, M. H. (1992). Classical medicine v alternative medical practices. Journal of Medical Ethics,
18, 18–22. Retrieved from http://jme.bmj.com/content/18/1/18.full.pdf.
Krashen, S. D. (2003). False claims about phonemic awareness, phonics, skills vs. whole language, and
recreational 
reading. NoChildLe.com, 
1(5). 
Retrieved 
from
www.nochildleft.com/2003/may03reading.html.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). e structure of scientiﬁc revolutions  (enlarged ed.). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Kuhn, T. S. (2000). e road since 
Structure: Philosophical Essays, 1970–1993, with an
autobiographical interview edited by Conant & J. Haugland. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Labaree, D. F. (2000). On the nature of teaing and teaer education: Diﬃcult practices that look
easy. Journal of Teacher Education, 51, 228–233.
Lakoﬀ, G., & Núñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Lagemann, E. C. (1989). e plural worlds of educational resear. History of Education arterly,
29(2), 185–214. doi:10.2307/368309. Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/368309.
Lagemann, E. C. (2000). An elusive science: e troubling history of education resear. Chicago:
University of Chicago.
Lamiell, J. T. (2013). Critical personalism: On its tenets, its historical obscurity, and its future
prospects. In J. Martin & M. H. Bihard (Eds.), e psyology of personhood: Philosophical,
historical, social-developmental, and narrative perspectives (pp. 101–123). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Lampert, M. (1985). How do teachers manage to teach? Perspectives on problems in practice. Harvard
Educational Review, 55, 178–194.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leahey, T. H. (1992). e mythical revolutions of American psyology. American Psyologist, 47,
308–318. 
Retrieved 
from
www.radford.edu/~tpierce/622%20files/Leahey%20%281992%29%20the%20mythical%20revolution
Leary, D. E. (1994). Psye’s muse: e role of metaphor in the history of psyology. In D. E. Leary
(Ed.), Metaphors in the history of psyology (pp. 1–78). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Leiter, K. (1980). A primer on ethnomethodology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lerman, S. (2009). Pedagogy, discourse and identity. In L. Bla, H. Mendi, & Y. Solomon (Eds.),
Mathematical relationships: Identities and participation (pp. 147–159). New York: Routledge.
Lesh, R., & Sriraman, B. (2005). Mathematics education as a design science. Zentralbla für Didaktik
der Mathematik, 37(6), 490–505.
Lester, F. K. (2010). On the theoretical, conceptual, and philosophical foundations for resear in

mathematics education. In B. Sriraman & L. English (Eds.) (2010). eories of mathematics
education: Seeking new frontiers (Advances in Mathematics Education) (pp. 67–85).
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Science. Reprinted from International Reviews on Mathematical
Education, 37(6), 457–467, 2005.
Lewin, P. (1995). e social already inhabits the epistemic: A discussion of Driver; Wood, Cobb, &
Yael; and von Glasersfeld. In L. P. Steﬀe & G. Gale (Eds.), Constructivism in education (pp.
423–432). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Li, S. (2001). How close is too close? A comparison of proxemic reactions of Singaporean Chinese to
male intruders of four ethnicities. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 93, 124–126.
Loveless, T. (2001). Introduction. In T. Loveless (Ed.), e great curriculum debate: How should we
teach reading and math? (pp. 1–12). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaing elementary mathematics: Teaer’s understanding of
fundamental mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Maddo, M. N. (1981). Science education: An anthropological viewpoint. Studies in Science
Education, 8, 1–26.
Mark, J., Cuoco, A., Goldenberg, E. P., & Sword, S. (2010). Developing mathematical habits of mind.
Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, 15(9), 505–509.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation into the human representation and processing
of visual information. New York: Freeman.
McCarty, L. P., & Swandt, T. A. (2000). Seductive illusions: Von Glasersfeld and Gergen on
epistemology and education. In D. C. Phillips (Ed.), Constructivism in education: Opinions and
second opinions on controversial issues. Ninety-ninth yearbook of the National Society of the
Study of Education, Part I (pp. 41–85). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McCombs, B. L. (2003). A framework for the redesign of K-12 education in the context of current
educational reform. Theory Into Practice, 42(2), 93–101.
McLeod, D. B., Stake, R. E., Sappelle, B., & Mellissinos, M. (1995). International inﬂuences on the
NCTM Standards: A case study of educational ange. In D. T. Owens, M. K. Reed, & G. M.
Millsaps (Eds.), Proceedings of the seventeenth annual meeting of the North American Chapter
of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (pp. 240–246).

Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse for Science, Mathematics, and Environmental Education.
McRae, M. (2011). Tribal science: Brains, beliefs, and bad ideas. St. Lucia, Australia: University of
Queensland Press.
Mehan, H., & Wood, H. (1975). The reality of ethnomethodology. New York: Wiley.
Merton, R. K. (1942/1973). e normative structure of science. In R. K. Merton, e sociology of
science: eoretical and empirical investigations (pp. 267–278). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Millei, Z, Griﬃths, T. G., & Parkes, R. J. (2010). Re-theorizing discipline in education: Problems,
politics, & possibilities. New York: Peter Lang.
Morgan, C. L. (1894/1903). An introduction to comparative psyology (2nd ed.). London: Walter
Scott Publishing.
Morris, E. K. (2003). B. F. Skinner: A behavior analyst in educational psyology. In B. J.
Zimmerman & D. Sunk (Eds.), Educational psyology: A century of contributions (pp. 229–
250). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Moscardini, L. (2014). Developing equitable elementary mathematics classrooms through teaers
learning about ildren’s mathematical thinking: Cognitively Guided Instruction as an inclusive
pedagogy. Teaching and Teacher Education, 43, 69–79.
Murray, D. J. (1988). A history of Western psychology (2nd ed). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nardi, B. A. (1996). Studying context: A comparison of activity theory, situated action models, and
distributed cognition. In Nardi, B. A. (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and
human-computer interaction (pp. 69–102). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nasir, N. S., & Cobb, P. (Eds.). (2002). Editors’ introduction to Diversity, equity, and mathematical
learning. Special issue of Mathematical Thinking and Problem Solving, 4(2&3), 91–102.
Nasir, N. S., & Saxe, G. B. (2003). Ethnic and academic identities: A cultural practice perspective on
emerging tensions and their management in the lives of minority students. Educational
Researcher, 32(5), 14–18.
National Council for Accreditation of Teaer Education. (2002). Professional standards for the
accreditation of schools, colleges, and departments of education. Washington, DC: Author.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.

National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities (NICHCY) (2009). How NCLB deﬁnes
“Highly Qualified.” Retrieved from http://nichcy.org/schools-administrators/hqt/nclb.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel. (2008). Foundations for success: e ﬁnal report of the
National Mathematics Advisory Panel. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.National
Resear Council. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and sool. Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.National Resear Council. (2005). How students learn: History,
mathematics, and science in the classroom. M. S. Donovan & J. D. Bransford (Eds.). Commiee
on How People Learn: A Targeted Report for Teachers. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Niss, M. (2004). Key issues and trends in resear on mathematical educational. In H. Fujita, Y.
Hashimoto, B. Hodgson, P. Yee Lee, S. Lerman, & T. Sawada (Eds.), Proceedings of the ninth
international congress on mathematical education (pp. 37–57). Dordret, Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers. http://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/1–4020–7910–9/page/1.
Noddings, N. (1990). Constructivism in mathematics education. In R. B. Davis, C. A. Maher, & N.
Noddings (Eds.), Constructivist views on the teaing and learning of mathematics. Journal for
Resear in Mathematics Education, Monograph Number 4 (pp. 7–18). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
North, A. (2015). Are ‘learning styles’ a symptom of education’s ills? New York Times, Op Talk ,
2/25/15. 
Retrieved 
from http://op-talk.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/02/25/are-learning-styles-a-
symptom-of-educations-ills/?smid=fb-share&_r=1.
Nuthall, G., (2004). Relating classroom teaing to student learning: A critical analysis of why
resear has failed to bridge the theory-practice gap. Harvard Educational Review,74(3), 273–
306. Retrieved from http://her.hepg.org/content/e08k1276713824u5/fulltext.pdf.
Oberheim, E., & Hoyningen-Huene, P. (2013). e incommensurability of scientiﬁc theories. In E. N.
Zalta 
(Ed.), e 
Stanford 
encyclopedia 
of 
philosophy  
(Spring 
Edition).
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/entries/incommensurability/.
Olson, D. R. (2003). Psyological theory and educational reform: How sool remakes mind and
society. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, D. R., & Bruner, J. S. (1996). Folk psyology and folk pedagogy. In D. R. Olson & N. Torrance

(Eds.), e handbook of education and human development  (pp. 9–27). Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Ormrod, J. E. (2000). Behaviorist views of learning. In J. E. Ormord, Educational psyology:
Developing learners (3rd ed.) (pp. 394–432). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ormrod, J. E. (2009). Essentials of educational psychology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.
Ostrove J. M., & Cole E. R. (2003). Privileging class: Toward a critical psyology of social class in
the 
context 
of 
education. Journal of Social Issues, 59, 677–692. doi:10.1046/j.0022–
4537.2003.00084.x.
Otero, J. (1998). Inﬂuence of knowledge activation and context on comprehension monitoring of
science texts. In D. J. Haer, J. Dunlosky, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.). Metacognition in educational
theory and practice (pp. 145–164). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Otterness, J. (2009). Teaching and learning—It’s not rocket science! Phi Delta Kappan, 91(2), 86–88.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Pashler, H., McDaniel, M., Rohrer, D., & Bjork, R. (2009). Learning styles: Concepts and evidence.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 9(3), 105–119.
Pavlov, I. P. (1897/1910). e work of the digestive glands. (W. H. ompson, Trans.) London:
Charles Griffin & Co.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reﬂexes: An investigation of the physiological activity of the
cerebral cortex. (G. V. Anrep, Trans./Ed.) London: Oxford University Press.
Paz, T., & Leron, U. (2009). e slippery road from actions on objects to functions and variables.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 40(1), 18–39.
Pedamonte, B. (2007). How can the relationship between argumentation and proof be analysed?
Educational 
Studies 
in 
Mathematics, 
66(1), 
23–41. 
Retrieved 
from
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs10649–006–9057-x.
Penuel, W. R., & Werts, J. V. (1995). Vygotsky and identity formation: A sociocultural approa.
Educational Psychologist, 30, 83–92.
Perkins, D., & Rithart, R. (2004). When is good thinking? In D. Y. Dai & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.),
Motivation, emotion, and cognition: Integrative perspectives on intellectual functioning and
development (pp. 175–194). Mawah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Perrenet, J., & Taconis, R. (2009). Mathematical enculturation: Shis in problem solving beliefs and

behavior during the baelor programme. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 71, 181–198.
doi:10.1007/s10649-008-9166-9.
Phillips, D. C. (1995). e good, the bad, and the ugly: e many faces of constructivism.
Educational Researcher, 24(7), 5–12.
Piaget, J. (1965/1995). Sociological studies (T. Brown, R. Campbell, N. Emler, M. Ferrari, M. Gribetz,
R. Kitchener, W. Mays, A. Notari, C. Sherrard, and L. Smith, Trans.). New York: Routledge.
Piaget, J. (1970/1983). Piaget’s theory. In P. H. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of ild psyology  (4th ed.,
Vol. 1, pp. 103–128). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and Knowledge. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.
Piaget, J. (1975). L’equilibration des structures cognitives. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Piaget, J. (1977a). Problems of equilibration. In M. H. Appel, & L. S. Goldberg, (Eds.), Topics in
cognitive development (Vol. 1, pp. 3–14). New York: Plenum.
Piaget, J. (1977b). Reeres sur l’abstraction reﬂeissante, Vols. 1 & 2. Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France.
Pin, T. (2007). e sociology of science and tenology. In C. D. Bryant & D. L. Pe (Eds.), 21st
century sociology: A reference handbook (vol. 2) (pp. 266–276). ousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Polya, G. (1957). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method (2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Powell, J. W. (1883). Human evolution: Annual address of the President, J. W. Powell, Delivered
November 6, 1883. Transactions of the Anthropological Society of Washington, 2, 176–208.
Prawat, R. S. (1992). Teaers’ beliefs about teaing and learning: A constructivist perspective.
American Journal of Education, 100, 354–395.
Pressley, M., & Roehrig, A. D. (2003). Educational psyology in the modern era: 1960 to the present.
In B. J. Zimmerman & D. Sunk (Eds.), Educational psyology: A century of contributions (pp.
333–366). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pressman, B. (2007). Substitute teaching from A to Z. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artiﬁcial grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 6, 855–863.
Reber, A. S. (1993). Implicit learning and tacit knowledge: An essay on the cognitive unconscious

(Oxford Psyology Series No. 19). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; New York: Clarendon
Press.
Regehr, G. (2010). It’s NOT roet science: Rethinking our metaphors for resear in health
professions 
education. Medical 
Education, 
44(1), 
31–39. 
Retrieved 
from
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20078754.
Remland, M.S., Jones, T. S., & Brinkman, H. (1991). Proxemic and haptic behavior in three European
countries. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 15(4), 215–232.
Resendez, M. & Azin, M. (2007). e relationship between using Saxon elementary and middle
sool math and student performance on California statewide assessments. Austin, TX:
Harcourt.
Riey, R. C., Klein, J. D., & Tracey, M. W. (2011). e instructional design knowledge base: eory,
research, and practice. New York: Routledge.
Rippa, S. A. (1971). Education in a free society (2nd. ed.). New York: David McKay Company.
Rosenberg, A. (2005). Philosophy of science: A contemporary approa (2nd ed.). New York:
Routledge.
Rubin, B.C. (2007). Learner identity amid ﬁgured worlds: Constructing (in)competence at an urban
high school. The Urban Review, 39, 217–249.
Sarkar, H. (2007). Group rationality in scientific research. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sawyer, R. K. (2002a). Emergence in sociology: Contemporary philosophy of mind and some
implications for sociological theory. American Journal of Sociology, 107(3), 551–585. Retrieved
from www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/338780.
Sawyer, R. K. (2002b). Durkheim’s dilemma: Toward a sociology of emergence. Sociological eory,
20(2), 227–247. doi:10.1111/1467–9558.00160.
Saxon Publishers (1992). Saxon Publishers (a promotional catalogue). Norman, OK: Author.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2003). Knowledge building. In J. W. Guthrie (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
Education (2nd ed., pp. 1370–1373). New York: Macmillan Reference, USA.
Serer, J. (2011). Measuring teaing using value-added modeling: e imperfect panacea. NASSP
Bulletin, 95(2), 122–140. doi:10.1177/0192636511410052.
Soen, H. L., Fey, J. T., Hirs, C. R., & Coxford, A. F. (1999). Issues and options in the Math Wars.
Phi Delta Kappan, 80(6), 444–453.

Soenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, and
sense making in mathematics. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of resear on mathematics
teaching and learning (pp. 334–370). New York: Macmillan.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2007). Method. In Frank K. Lester, Jr. (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on
mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 69–107). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1977). Cross-cultural studies of memory and cognition. In R. V. Kvail, Jr., &
J. W. Hagen (Eds.), Perspectives on the development of memory and cognition (pp. 239–272).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Secada, W. (1995). Social and critical dimensions for equity in mathematics education. In W. Secada,
E. Fennema, & L. B. Adajian (Eds.). New directions for equity in mathematics education (pp.
146–164). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Serpell, R. (2001). Cultural dimensions of literacy promotion and sooling. In L. Verhoven & C. E.
Snow (Eds.), Literacy and motivation: Reading engagement in individuals and groups (pp. 243–
273). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of oosing just one. Educational
Researcher, 27(2), 4–13.
Sfard, A. (2008). inking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses, and
mathematizing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Sfard, A., & Linevski, L. (1994). e gains and the pitfalls of reiﬁcation: e case of algebra.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 191–228.
Shapin, S. (1995). Here and everywhere—sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge. Annual Review of
Sociology, 21, 289–321.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaing: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard
Educational Review, 57(1), 1–21.
Sigel, I. E. (1979). On becoming a thinker: A psyoeducational model. Educational Psyologist, 14,
70–78.
Simon, M. A., Saldanha, L., McClinto, E., Karagoz Akar, G., Watanabe, T., & Ozgur Zembat, I.
(2010). A developing approa to studying students’ learning through their mathematical
activity. Cognition and Instruction, 28, 70–112.
Simon, M. A., & Tzur, R. (2004). Explicating the role of mathematical tasks in conceptual learning:

An elaboration of the hypothetical learning trajectory. Mathematical inking and Learning,
6(2), 91–104.
Simon, M. A., Tzur, R., Heinz, K., & Kinzel, M. (2004). Explicating a meanism for conceptual
learning: Elaborating the construct of reﬂective abstraction. Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 35(5), 305–329.
Skinner, B. F. (1958a). Verbal behavior. New York: Macmillan.
Skinner, B. F. (1958b). Teaching machines. Science, 128, 969–977.
Sloboda, J. A., & Rogers, D. (Eds.) (1987). Cognitive processes in mathematics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Smith, E. E. (2001). Cognitive psyology: History. International encyclopedia of the social and
behavioral 
sciences. 
New 
York: 
Elsevier, 
pp. 
2140–2147. 
Retrieved 
from
http://mechanism.ucsd.edu/teaching/w07/philpsych/smith.cogpsychhistory.pdf.
Snow, C. E. (2001). Preventing reading diﬃculties in young ildren: Precursors and fallout. In T.
Loveless. (Ed.), e great curriculum debate: How should we tea reading and math?  (pp. 229–
246). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Spivey, N. N. (1997). The constructivist metaphor: Reading, writing, and the making of meaning. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Staats, A. W. (1981). Paradigmatic behaviorism, unified theory, unified theory construction methods,
and the Zeitgeist of separatism. American Psyologist, 36(3), 239–256. doi: 10.1037/0003–
066X.36.3.239.
Stanic, G. M. A., & Kilpatri, J. (1988). Historical perspectives on problem solving in the
mathematics curriculum. In R. I. Charles & E. A. Silver (Eds.), e teaing and assessing of
mathematical problem solving (pp. 1–22). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Stanovi, K. E. (1986). Mahew eﬀects in reading: Some consequences of individual diﬀerences in
the acquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 360–406.
Steﬀe, L. P. (1991). e constructivist teaing experiment: Illustrations and implications. In E. von
Glasersfeld (Ed.), Radical constructivism in mathematics education (pp. 177–194). Dordret,
Holland: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Steﬀe, L. (1994). Children’s multiplying semes. In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), e development

of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics (pp. 3–40). Albany: State University
of New York Press.
Steﬀe, L. P. (2003). Fractional commensurate, composition, and adding semes: Learning trajectories
of Jason and Laura: Grade 5. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22, 237–295.
Steﬀe, L. P., & Kieren, T. (1994). Radical constructivism and mathematics education. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 25(6), 711–733.
Steﬀe, L. P., & ompson, P. W. (2000). Teaing experiment methodology: Underlying principles
and essential elements. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of resear design in mathematics
and science education (pp. 267–306). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sternberg, R. J. (1997). Metaphors of mind: Conceptions of the nature of intelligence. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). e teaing gap: Best ideas from the world’s teaers for
improving education in the classroom. New York: The Free Press.
Stylianides, G. J., & Stylianides, A. J. (2009). Facilitating the transition from empirical arguments to
proof. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 40(3), 314–352.
Sund, R. B., & Picard, A. J. (1972). Behavioral objectives and evaluation measures: Science and
mathematics. Columbus, OH: Charles Merrill Publishing.
Thomas, C. (2004). Distracted subject: Madness and gender in Shakespeare and early modern culture.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
ompson, P. W. (1994). e development of the concept of speed and its relationship to concepts of
rate. In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), e development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning
of Mathematics (pp. 181–236). Albany: State University of New York Press.
ompson, P. W. (2013). In the absence of meaning…. In Leatham, K. (Ed.), Vital directions for
research in mathematics education (pp. 57–93). New York: Springer.
orndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: An experimental study of the associative processes in
animals. New York: Macmillan.
orndike, E. L. (1910). e contribution of psyology to education. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 1, 5–12.
orndike, E. L. (1911). Animal intelligence: Experimental studies. New York: Macmillan. Retrieved
from https://archive.org/stream/animalintelligen00thor#page/n5/mode/2up.

orndike, E. L., & Gates, A. I. (1929). e main aracteristics of learning. In Elementary principles
of education (pp. 84–106). New York: The Macmillan Company.
orndike, E. L., & Woodworth, R. L. (1901). e inﬂuence of improvement in one mental function
upon the efficiency of other functions. Psychological Review, 8, 247–261.
Vågan, A. (2011). Towards a sociocultural perspective on identity formation in education. Mind,
Culture, and Activity, 18, 43–57.
VanderStoep, S. W., & Seifert, C. M. (1993). Learning “how” versus learning “when”: Improving
transfer of problem-solving principles. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 3(1), 93–111.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1926/1997). Educational psychology (R. Silverman, Trans.) Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie
Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1927/1987). e historical meaning of the crisis in psyology: A methodological
investigation. New York: Plenum Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1934/1986). ought and language (Chapter 6, “e development of scientiﬁc
concepts in childhood”). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wandersee, J. H., Mintzes, J. J., & Novak, J. D. (1994). Resear on alternative conceptions in science.
In D. L. Gabel (Ed.), Handbook of resear on science teaing and learning (pp. 177–210). New
York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Wasley, P. (2006, June 6). Accreditor of education sools drops controversial ‘social justice’ standard
for 
teaer 
candidates. e 
Chronicle 
of 
Higher 
Education. 
Retrieved 
from
http://chronicle.com/article/Accreditor-of-Education/14458/.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review, 20, 158–177.
Weimer, W. B., & Palermo, D. S. (1973). Paradigms and normal science in psyology. Science
Studies, 3, 211–244.
White, B. Y. (1993). inkerTools: Causal models, conceptual ange, and science education.
Cognition and Instruction, 10(1), 
1–100. 
Retrieved 
from www.jstor.org/stable/3233779?
origin=JSTOR-pdf&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents.
White, S. H. (1991). ree visions of a psyology of education. In L. T. Landsmann (Ed.), Culture,
schooling, and psychological development (pp. 1–38). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wilson, S. M. (2003). California dreaming: Reforming mathematics education. New Haven, CT: Yale

University Press.
Windsitl, M. (2002). Framing constructivism in practice as the negotiation of dilemmas: An
analysis of the conceptual, pedagogical, cultural, and political allenges facing teaers. Review
of 
Educational 
Resear, 
72(2), 
131–175. 
Retrieved 
from
http://rer.sagepub.com/content/72/2/131.full.pdf+html.
Wimann, E. (1995). Mathematics education as a ‘design science.’ Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 29, 355–374.
Wojcikiewicz, S. K. (2010). Dewey, Peirce, and the categories of learning. Education and Culture,
26(2), 65–82.
Wojcikiewicz, S. K., & Wenzel, A. (2012, April). eories of learning as aspects of experience: A
philosophical system for reconceptualizing, and teaing, behaviorist, cognitive, and situative
perspectives. Paper presented at AERA Annual Meeting, Vancouver, Canada.
Yael, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in
mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458–477.

Section II
Democratic Access to Mathematics
Learning

5 Young Children’s Access to Powerful
Mathematics Ideas
A Review of Current Challenges and New
Developments in the Early Years
Joan Moss
OISE of the University of Toronto
Catherine D.Bruce
Trent University
Janette Bobis
The University of Sydney

A Call to Action
e importance of a sound introduction to mathematics in the early years is
buressed by recent resear results that demonstrate the predictive power
of early mathematics for later academic and career success (Claessens,
Duncan, & Engel, 2009; Duncan et al., 2007; Geary, Hoard, Nugent, &
Bailey, 2013; Ritie & Bates, 2013). In 2007, Duncan et al. identiﬁed
mathematics skills at kindergarten entry as the best predictor of sool
aievement, and that this ﬁnding was consistent for both boys and girls
from high and low socioeconomic bagrounds. More recently, in a
traing study of 1,364 ildren from 54 months to the age of 15, Was,
Duncan, Siegler and Davis-Kean (2014) found that there were “statistically
signiﬁcant associations between presool mathematical ability and
adolescent mathematics aievement;” moreover, “gains in mathematical
knowledge from presool through ﬁrst grade are even more predictive of
age 15 mathematics aievement than presool knowledge” (p. 352).
Reading and working memory, by comparison, were found to be less
predictive of later aievement. Together, these studies strongly indicate
that high-quality mathematics learning opportunities, prior to formal
schooling and in the first years of school, are crucial.
Fortunately, there is a strong and exciting resear base evolving that
demonstrates best practices for engaging ildren in signiﬁcant
mathematics activity. National associations and professional societies, su
as the National Council of Teaers of Mathematics (NCTM, 2000) and the
National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC/NCTM,
2002), strongly recommend adoption of enried and expanded
mathematics programs in the early years.
Nevertheless, progress in implementing these best practices has been
hampered by many factors: for example, the privileging of literacy over
math in early years; the discomfort that many early years educators have

with mathematics; and, most especially, by common misunderstandings and
underestimations of young ildren’s developmental capabilities in the
areas of mathematical thinking. ese and other factors limit the scope of
ambition that teaers and policy makers hold for their young mathematics
students. As a result, early years mathematics in many jurisdictions remains
narrowly focused on basic counting, sorting, and naming of shapes, or else
is relegated to unstructured play, devoid of systematic inquiry (Ginsburg,
Lee, & Boyd, 2008).
Although these limitations of the scope and ambition of early ildhood
mathematics education underserve all ildren, the imperative of reform
takes on added urgency when we consider the diﬀerential eﬀects of weak
mathematics programming and instruction on ildren of diﬀerent social
classes. In many countries with tiered education systems, educational
expertise is inequitably distributed across income groups, with students of
higher socioeconomic status (SES) more likely to obtain instruction
conducted in accordance with recommended standards (Arnold &
Doctoroﬀ, 2003). A second factor is diﬀerences in the socialization
experiences that young children of different social classes encounter prior to
commencing presool programs. ese diﬀerences may privilege more-
aﬄuent students’ readiness for sool mathematics (Clements & Sarama,
2009). In this respect, students from low-resourced communities are more
likely to fall behind their peers in early childhood education and elementary
sool. Fortunately, there is a growing body of resear-based programs
that have been shown to be promising for all young learners.
In this apter we consider how to expand both pedagogy and the
curriculum for young ildren to support equitable access to mathematics
thinking and ideas. We discuss new resear ﬁndings on the centrality of
early mathematics for long-term overall academic success, and present
promising developments in the areas of play and spatial reasoning.
In the ﬁrst section of this apter, “Current Issues, Approaes, and

Programs 
for 
Early 
Years 
Mathematics,” 
we 
summarize 
key
recommendations of leading organizations with a focus on high quality
early years mathematics. We review the literature on the gap in
preparedness between ildren from low- and high-resourced communities
and review recent resear that links early math performance and later
academic success. We also oﬀer a description of some representative early
year mathematics programs that have been shown to be successful in
supporting young learners, particularly those at risk.
In the second section, “Documented Challenges to Mathematically Ri
Instruction,” we provide an analysis of some of the known impediments to
widespread implementation of the recommendations by many professional
organizations on early mathematics education. is section also includes a
discussion on the aitudes and beliefs about mathematics content and
pedagogy for early years classrooms.
e third section, “New Developments in the Field,” examines recent
developments in the mathematics education resear community. e ﬁrst
is an articulation of the various perspectives and ﬁndings on the aﬀordances
of a playful and guided pedagogy. e second is an expanded
conceptualization of early years mathematics curricula to include recent
developments in geometry and spatial reasoning. Next, we oﬀer vignees
that bring together guided pedagogy within the context of spatial reasoning
to illustrate the sophisticated mathematics thinking that young ildren can
demonstrate.
e next section, “Professional Development for Teaers of Young
Children,” describes several new models and promising approaes to early
years teaer professional learning in mathematics. e apter ﬁnishes
with a succinct summary and series of recommendations. Whereas the early
ildhood years generally are identiﬁed as 0–8 years of age, the focus in
this apter is on mathematics teaing and learning in the 4–7 age range,
roughly capturing the pre-kindergarten through to first grade span.

Current Issues, Approaches, and Programs for
Early Years Mathematics
In the past decade there has been an unprecedented political as well as
academic focus on the high importance of mathematics in early years
classrooms (Clarke, Clarke & Roe, 2011; Ginsburg et al., 2008; Haey,
2013; MacDonald, Davies, Doe, & Perry, 2012; Tirosh, Tsamir &
Levenson, 2011; Purpura, Baroody, & Lonigan, 2013). Accumulating
evidence conﬁrms that ildren’s mathematics learning in the ﬁrst six years
of life has profound, long-lasting outcomes for students in their later years—
not only in relation to their future mathematics aievement but also in
terms of overall academic success (e.g., Jordan & Levine, 2009; Duncan et
al., 2007). e National Association for the Education of Young Children
and the National Council of Teaer of Mathematics (NAEYC & NCTM,
2002) jointly identiﬁed mathematics as a crucial area of learning for young
ildren and called for the provision of “high-quality, allenging, and
accessible mathematics education for all 3- to 6-year-old ildren” (NAEYC
& NCTM, 2002, p. 1).
Everyday Mathematics and Equity
It is now well known that young ildren have an intuitive and strong
grasp of “everyday mathematics” (Ginsburg et al., 2008, p. 3), as well as
having “sophisticated mathematical minds and a natural eagerness to
engage in a range of mathematical activities” (English & Mulligan, 2013, p.
1; see also Anthony & Walshaw, 2007; Baroody, Lai, & Mix, 2006; Hunting
et al., 2013; Perry & Doe, 2008; Sarama & Clements, 2009). Even before
ildren enter presool they develop an everyday mathematics that is
“surprisingly broad, complex, and sometimes sophisticated” (Ginsburg et

al., 2008, p. 3). is everyday mathematics may be innate or drawn from
daily experiences, and has been shown to provide the foundation for
learning more complex and abstract mathematics throughout sool
(Jordan & Levine, 2009). Indeed, given the breadth of young ildren’s
everyday mathematics, cognitive scientists (West, Denton, & Germino-
Hausken, 2000; Baroody & Wilkins, 1999; Hunting, 2003), and math
education solars call for a raising of the curriculum ceiling, because
“ildren oen know more than curriculum developers or teaers give
them credit” (Sarama & Clements, 2008, p. 68; see also Bruce & Hawes,
2014; Bruce, Moss, & Flynn, 2013).
Unfortunately, not all young ildren possess—nor have they been
exposed to—the same quality of everyday mathematics. Despite many
strong universal starting points, there are striking diﬀerences in ildren’s
mathematics readiness by the time they enter sool—diﬀerences oen
aributed to factors related to SES (Baroody, 2006; Case, Griﬃn & Kelly,
1999; Jordan, Kaplan, Oláh, & Locuniak, 2006; Klibanoﬀ, Levine,
Huenloer, Vasilyeva, & Hedges, 2006; Lee & Burkam, 2002; Saxe,
Guberman, & Gearhart, 1987; Starkey, Klein, & Wakeley, 2004). ere is
ample resear illustrating that kindergarten students from low-resource
families lag behind in mathematics knowledge and readiness compared to
peers from more affluent families (Alexander & Entwisle, 1988; Claessens et
al., 2009; Duncan et al., 2007; Jordan & Levine, 2009). As Clements and
Sarama (2011a) note, “some 6-year-olds have not acquired mathematical
knowledge that other ildren acquire at 3 years of age” (p. 5). Although
both groups of ildren may have informal experiences with quantitative
situations, those from low-resource communities tend to have fewer
opportunities to mathematize this tacit knowledge—that is, to reﬂect on,
and represent, the situations. Resear has found that ildren from low-
income families are less able to explain mathematical ideas and processes
than their more-privileged peers.

Furthermore, this gap between low-income and middle-income students
widens over time in the absence of intervention (Cannon, Jaowitz, &
Painter, 2006; Crosnoe & Cooper, 2010). ese SES diﬀerences pose a major
problem in early education contexts with respect to mathematics, where, as
we elaborate in this apter, early competencies have been found to be
strong predictors of later academic success, including social studies and
reading (Duncan et al., 2007; Verdine et al., 2013).
Mathematics in Kindergarten as the Best Predictor
of Later Academic Success
In a landmark set of studies, Claessens, Duncan, and colleagues (e.g.,
Claessens et al., 2009; Claessens & Engel, 2011; Duncan et al., 2007), found
that mathematics skills measured at kindergarten entry were the best
predictor of later sool aievement, and that this ﬁnding was consistent
for both boys and girls from high and low socioeconomic bagrounds.
ese studies, involving up to 36,000 students and combining six
international data sets, found that ildren’s sool-entry mathematics
abilities measured at kindergarten were strongly predictive of later
academic success, above and beyond the variance accounted for by reading,
aention, and socio-emotional skills. Furthermore, the researers found
that “early mathematics skills predicted reading, math, and science
aievement as well as grade retention from kindergarten through eighth
grade” and that the “importance of these math skills for subsequent
aievement increases or is maintained over time.” (Claessens & Engel,
2011, p. 2). Further, the findings held true across demographic groups:
e fact that these early skills are equally important for all ildren reinforces the need to
continue to work to reduce the aievement gap and to ensure that all ildren 1) begin sool
with the skills necessary to succeed and 2) are supported adequately in their eﬀorts to continue

to learn.
(p. 22)
ese and other ﬁndings point to the profound importance of early
mathematics learning to prepare ildren for sool and life success
(Baroody et al., 2006). Jordan and Levine (2009) warn that, without
adequate support in the ﬁrst years of sooling, learners who experience
diﬃculties in mathematics in the early years can experience “a cascade of
mathematics failure” (Jordan & Levine, 2009, p. 6) that threatens their
ability to catch up (see also Aunola, Leskinen, Lerkkanen, & Nurmi, 2004).
In the interest of establishing equitable starting points for students of all
bagrounds, the US National Resear Council (NRC) urges policy makers
to provide young ildren with “extensive, high-quality early mathematics
instruction that can serve as a sound foundation for later learning in
mathematics and contribute to addressing long-term systemic inequities in
educational outcomes” (Cross, Woods, & Sweingruber, 2009, p. 2).
Baroody et al. (2006) further assert that, “most individual diﬀerences are
probably due to the la of opportunity” (p. 200). erefore establishing the
foundations of mathematics knowledge early in formal sooling “seems to
be an essential ﬁrst step for aieving equity (Baroody et al., 2006, p. 202).
In the most basic sense, early mathematics education is one of the most
important social justice issues.
Policy Directions and Visions of School
Mathematics
To elaborate on what is meant by “extensive, high level early mathematics
instruction,” we look to NAEYC/NCTM and NRC. NAEYC/NCTM (2002)
state that mathematics in early years classrooms should address the big
ideas in all of the strands of mathematics through the processes of problem

solving, analysis, and communication. Further, NRC (2009) declares that
early years teaing must be intentional. Intentional teaing involves
teaers “adapting teaing to the content, type of learning experience, and
individual child with a clear learning target as a goal” (NRC, 2009, p. 226).
e intuitive foundational mathematics skills that young ildren
naturally develop are not enough; it is through intentional teaing that
ildren can advance beyond their intuitive mathematics to meaningfully
interpret foundational mathematical principles (Ginsburg, 2009; Haey,
2013).
Early Years Mathematics Programs
Given the moral and practical imperative to improve mathematics
programming for young ildren, some mathematics education researers
and psyologists have been developing comprehensive intervention
programs to support closing aievement gaps of ildren prior to entering
formal schooling and in the first years of school.
Since the late 1990s, a number of high quality, resear-based, early
years mathematics programs have been developed to support young
students, particularly ildren from low-resource communities, to engage in
rigorous mathematics learning. Descriptions of the wide range of early
years programs is beyond the scope of this apter. Instead we present four
of these programs—Building Blos, Number Worlds (Rightstart), Paern
and Structure Mathematical Awareness Program, and Big Math for Lile
Kids—because they span, at a minimum, the pre-kindergarten to ﬁrst grade
(the target age group for this apter) and, importantly, because the central
features of these programs are representative of most of the successful early
year mathematics curricula. We have also selected these programs because
they speciﬁcally address the needs of ildren at risk and have been

empirically tested and shown to be eﬀective in supporting young students
to succeed at mathematics beyond their expected levels of competence.
As we note in the descriptions of the four programs there are a number
of diﬀerences amongst them in terms of scope of topics, level of tenology
use (for an example of high tenology use, see Masieo & Soury-
Lavergne’s EducMath program, originating in France), and the overall
organization of material. Along with these diﬀerences however, the four
programs share fundamental principles and features. ese commonalities
include: (1) the use of the ildren’s mathematical knowledge and interests
as a starting point for learning; (2) the understanding that play alone is not
enough to ensure deep understanding of foundational mathematics ideas
and therefore, mathematics should be introduced and enried in a planned
way; (3) the understanding that activities should be designed and organized
based on developmental theory; and (4) the assumption that sensitive adult
guidance is required. Ea of these programs also involves substantial
professional development. Finally, the general hypothesis underlying ea
program is, to quote (Greenes, Ginsburg, & Balfanz, 2004), “extensive
engagement in activities oﬀered… may lead to higher levels of competence
than ordinarily observed in young children” (p. 164).
Building Blocks—Foundations for Mathematics
Thinking Program (Clements & Sarama, 2002)
We begin our discussion of the four selected math programs with Clements’
and Sarama’s Building Blos curriculum, whi, to date, has undergone
several phases of rigorous evaluation and has been shown to be highly
successful. (See Clements and Sarama, 2008 and Clements, Sarama, Spitler,
Lange, & Wolfe, 2011 for details of randomized controlled studies showing
strong eﬀect sizes of the program.) Designed for students from pre-

kindergarten through second grade, the Building Blos program has been
created to support young students to gain competence in the domains of: (1)
number concepts (in particular, in subitizing, counting and arithmetic
operations); and (2) spatial and geometric concepts, and processes. Clements
and Sarama state that they selected these topics because they are
“mathematically foundational, generative for, and interesting to young
ildren” (p. 6). Within these two areas, three mathematical themes are
integrated: paerns, data and sorting, and sequencing (Sarama, 2004). e
activities included in Building Blos are aimed at “ﬁnding the mathematics
in, and developing mathematics from ildren’s everyday activity” (Sarama
& Clements, 2002, p. 93).
While this program involves a wide range of classroom activities, a
particular feature of Building Blos is the prominent use of computer
soware designed as part of the curriculum (Sarama, 2004; Clements &
Sarama, 2002). e soware component supports students’ modeling and
mathematizing and, importantly, allows for individualized learning
experiences.
A second important feature of this program, and one that is a
foundational contribution, is the incorporation of rigorously researed
learning trajectories that underlie ea topic and subtopic. Learning
trajectories, ﬁrst introduced and used in the Netherlands within the Realistic
mathematics program (Gravemeijer, 1994), and also developed and used by
Dut researers (Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, 2008; Van den Heuvel-
Panhuizen & Buys, 2008; Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, Kühne, & Lombard,
2012), constitute the core around whi all educational activities are
structured in the Building Blos program. ese trajectories involve
descriptions of successive levels of mathematical reasoning towards a goal
of a speciﬁc topic and are embedded in the instructional activities that
enable students to progress from one level to another. For example, in the
geometry strand in the area of composing and decomposing, students move

from the level of “Pre-Composer,” a level in whi the ild manipulates
shapes as individual pieces and is yet unable to combine them to compose
large shape; to “Picture Maker,” in whi the student ooses shapes using
gestalt conﬁguration and a pi-discard strategy; to “Shape Composer,” in
whi the ild is able to combine shapes to make new shapes with
anticipation.
The Number Worlds Program (Griffin, 2004)
e design of the Number Worlds program (originally called Rightstart; see
Griﬃn, Case, & Siegler, 1994) also is heavily grounded in a developmental
trajectory approa. However, in this program, the focus is exclusively on
number development and is underpinned by the central conceptual
structure theory for whole number development (e.g., Case & Okamoto,
1996). Brieﬂy, a central conceptual structure is deﬁned as a powerful
organizing knowledge network that plays a central role in enabling
individuals to master the problems that a domain presents. e proposal is
that the central conceptual structure for number is built on the integration
of two separate competencies/semas, that young ildren (3 years old)
possess: one is an initial counting sema, and the other, a global quantity
comparison seme that is intuitive and involves a nonnumerical sense of
quantity. As documented in extensive cognitive developmental resear
(summarized in Griﬃn & Case, 1996), it is the merging of these two
separate semas at the age 5 or 6 that supports the formation of a single,
superordinate conceptual structure for number.
Griﬃn, Case and Siegler (1994) propose that this structure is an internal
counting line, a continuum increasing in one-unit steps, to whi the ild
has access when solving mathematical tasks and learning new ideas. Once
the ild has developed the central conceptual structure, they are able to

use the counting numbers without needing the presence of physical objects
to make a variety of quantity judgments, su as determining how many
objects they would have altogether if they had four of something and
received three more. One of the motivating factors for the creation of the
Number Worlds program was resear revealing that a substantial number
of ildren living in low-income communities in Canada and the United
States start sool at age 6 without this conceptual structure in place and
are at risk for significant mathematics difficulties (Griffin et al., 1994).
Based on this developmental central conceptual structure theory,
activities in the Number Worlds program follow a speciﬁc order. It begins
by presenting students with activities to help them build ea separate
competence/sema and then to integrate them. us, the Number Worlds
program provides activities that involve quantities, counting, and formal
symbols, and is organized to provide multiple opportunities for constructing
relationships among the three aspects. Importantly, the program provides a
carefully graded sequence of activities that enable students to use their
current understandings to construct new understandings at the next level
up.
Activities in the pre-kindergarten program enable 4-year-old students to
use their conceptual structures to acquire the foundational knowledge that
they will need later. Activities in the kindergarten program allow students
to construct and consolidate their central conceptual structure. Within ea
grade level, activities have also been classiﬁed at three levels of
developmental complexity. A seamless sequence of activities permits
individual students to start at an appropriate individual level and to move
through the normal developmental progression at a suitable pace.
Finally, in the Number Worlds program games are used to expose young
students to ﬁve diﬀerent forms of number representation that are common
in our culture: groups of objects in Object Land, dot-set paerns and
numerals in Picture Land, position on a path or line in Line Land, position

on a vertical scale in Sky Land, and position on a dial in Circle Land.
Expanded programs for four grade levels (pre-K–2) enable students to
forge connections among these “lands” at increasing levels of complexity.
Pattern and Structure Mathematical Awareness
Program (Mulligan & Mitchelmore, 2009, 2013)
e Australian early years mathematics program, Paern and Structure
Mathematical Awareness Program (PASMAP), consists of a series of
learning experiences developed for ildren in kindergarten through Grade
2, and is based on the assumptions that awareness of paern and structure
is a fundamental requirement for understanding mathematics; and that
paern and structure can be learned through appropriate learning
experiences and explicit teaing (Mulligan & Mitelmore; see also
English, 2012, 2013). e authors of this program assert that the early
development of paerning and structural thinking in mathematics is critical
to the abstraction and generalization of mathematical ideas and
relationships. In the authors’ view, mathematical development depends to a
large extent on the structure of students’ thinking and how well this reﬂects
the structure of mathematical concepts and relationships. For example,
ildren need to recognize mathematical structure and how it is generalized
in order to understand how the number system is organized by grouping in
tens, and how equal groups form the basis of multiplication and division
concepts (Mulligan, Presco, Papic, & Mitelmore, 2006). Resear
conducted by Mulligan and team reveals that ildren with a strong sense
of structure can more easily recognize similarities and diﬀerences in new
mathematical paerns, whereas ildren with low structure tend to focus
on more superﬁcial features of paerns and relationship. e result for
students who do not have a strong sense of structure is that they are less

likely to transfer their understanding (Mulligan & Mitelmore, 2013;
Mulligan et al., 2006).
eoretically, PASMAP is grounded in the proposed existence of an
Awareness of Mathematical Paern and Structure (AMPS) construct. e
degree to whi ildren recognize and apply paern and structure is
referred to as their AMPS. According to this theory, the AMPS construct
generalizes across many early mathematical concepts and is correlated with
ildren’s mathematical understanding. e AMPS construct, whi
Mulligan and Mitelmore (2013, p. 35) classify in ﬁve developmental
levels, from “Prestructural” to “Advanced Structural,” involves both
cognitive and metacognitive abilities: cognitive involves knowledge of
structure, and metacognitive involves a tendency to seek and analyze
patterns.
PASMAP consists of guidelines for a large number of learning sequences
designed to support young students’ paern awareness in the ﬁrst three
years of formal sooling. Amongst the learning sequences included in
PASMAP are paerning, structured counting, place value, partitioning and
sharing, measurement, grid structure, geometry, and symmetry and
transformation. Ea separate learning sequence follows an identical
developmental paern of learning experiences for the students and is
comprised of four separate stepwise components. (1) e initial activities in
the learning sequence involves various types of “modeling” where students
either copy, model, or describe a paern or structure within the topic. e
teaer’s role in this ﬁrst set of activities is to support students in
understanding the essential features of the paern or relation. (2) e
second set of activities involves “representing.” Here the ildren are
required to physically draw the paern or a model of the paern while it is
still visible. is experience reinforces ild understanding and
representational skill. (3) Next in the learning sequence are activities
involving “visualization.” To this end the tasks students engage with

involve drawing or symbolizing without being able to see the original
structure. (4) Finally, ildren work towards making “generalizations”: at
this stage of the process teaers explicitly support students in
understanding the structure of the paern and work with students to ﬁnd
similar paerns in other contexts. PASMAP can be implemented as a
complete 
mathematics program that aligns with the Australian
mathematics 
curriculum 
(Australian 
Curriculum, 
Assessment, 
and
Reporting Authority, 2014). Alternatively, learning sequences from
PASMAP can be integrated with existing mathematics programs to support
particular aspects of the curriculum such as patterns and algebra.
Big Math for Little Kids (Greenes et al., 2004)
e Big Math for Lile Kids program is a mathematics curriculum designed
to facilitate mathematics learning for pre-kindergarten to ﬁrst grade
students (Greenes et al. 2004). e program is the most comprehensive of
the four described in this section and includes six units (number, shape,
measurement, constructing and partitioning numbers, paerns and logic,
and navigation and spatial concepts). e program is designed to be used in
whole-class and small-group seings, as well as with individual students. It
contains a sequence of enjoyable activities designed to promote both
mathematical understanding and language (Greenes et al., 2004). is
program is ﬁrmly grounded in the intensive resear and observational
studies of young ildren’s spontaneous mathematics in presool seings.
Unlike the other programs presented here, whi follow highly speciﬁed
trajectories, the Big Math for Lile Kids program focuses on a variety of
types of activities, games, tasks, stories, and verbal expression in an
integrated framework. In fact, storybooks were developed for ea of the
strands in the program.

Central among the goals of Big Math for Lile Kids is to support all
students, including those at risk, to verbalize their mathematics and to learn
to mathematize. e Big Math for Lile Kids program should encourage
“thinking like a mathematician,” promote language development, and
foster student reﬂection (Greenes et al., 2004). e intensive language focus
of the Big Math for Lile Kids program emanates from resear by
Greenes and colleagues. In particular, the focus on language and
metacognition in the Big Math for Lile Kids program stems from resear
on the well-known lag in performance between high- and low-SES
students in verbal number sense, addition, and subtraction. e resear
revealed, for example, that while both high- and low-SES students
employed similar strategies when presented with addition and subtraction
problems (su as counting on from the larger number, or “derived facts”),
what diﬀered was the way that these two groups of ildren articulated
these strategies and understandings, with the lower SES group experiencing
mu more diﬃculty (Ginsburg & Pappas, 2004). Big Math for Lile Kids
has a promising record of success (e.g., Presser, Clements, Ginsburg & Ertle,
2012) and in particular, demonstrates a gap-closing intervention in the form
of a mathematically rich program that benefits all students.
Some Concluding Thoughts on Early years
Mathematics Programs
e four math programs described share some common underpinning
beliefs: First, programs and related instruction are impactful when they are
resear-based and developmentally sound. Second, the learning builds on
a ild’s current mathematical knowledge. ird, ildren beneﬁt from a
planned program that is carefully guided by adults who draw ildren’s
aention to the mathematics at hand. And fourth, ildren come to be able

to engage in signiﬁcant mathematics when the tasks are well constructed
with appropriate materials and ideas. We suggest that there are several
other foundations to quality mathematics programming for young ildren,
including (1) the importance of daily/regular mathematics learning
opportunities; (2) the importance of teaer-student interaction over peer
interactions when developing and solidifying mathematics ideas; and (3) the
value of multiple teaing contexts and less reliance on student rotation
through centers (e.g., Bruce et al., 2013; Ginsburg et al., 2008).
While it is helpful to know that well-constructed programs are available,
it is also important to underline that despite the existence of these
exemplars, there is limited ri mathematics programming occurring in
many classrooms. ere are a host of reasons why this may be the case. For
example, teaers of young ildren may not be comfortable teaing
mathematics, or may hold beliefs about mathematics learning that run
counter to the most fundamental principles of the programs mentioned in
this apter. Of particular concern is the pervasive underestimation of
student interests and abilities in mathematics, leading to strongly restricted
mathematics programs of counting and naming shapes (Ginsburg et al.,
2008). These, and other existing challenges, are discussed next.

Documented Challenges to Mathematically Rich
Instruction
While the arguments, and visions, for high-quality early years mathematics
programs are well researed and well articulated, the kinds of systemic
anges needed to realize these visions for early years mathematics are not
easily aieved. Here we outline some of the main allenges to
mathematically rich instruction in the early years.
Negative Attitudes, Beliefs, and Lack of Interest in
Mathematics Content and Pedagogy
Mathematics educational resear has identiﬁed a host of allenges in the
domain of aitudes and beliefs toward mathematics itself and in turn, how
it should be taught. Teaers of young ildren oen report anxieties,
discomfort, and diﬃculties teaing mathematics (Copley, 2004; Lee &
Ginsburg, 2007). Compared to other elementary educators, kindergarten to
grade 4 teaers (working with ildren of ages 4 through 10), have
reported the most strongly negative aitudes toward mathematics (Kolstad
& Hughes, 1994). Many teaers of young ildren also admit to not seeing
themselves as teaers of mathematics—what Ginsburg and Ertel (2008) call
an “identity issue.” Further, many teaers of young ildren report
selecting a career in educating young ildren (rather than older students)
because they do not like mathematics or they do not want to tea
mathematics (Ginsburg & Ertel, 2008). In a survey of primarily female
preservice elementary teaers (n = 384), Perry (2011) found that those
preservice teaers who ose careers in elementary education reported
notably low conﬁdence levels in learning mathematics—lower on average
than those women who chose careers in other fields.

ese allenges facing teaers of early years mathematics must not be
interpreted as a criticism of educators, but of systemic, cultural and
historical factors. As Stipek (2013) cogently writes, “we cannot blame the
teaers. Until recently we have not expected instruction in mathematics in
early ildhood education programs. And in addition to not being trained,
many are not comfortable with their own mathematical skill” (in Ginsburg
et al., 2008, p. 13).
e overall allenge arises from the scarcity of examples and models of
eﬀective early years mathematics teaing. In fact, early years mathematics
teaing, learning, and related educational resear receives relatively lile
focus internationally from the mathematics education community. In our
recent sear of peer-reviewed mathematics education journals, the term
“early ildhood mathematics education” found only 83 solarly articles
between 2005 and 2013 (approximately 10 articles per year) over all
mathematics education journals (ProQuest search, May 2014).
is overall low interest may explain a related devaluing of mathematics
teaing in early years classrooms. Ginsburg, Lee, and Boyd (2008) found
that “in general, early ildhood teaers do not place a high value on
teaing mathematics” (p. 10). Rather, helping ildren develop socially and
emotionally (Kowalski, Prei-Frontczak, & Johnson, 2001; Lee, 2006; Lin,
Lawrence, & Gorrell, 2003) and protecting them from tedium and stress
have been reported as top priorities for educators of young ildren (Lee,
2006; Lee & Ginsburg, 2007). Further, many educators believe that their
students will eventually cat up to their peers mathematically, regardless
of what happens during their early ildhood years (Lee & Ginsburg, 2007,
2009).
As Lee and Ginsburg’s studies point out, teaers believe that young
ildren are not ready for, nor are they interested in mathematics, that
young ildren are not capable of high level or abstract reasoning, and that
simple numbers and shapes are the most appropriate mathematics content

in early years of sooling. A ﬁnal complication is a widely held belief that
mathematics should not be a stand-alone subject, but should rather be
integrated into other learning where students “don’t even know they are
doing math.” Indeed, a play approa to mathematics has wide currency:
many teaers of early years strongly hold to the belief that all
mathematics activity should emerge from ild-directed play. While there
is widespread agreement that young ildren learn through actively
constructing their mathematics knowledge, there are still many questions
about the kinds of pedagogy that are appropriate for early years
mathematics learning.
The Belief That All Mathematics Learning Should
Emerge From Children’s Unguided Play
In this section, we elaborate on the predominant play pedagogy and the
potential limitations of unguided play for deep learning in mathematics.
ere is no dispute that play is central to early years education and is
anowledged as an important mode of engaging students in mathematics
learning in early years (e.g., Bergen, 2009; Caldera et al., 1999; Perry &
Doe, 2002). Amongst the many other aﬀordances of play for learning,
play has been reported to support the development of dispositions and
habits of mind valued in mathematics education, su as curiosity,
creativity, and acceptance of multiple routes or multiple possible answers to
the same problem (Ginsburg, 2006; NAEYC/NCTM, 2002; Doe & Perry,
2007). However, while play oﬀers extensive possibilities, it “does not
guarantee mathematical development” (NAEYC/NCTM, 2002, p. 6; cited in
de Vries, omas, & Warren, 2010, p. 717). “Children do learn from play,
but it appears that they can learn mu more with artful guidance and
allenging activities provided by their teaers” (Seo & Ginsburg, 2004, p.

103). Furthermore, Sarama and Clements (2009) argue that when ildren
play with mathematics-related objects by themselves, it is unlikely that
their play will facilitate the learning of the intended concepts.
Among the many allenges cited of a play-only approa is that the
learning program can become “a grab bag of any mathematics-related
experiences that seem to relate to a theme or project” (NAEYC/NCTM,
2002, p. 8). Further, drawing out the mathematics through teaable
moments, when they are recognized, is “extraordinarily diﬃcult” (Ginsburg
& Ertle, 2008, p. 47). In a play-based mathematics program there is also
lile opportunity for teaers to support the critical process of
mathematization: redescribing, abstracting, generalizing, and giving
language to that whi is ﬁrst understood at an intuitive and informal level
(Clements and Sarama, 2009, p. 244). Both exploiting the teaable moment
and supporting mathematization is a sophisticated process that demands a
nuanced mathematics knowledge and heightened aention to what
mathematics ildren are actually doing and thinking about in their play
(Clements & Sarama, 2009; Ginsburg et al., 2008; Perry & Doe, 2008). As
Ginsburg and Ertel (2008) assert, play alone likely does not address the gap
in abilities for students from low-resource communities who may suﬀer
from la of opportunity to engage with mathematics (see also Bowman,
Donovan, & Burns, 2001; Starkey & Klein, 2008).
Narrow Conceptions of What Mathematics Should
Be Taught
e limitations of unstructured and nonmathematized play, coupled with a
general lack of interest in mathematics for young children, is concerning. As
a result, there are wide reports of a limited content palee of early years
mathematics programs (Balfanz, 1999) that focus on counting to 20,

repeating paerns, and naming shapes (Copley, 2004; Frede, Jung, Barne,
Lamy, & Figueras, 2007; Graham, Nash, & Paul, 1997), leaving young
ildren undernourished in their mathematical development (Ginsburg et
al., 2008).
Fortunately, there are some very promising new developments in the
field that may offer a way forward in response to the current call to action.

New Developments in the Field
We turn now to some new developments in the ﬁeld of mathematics for
young ildren with the potential of oﬀering ildren improved access to a
deeper and broader range of mathematics learning opportunities. In the
ﬁrst of these developments, we present the beneﬁts of a playful pedagogy.
Next, we discuss the potential beneﬁts of a mathematics curriculum that
includes a mu stronger emphasis on spatial reasoning. en we combine
these two developments in the form of three vignees to illustrate the
sophisticated and genuine reasoning of young ildren as they participate in
classroom lessons that focus on geometry and spatial reasoning.
New Research Findings on the Effectiveness of a
Playful Pedagogy
ere is accumulating evidence over the last decade that a middle ground
between unguided play and direct instruction may be most eﬀective in
supporting young students in learning mathematics. Variously called guided
discovery (Baroody et al., 2006), guided play (Singer, Golnikoﬀ, & Hirsh-
Pasek, 2006), or structured play (Bruce & Flynn, 2012), this middle ground
approa integrates the ild-centered engagement of play with curricular
goals and enabling ildren to maintain a large degree of control over their
learning.
In a particularly detailed study, Baroody et al. (2006) articulated a helpful
continuum of pedagogies for early years mathematics based on their
classroom observations. e continuum is described at four points, from (1)
traditional direct-instruction, to (2) guided discovery learning via an adult-
initiated task, to (3) ﬂexible guided discovery learning via a ild-initiated
task, and finally to (4) unguided discovery learning via a ild-initiated task.

e continuum of types were distinguished by identifying who was
initiating the task or learning (the ild or the teaer) and the degree of
teaer “guidance” (from none to fully) that occurred during the task.
Baroody and colleagues’ observations of ildren in classrooms found that
guided discovery and ﬂexible guided discovery (the two categories in the
center of the continuum) were the most promising approaes for learning
mathematics, but that ea one of these approaes held an important place
in early years classrooms.
More recently, Fisher, Hirsh-Pasek, Newcombe, and Golinkoﬀ (2013)
tested the efficacy of a pedagogical approach that they referred to as guided
play. In this study, the researers asked: What would a pedagogy look like
that combined early years’ teaers’ aention to the whole ild and the
inclusion of play and oice, with elementary-grade practices of robust
content and aention to learning trajectories? e authors reported on
results of a teaing experiment with kindergarten-aged ildren in whi
they compared the eﬃcacy of ildren’s learning about properties of
geometric shapes in three conditions: direct instruction, guided play, and
free play. Although the scope of this apter does not allow for a full
description of their methods and results (please see Fisher et al., 2013 for the
full report) we take time here to provide some details of the experimental
intervention to illuminate the way the researers operationalized this
construct of guided play.
In this study, 70 4- to 5-year-old ildren were introduced to the
properties of four geometric shapes (triangles, rectangles, pentagons, and
hexagons) and were randomly assigned to one of three learning/teaing
modes: guided play, free play, or direct instruction. Researers ose 4–5
year olds because they typically display some knowledge of shapes and
oen rely heavily on visual representations in their mathematics meaning
making. e goal of the experimental intervention was that the students
would recognize shapes not only in their canonical form (regular), whi is

typical of students in the age range (Van Hiele, 1999), but that they would
also be able to identify irregular shapes (irregular in orientation or lengths
of sides) as real shapes. In addition, the study assessed whether these young
students would reject distractor shapes that closely resembled one of the
four target shapes but had incorrect features. In mathematics education
terms, the goal of the teaing experiment was to move students from a
simply visual recognition of the shapes to a more analytical one.
Interestingly, the conditions of the guided play and direct instruction
approaes were similar in more ways than they were diﬀerent. In both of
these conditions the teaer-researer introduced the ild to a play-like
scenario about the secrets of shapes. In both the guided and direct-
instruction conditions the researer began with the following text: “Did
you know that all shapes have secrets?” In the direct-instruction condition,
the experimenter continued by saying: “Today I am going to tell you the
secret of the shapes.” By contrast in the guided play condition the
researer said: “Today I need your help in discovering the secret of the
shapes.” e researers explained the diﬀerence as one of telling (direct)
versus one that involved the students in inferring (guided).
As the lesson progressed, the teaer in the direct-instruction condition
deﬁned the properties (secrets) of ea shape. In the guided-play condition,
the instructor encouraged the students to focus on and identify what they
saw as similar in ea shape category. Essentially in both conditions the
students were asked to focus on the similarities amongst the individual
shapes: however, in the direct instruction condition, the experimenter was
teaing by telling versus in the guided play condition the researer was
teaching by implying (Fisher et al., 2013).
Results revealed that ildren in the guided-play and direct-instruction
conditions both made progress. However, the students in the guided-play
condition made signiﬁcantly more progress and showed deeper conceptual
processing of shape features, and they were beer able to extrapolate,

compared to students who were taught through direct instruction. e
ildren in the free play condition did not improve at all. is group
showed no change in understanding.
e results of this study point to the greater eﬃcacy of the guided but
playful approa to mathematics learning. e study is also useful in
helping to deﬁne and operationalize through a detailed example, a model
for a middle ground approa to mathematics teaing of young ildren
that clearly sits in the middle between play and direct instruction: a playful
and intentional pedagogy.
It is important to note that on the other side of the early years pedagogy
debate are proponents for direct instruction. e assertion is that direct
instruction is more eﬃcient and facilitates ildren’s learning more
eﬀectively than other approaes (Stoard & Engelmann, 2008). However,
while this approa is gaining in popularity in countries su as the United
States, the United Kingdom and Australia, in reality there has been lile
conclusive resear to support the eﬃcacy of direct instruction in early
years seings (Diamond, Barne, omas, & Munro, 2007), particularly in
the area of mathematics learning (Fisher, Hirsh-Pasek, Newcombe, &
Golinkoﬀ, 2013). Indeed there are some reports that state direct instruction
interventions in early years are seen by some as undermining later
development and learning (Hirsh-Pasek, Hyson, & Rescorla, 1990; Marcon,
2002). e conﬂicting ﬁndings to date point to the need for additional and
precise comparative studies with children ages 4 through 7.
A Growing Knowledge and Interest in the
Affordances of a Spatial Approach to Young
Children’s Mathematics
Another recent development in the growing ﬁeld of mathematics education

resear with young ildren is examining the potential beneﬁts of a
mathematics curriculum that builds on and expands ildren’s geometric
and spatial reasoning abilities. is very recent development is not yet fully
realized and has emerged since the previous edition of this Handbook.
e inclusion of geometry in early years classrooms has, for the most
part, been dominated by recognizing and naming shapes (Copley, 2004).
Freudenthal (1981) asserted that geometry is the most neglected subject of
mathematics teaing, referring to geometry as the “forgoen” strand in
pre-kindergarten through senior sool mathematics curricula. Although
Clements and Sarama (2011b) have led the way in ampioning the
importance of geometry in early years, it has received mu less resear
emphasis in the mathematics education literature than has number (NRC,
2009). Indeed the concern about the minimal role of geometry in early
years curriculum and up through the grades has been recognized for
decades. A sear of the mathematics education resear literature in early
years reveals that, with the exception of a handful of programs (Casey et
al., 2008; Clements & Sarama, 2007; Levenson, Tirosh, & Tsamir, 2011; Van
den Heuvel-Panhuizen & Buijs, 2005), there has been a notable absence of
program focus on young children’s learning in the area of geometry.
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen and Buijs (2005) urge us to provide “more
space for geometry in primary sool” (p.145). is call for increased
aention on geometric thinking is important because of its foundational
role in overall mathematics, “where students learn to reason and to see the
axiomatic structure of mathematics” (NCTM, 2000, p. 41). In its Principles
and Standards for Sool Mathematics document, the NCTM parses
geometry in the early years (K–2) mathematics programs into four
categories of activity: (1) analyzing properties of two- and three-
dimensional geometric ﬁgures; (2) locating objects in space and describing
spatial relationships; (3) applying transformations and using symmetry; (4)
using visualization and spatial reasoning. Although now over 10 years old,

this set of descriptions moves well beyond typical classroom learning for 4–
8 year olds at present, and helps set an agenda for renewed mathematics
education resear energies. Within ea of these four NCTM categories of
geometry activity, spatial reasoning is prominent. Spatial reasoning of
young ildren, including the ability to visualize, engage in perspective
taking, situate oneself and other objects in space, and to mentally rotate
ﬁgures, is proving to be a key predictor of overall mathematics abilities
(Mix & Cheng, 2012; Verdine et al., 2013).
To date, the study of spatial reasoning has been largely conducted within
the domains of cognitive sciences and psyology (Gathercole & Piering,
2000; Levine, Huenloer, Taylor, & Langro, 1999; Cheng & Mix, 2012;
Newcombe, 2010, 2013; Newcombe & Fri, 2010). One particularly
promising ﬁnding reported in an award-winning meta-analysis is that
spatial reasoning is malleable: it can be improved with practice and training
for people of all ages (Ual et al., 2013). Recent ﬁndings connecting spatial
reasoning abilities to the science, tenology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines, have begun to aract the aention of some
mathematics and science educators, as well as mathematics education
researchers who are now exploring how spatial reasoning can be embedded
in mathematics programs that are grounded in classroom-based resear
initiatives (Battista, 2007; Clements & Sarama, 2011a; Sinclair & Bruce, 2014;
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen & Buys, 2008; Whiteley, 2002). Currently, as
with geometry in general, there are minimal high-quality, ﬁeld-tested
resources for teaers that focus on building spatial reasoning (Clements &
Sarama, 2011a; Ehrli, Levine, & Goldin-Meadow, 2006) although some
classroom ﬁeld-tested resources that intentionally zero in on spatial
reasoning (Stipek, 2013), are now being developed to accompany these
recent ﬁndings on its importance. (See, for example, Clements & Sarama,
2002; Moss et al., 2012; Bruce, Flynn, McPherson, & Bennett, 2012.)
Reports from the United Kingdom (Jones, 2000), Australia (MacDonald et

al., 2012) and in the United States (Clements and Sarama, 2011b) further
corroborate these ﬁndings and suggest that the la of focus on early
geometry learning is of international concern. For example, a recent U.S.
study tested 81 kindergarten teaers, more than half whom had MA
degrees or higher, on their mathematical content knowledge of number
sense, paerning, ordering, shapes, spatial sense, and comparison problems.
e teaers scored lowest in their knowledge of spatial sense, obtaining a
mean score of 44.23 compared to a mean score of 89.12 on the test of
number sense (Lee, 2010).
e la of aention paid to, and understanding of, geometry and spatial
thinking is troubling given its fundamental importance to the development
of mathematics. As Clements and Sarama (2011) point out, geometry is a
special kind of language through whi we communicate ideas that are
essentially spatial, “from number lines to arrays, even quantitative,
numerical, and arithmetical ideas rest on a geometric base” (p. 134). In
addition, they note that geometry spans mathematics and science and is
central to other disciplines su as physics, emistry, biology, geology,
geography, art, and aritecture (Wai, Lubinski & Benbow, 2009).
Furthermore, the work of developmental psyologists solidiﬁes the
importance of spatial thinking in mathematics in general. Over a century of
psyological resear supports the close relationship between spatial and
mathematical processes, so mu so, that Mix and Cheng (2012) claim that
“the relation between spatial ability and mathematics is so well established
that it no longer makes sense to ask whether they are connected” (p. 206).
A recent meta-analysis has shown that spatial reasoning is malleable and
can be improved with practice and training in people of all ages (Uttal et al.,
2013). Furthermore, Newcombe, Ual, and Sauter (2013) suggest that by
providing instructional support to enhance young ildren’s spatial
reasoning, we are opening up possibilities for their long-term interest and
engagement with STEM-related activities. More speciﬁcally, Verdine et al.

(2014), suggest that incorporating spatial reasoning into early years math
will have a “two-for-one” eﬀect that yields beneﬁts both for spatial
reasoning as well as mathematical development (p. 6). Moreover, teaing
spatial ability enhances ildren’s mathematical aitude (Casey et al., 2008;
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen & Buys, 2008).
Illustrative Vignettes That Reveal Sophisticated
Spatial Reasoning of Young Children in the
Context of a Playful Pedagogy
In the sections that follow we present three examples of young ildren’s
(ages 4 to 6) mathematical reasoning as they engage with a range of
carefully designed mathematics activities that have a particular emphasis on
spatial reasoning. ese vignees are drawn from our resear classrooms
(predominately in underprivileged communities) and represent the kinds of
sophisticated mathematical reasoning that can emerge when ildren are
invited into stimulating and structured learning opportunities focused on
powerful mathematics.
Exploring Congruence in a Kindergarten
Classroom: A Two-Dimensional Pentomino
Challenge
e task featured in this ﬁrst vignee allenged students to generate 12
pentomino ﬁgures representing the full set of noncongruent two-
dimensional ﬁgures that can be comprised of ﬁve squares (in whi the
squares are edge-aligned, see Figure 5.1).
To begin, the ildren were introduced to a narrative where they were

asked to help Princess Kate assemble 12 magic keys (pentomino ﬁgures) to
rescue her Prince William from the tower of the evil wit. Next the
teaer established rules for assembling pentomino ﬁgures from ﬁve
squares and then invited a student to come up to the interactive whiteboard
to ﬁnd/assemble and to move ﬁve squares together to form the ﬁrst of the
12 pentomino configurations. See Figure 5.2.
e teaer then proceeded to assemble a second ﬁgure on the
whiteboard, congruent to the ﬁrst but oriented in a rotation of 180 degrees
of the first (Figure 5.3).
The teacher then addressed the students.
Teacher:
There, now I have a new magic key.
Students:
(excited calling out) No, it’s the same! It’s the same!
Teacher:
(feigning ignorance) What do you mean, it’s the same?
Sam:
You can rotate it and it will be the same (moving his arms).
Teacher:
(Next, the teaer pied a plastic model of the same
pentomino ﬁgure, whi she displayed, to the ildren in still
another orientation.) What about this one? Do you think this
one is the same as well?
Students:
No, it’s the same too!
Students:
(multiple voices) You just have to make it go the same way
and you will see.


Figure 5.1 The complete set of 12 pentomino configurations.
Once the ildren had demonstrated their understanding that these ﬁrst
three pentominoes were congruent and only therefore represented a single
one of the 12 possibilities, they were asked to sit in small groups to ﬁnd as
many unique combinations of ﬁve squares as possible. See Figures 5.4a and
5.4b.
In the ﬁnal step in the lesson, the students were asked to share and
compare their assembled ﬁgures to collectively identify the 12 distinct
pentomino ﬁgures. Surprisingly, in the course of presenting and describing
their pentomino ﬁgures, one student, Mante, made an observation that the
pentomino she had built might look like an open box if it were folded.
Figure 5.2 Student drags squares on the interactive whiteboard to construct one of the 12 pentomino
figures while following the restrictions of the configurations. Once her figure was complete, the

teacher acknowledged that the student’s shape was indeed a “magic key.”
Figure 5.3 The teacher constructs a congruent figure in different orientation.

Figure 5.4a Students assembling configurations of five squares.

Figure 5.4b Students assembling configurations of five squares.
The discussion that took place is captured in the transcript below:
Teacher:
Who would like to describe the shape of one of their magic
keys?
Mante:
(Holding up a pentomino in the shape of a cross:) It’s a plus.
Teacher:
Yes, Mante, it does look like a cross. Is there a diﬀerent way
you might describe that shape? Mante? Lana?
Mante:
It’s like an X for a pirate’s treasure, or, it could like turn into a
box!
Teacher:
How could you turn it into a box?
Student:
But it’s a box without a top. You li these sides up, but you
need one more … one more on top to get a cube.
e teaer encouraged the students to investigate further (see Figure
5.5).
As shown in this particular vignee, the 4–6 year old students not only

assembled and distinguished ea of the 12 pentomino ﬁgures, but they also
initiated—with the help of a peer—the dynamic connection between two-
and three-dimensional ﬁgures through ﬁrst mentally and then physically
folding the nets to make “boxes without tops.” Furthermore, in this task
students engaged in the forms of geometric reasoning speciﬁed by NCTM,
su as recognizing and applying translations, rotations, and reﬂections to
discriminate between congruent and noncongruent figures.
Location, Orientation, and Positional Language: A
Grade 1 Barrier Game
In this second vignee, we highlight the discussion of a pair of 7-year-old
students as they played shape-based barrier games designed to focus on
location and orientation and positional language of shapes with the aid of
cookie sheets and magnetic shapes.
e lesson from whi the vignee is taken had a number of steps. As a
starting point, students were given cookie sheets sectioned into six equal
parts and six diﬀerent magnetized shapes. en, working in pairs with a
barrier in place between the pairs of students, the person in the role of
allenger covered full grid by placing ea of their shapes in one of the
grid sections and then described to his/her partner where ea shape was
located in the grid and how it was oriented.
In the next stage of the barrier game, whi added an increased level of
allenge, the grid was removed and this time the designer ildren
composite composed ﬁgures using Tangram pieces to assemble designs that
resembled horses, houses, arrows, roets, etc. Again, the ildren kept a
barrier between them so that one partner created a composite ﬁgure design
(using a variety of smaller shapes), and described it to the other partner,
who could not see the design (see Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.5 Students use paper folding to determine which pentomino configurations make an open
box.

Figure 5.6 Two children in grade 1 playing a barrier game with a red folder acting as the barrier,
and each child having their own set of green magnetic Tangram figures and cookie sheet.
In the following transcript, the composer/allenger (Ben) is describing
his ﬁgure and trying to provide as mu detail as possible to his partner.
Ben’s partner (Shay) is asking additional directional questions as needed:
Ben:
So the right corner of the triangle is touching the side of the tray.
Shay:
A certain way?
Ben:
It is. It is kind of like a boat. Now put a streted out triangle on
the short side.
Shay:
On the left or the right?
Ben:
The left. And now put a triangle, so it fits on the other small side.
Shay:
The right.

Ben:
Yup. (pause)
Ben:
And the whole thing is like a triangle streted out upways and
sideways, on both sides.
Upon completion of the game, the partners compared their designs to
determine whether they were exact mates or whether there were some
differences (Figure 5.7).
Ben:
You didn’t do something right, but they are very very close.
Look at this (points to his own design) and now look at yours
(points to same area of the design his partner made). Look, look.
Is there a space there? (points to design his partner made). But is
there a space here? (points to his design).
Shay:
OK (Shay shis the base of her design over approximately 1 cm
to the left).
The designs now match exactly.
In this transcript, Ben is referring to several important geometric and
mathematical ideas: the overall location and orientation of shapes within
the rectangular frame of the cookie sheet; the relative location of ﬁgures to
one another; and the composition of the overall composite shape (a large
triangular looking ﬁgure “streted out upways and sideways”). Finally, the
composer, Ben demands precision by pointing out the minor variation
between his design and his partner’s design. In asking his partner questions,
and pointing to the area that is not an exact mat (and without touing
Shay’s design), he encourages his partner to adjust his design to complete
the exanges and the game, Shay slides the ﬁgure over slightly to create
an exact mat with Ben’s. e level of geometric and spatial reasoning,
persistence and precision involved in this task (diﬃcult for many adults) is
remarkable to observe in these two 7 year olds.

Figure 5.7 Two children compare their designs after completing the Barrier Game.
The Three-, Four- and Five-Cube Challenge: A
Lesson in Discovering Equivalence of Three-
Dimensional Figures
e third vignee focuses on geometry and transformations with an
emphasis on ildren’s reasoning about three-dimensional ﬁgures. e
examples of students’ thinking that we present in the vignee come from a
grade 1 lesson designed by a Math for Young Children lesson study teaer
team. e overaring goal of the lesson was to support students to engage
with the allenging concept of congruence/equivalence of three-
dimensional ﬁgures: or, as the teaers described the goal, “to help students
to realize that certain three-dimensional shapes are the same despite

differences in their orientations.”
is lesson was designed in a number of steps of increasing diﬃculty.
Speciﬁcally, the students were asked ﬁrst to ﬁnd all of the possible
conﬁgurations using three interloing cubes, then to ﬁnd as many unique
conﬁgurations as possible using four cubes, and then ﬁve cubes. e initial
three-cube allenge (whi results in only two unique ﬁgures) was
introduced as a means to help the students to discover the principles of
equivalence despite position or orientation. e four- and ﬁve-cube
allenges were signiﬁcantly more diﬃcult, requiring the students to
imagine and build the multiple combinations in whi the interloing
cubes could be combined to create new ﬁgures—a total of eight possible
figures with four cubes and 29 with five cubes.
e lesson participation structures were designed so that students could
recognize equivalence in two ways: one through visual inspection and
mental rotation and the other through building, comparing, and
manipulating the actual ﬁgures. e ﬁrst brief set of exanges we present
occurred between students midway through the lesson and exempliﬁes
students’ abilities to reason about equivalence through visualization and
mental rotation.
Student
1:
(Holding up a ﬁgure she had assembled with 5 cubes:) Does
anyone have this shape? It is a “W.”
Student
2:
I was about to make that “W” but then I realize I have
already made it except it looks like an “M.”
Similarly:
Student
3:
I have a shape that’s like a throne. Did anyone else make
one?
Student
4:
I have one in my collection too, except mine is rotated and it
looks like a table.
e way these students reasoned showed that they were using

visualization and thinking/seeing their figures holistically.
While the young students in our resear classrooms were able to
recognize congruence amongst shapes, as exempliﬁed in the previous
transcript, the majority of students had trouble with three-dimensional
ﬁgures that were mirror images of ea other. e confusion arose because
students had learned, when working with two-dimensional ﬁgures, that
shapes that are mirror images of ea other are congruent. us it was
perplexing for the students when they worked with three-dimensional
figures, to come to understand that mirror figures were not equivalent.
To illustrate what we mean by mirror-image ﬁgures, Figure 5.8 presents
a photo of the complete set of four-cube ﬁgures in whi the last two
ﬁgures at the far right are mirror images of one another and are unique in
structure.
Indeed, as the ﬁnal transcript illustrates, the mirror image problem not
only allenged students but also proved to be allenging for adults—the
teachers and researchers.
e last transcript comes from the ﬁnal part of the lesson, when the
students were challenged to find all of the possible unique figures that could
be created with ﬁve cubes. Aer the students had been given 10 minutes to
work in pairs to build as many ﬁve-cube ﬁgures as they could, the teaer
then asked pairs of students to join together in groups of four and to pool
their combined ﬁgures, assess the new combined collection of shapes, and
eliminate those configurations that were the same.
Ryan and his small group looked at the collection of shapes that they had
combined. Ryan stared for a long time at two shapes on the mat and then
pied them up and rotated them repeatedly. He then approaed the
teaer, who was working with another group of ildren, and held out his
two figures.
Ryan:
I think these are different but I am not sure.

Teacher:
Hmm… What do you think? (Pause) Ryan, let me have them.
They look the same to me.
(e teaer takes the two ﬁgures and sets them down next
to ea other and rotates one to consider this problem.) I am
sorry, Ryan, but I am not sure.
Ryan takes the two shapes, confers with his group and then
comes back to the teacher.
Ryan:
ey are diﬀerent. No maer what you do to this one ( Ryan
physically rotates one of the ﬁgures), you can not make it
look the same as this one. ey’re diﬀerent. I know because
you would have to take this cube (points to one cube in the
configuration) and move it. You can’t make this one ﬁt into
that one.
Figure 5.8 Unique configurations that can be built using sets of four interlocking cubes.
Some Concluding Thoughts on New Approaches
in the Field
e types of dynamic student activities presented in the three vignees are
uncommon in early years geometry lessons and activities. In terms of
cognitive demand, the mental rotation required of the students is
allenging. Some resear suggests that mental rotations are more a
strength for males than females (e.g. Jansen, Smelter, aiser-Pohl,
Neuburger, & Heil, 2013; Levine et al., 1999; Tzuriel & Egozi, 2010), but both
boys and girls enjoyed these activities and persisted in constructing the cube
conﬁgurations. In working with one group of 7 year olds, the class found 26

of the 29 conﬁgurations for ﬁve cubes. ese results are consistent with
other ildren at diﬀerent sites in the same Math for Young Children
project. ese examples of sophisticated mathematical ideas also illustrate
how a playful pedagogy combined with clear mathematics goals enable
ildren to clearly exceed typical curriculum expectations and typical
trajectories. ese speciﬁc examples have come from our own resear
projects but are also representative of the kinds of mathematical reasoning
that is becoming more frequently reported in the mathematics education
literature. See, for example, Sinclair’s work with young ildren in dynamic
geometry environments (Sinclair & Crespo, 2006; Sinclair & Jaiw, 2011;
Sinclair & Moss, 2012); English’s work on data management and
metarepresentations (e.g., English 2004); and the extensive literature that
looks at the development of paerning and algebraic reasoning (Blanton &
Kaput 2003; Brizuela, Martinez, & Cayton-Hodges, 2013; Carraher,
Martinez, & Slieman, 2008; Moss & London-McNab, 2011; Papic,
Mulligan, & Mitchelmore, 2011; Radford, 2008; Warren & Cooper, 2008).

Figure 5.9 Students considering equivalence of mirror shapes.

Figure 5.10 Student discusses mirror shapes with the teacher.


Figure 5.11 Teacher and student align the shapes on the carpet to visually compare their
configuration.
e ﬁnal new development that we highlight is inextricably connected to
the other developments identiﬁed in previous sections of this apter—
namely, teaer professional development. In this next section, we examine
promising approaes to teaer professional development as a critical
feature of shiing mathematics curriculum, its implementation, and
classroom practice.

Professional Development for Teachers of Young
Children
Central to the process of enhancing young ildren’s opportunities to learn
mathematics are teaer knowledge of, conﬁdence in, and aitudes toward
mathematics teaing (MacDonald et al., 2012). Unfortunately, as indicated
in earlier sections of the apter, studies report that many early years
educators do not identify themselves as teaers of mathematics (Ginsburg
& Ertel, 2008), are ambivalent towards mathematics (Hunting et al., 2013),
or even report a dislike for mathematics (Kolstad & Hughes, 1994). ese
allenges should not be taken as criticism of teaers but as a reﬂection of
systemic, cultural, and historical factors (Stipek, 2013). Historically, we have
underestimated the knowledge required for engaging young ildren in
mathematics activity. As Stipek (2014) observed, not only do teaers need
speciﬁc knowledge of the mathematics content they are teaing, but they
also need to be able to assess their students and support them to progress
through more advanced levels.
Given the critical role teaers play in developing a solid, mathematics
foundation for their students (e.g., Simpson & Linder, 2014; Shulman 1986;
Ball, ames, & Phelps, 2008), professional development programs that
support teaers of young ildren are of extreme importance. Resear-
based professional development programs undertaken across many parts of
the world show that the mathematical knowledge and understanding of
young children can be enhanced as a result of their teachers’ involvement in
high-quality and sustained programs of professional development
(Anderson, Bobis & Way, 2008; Bobis et al., 2005; Bruce et al., 2013;
Clements & Sarama, 2013; Fennema et al., 1996; Guskey, 2003; Moss,
Hawes, Naqvi & Caswell, 2015).

Promising Mathematics Programs That Incorporate
Professional Development
In the last decade, there have been high-caliber examples of successful
professional 
development 
programs 
designed 
to 
support 
the
implementation of speciﬁc resear-based mathematics curricula for young
students, su as Mathematical Awareness Program, Count Me In Too , and
the Numeracy Development Project (Bobis et al., 2005), National Literacy
and Numeracy Strategies (Aubrey, 2004; Aubrey, Dahl, & Godfrey, 2006),
Paerns and Early Algebra Professional Development Program (Papic,
2013) and Curious Minds (van Nes & de Lange, 2007). Earlier we described
four su programs: Big Math for Lile Kids (Greenes et al., 2004), Building
Blos (Clements & Sarama, 2007), Number Worlds (Griﬃn, 2007) and
PASMAP (Mulligan & Mitelmore, 2009). Ea of these programs is
accompanied by substantial professional development programs that have
resulted in signiﬁcant gains in ildren’s mathematics learning. Despite
obvious diﬀerences in their mathematics content areas, the professional
development components of these programs have four common structures:
(1) Ea provides workshops for the educator participants near the start of
the sool year as well as regular workshops throughout the sool year.
(2) Ea provides individualized supports for teaers in the form of
classroom-based coaing. (3) Ea is designed around a coherent
curriculum grounded in resear and in standards for early math learning
and teaing. (4) In addition, ea program is comprehensive and of
suﬃcient duration for educator participants to explore and develop a deep
understanding of its content. When examined together, these programs also
include some key characteristics of exemplary professional development for
early years mathematics educators.

Characteristics of Effective Professional
Development for Early Years Teachers
e robust literature on mathematics professional development focuses
predominantly on teaers of older students. However, in 2010, Zaslow,
Tout, Halle, Whiaker, and Lavelle conducted a thorough evaluation of 18
early ildhood professional development programs in mathematics and
literacy. e evaluation identiﬁed common features across the professional
development programs that were effective in supporting child learning.
Classroom-Embedded and Practice-Focused Professional Learning
Programs
A common feature of successful professional development is that it is
embedded in practice. A practice-focused approa prioritizes working in
classrooms and with ildren—what Webster-Wright (2009) calls “active
engagement in practice” (p. 723) in her review of over 200 studies on
professional development. is approa stands in contrast to a more
traditional knowledge-based approa to professional development, where
the underlying assumption is that teaers will simply and successfully
translate the context-void knowledge into their classroom practice (Bruce,
Esmonde, Ross, Gookie, & Beay, 2010). Increasingly, resear reveals that
introducing teaers to general concepts about ildren’s mathematical
development works beer when the concepts are illustrated through
directly and collaboratively working with ildren (Moss et al., 2015) in a
tight alignment of practice and knowledge. We conjecture that a practice-
focused approa to professional development is particularly successful in
supporting early years teaers who are initially hesitant, and even possibly
resistant, to teaching mathematics.
Although there are many variations and features of the practice-focused

approa to professional development, Zaslow et al. (2010) highlight
“coaing” wherein an experienced educator/researer, part of the
professional development resear team, supports individual teaers by
modeling teaing, coteaing, and providing feedba through shared
reflection. According to the Zaslow report, this kind of coaching can happen
on-site or through tenology. e use of tenology can work in two
ways: a video library can provide documented examples of exemplary
practice; and teaers can record their own teaing, send it to their
coaches, and receive feedback.
Clearly Articulated and Specific Objectives for Professional Development
Important ﬁndings emerging from the Zaslow et al. (2010) report also dealt
with both the breadth of the goals of the professional development
program, and how these goals were to be communicated. Amongst their
ﬁndings was that the eﬀects of the professional development were stronger
when the goals were speciﬁc rather than open-ended (Fukkink & Lont,
2007, cited in Zaslow, 2010) and were clearly articulated and communicated
to the participants of the professional development program. Amongst the
communication methods cited was the availability of a manual for ea
participant that laid out the full program. e meta-analysis also stressed
the importance of familiarizing the participants with the measures used in
the program as another way to deepen their understanding of the goals of
the program (Hamre, Pianta, Burchinal, & Downer, 2010).
Although specifying and communicating goals is understood to be
important for successful professional development for all educators, Zaslow
emphasizes that—for the teaing and learning of mathematics in early
years—the communication of goals is particularly important to the process.
Citing Clements et al., (2011) she proposes that a clear articulation of the
speciﬁc concepts and skills targeted in the program, along with an

explanation and how a focus on these concepts and skills is part of the
learning sequence, builds upon previous learning and prepares a foundation
for later learning (Zaslow, 2010).
Implementation and Use of Information From Child Assessments
An important ﬁnding across multiple studies is that eﬀective professional
development programs oen incorporate training for teaers and other
educators, to both conduct ild assessments and to use this information to
inform instruction and monitor ildren’s progress (Mast & Ginsburg, 2010;
Moss et al., 2015; Tirosh, Tsamir, Levenson, & Taba, 2011; Zaslow et al.,
2010). As Ginsburg (2009) observed, while the use of assessments to inform
instruction may serve diﬀerent professional development purposes, this
practice of observing students during task-based assessments can be
particularly important to early years mathematics educators, allowing them
to become acquainted with foundational sequences of mathematical
learning. In the Math for Young Children project, teaers were invited to,
and supported in, developing their own student interview tasks to
understand more about their students’ thinking in precise mathematics
content areas (Bruce et al., 2013; Moss et al., 2015).
Sustained Professional Development of Sufficient Duration
In an analysis of the extant empirical resear on the eﬀects of professional
development on teaer knowledge and ange in practice, Desimone
(2011) identiﬁed the importance of suﬃcient time for the professional
development experience to have an eﬀect in anging practice for teaers.
Based on her analysis, Desimone recommended a 20-hour minimum of
contact hours, over at least four to ﬁve months. is sustained professional
development model is a central feature of the Building Blos professional
development program, for example, whi includes nine days of training as

well as 16 hours of on-site coaching.
Other important aracteristics related to sustained professional
development programs include involving educators (1) in actively working
on mathematics allenges on a regular basis; and (2) in cycles of
collaborative co-planning of tasks, classroom implementation, and
purposeful reflection (Bobis, Higgins, Cavanagh, & Roche, 2012; Bruce et al.,
2013; Clements et al., 2011; Goldsmith, Doerr, & Lewis, 2014; Papic, 2013;
Timperley, Wilson, Barrar, & Fung, 2007; Warren & ine, 2013). is
purposeful reﬂection has been highly successful when working with the
educators of ildren from disadvantaged bagrounds in the ﬁrst two
years of sool: Warren and ine (2013) implemented a professional
development program that incorporated ongoing discussions with experts
in the ﬁeld and cycles of reﬂection as the teaers tested out new teaing
approaes and resources in their classrooms. e researers found that
building early ildhood educators’ conﬁdence in mathematics over time
was critical to the success of the professional development program.
Lesson Study as a Form of Professional
Development for Mathematics Teachers of Young
Children
In Japan, lesson study has been a dominant and powerful form of
professional development for the past century (Murata, 2013; Takahashi &
Yoshida, 2004). In the late 1990s, lesson study was introduced in the United
States (see Chokshi & Fernandez, 2004; Lewis, Perry, & Murata, 2006) and
has since spread through North America and poets of Europe (with the
World Association of Lesson Studies international conference hosted in
Sweden in 2013) and Eurasia (see Doig, Groves, & Fujii, 2011). Takahashi
and Yoshida (2004) identiﬁed three aracteristics of lesson study that have

appeal to teaers on this global stage: First, lesson study is embedded in
the authentic environment of classrooms. Second, students and student
learning are a strong point of focus. ird, lesson study supports teaers as
the actors of instructional ange. In the lesson study cycle, participants
engage in iterative cycles beginning with deﬁning a problem, seing goals,
designing a lesson or series of lessons, teaing the lesson, reﬂecting on
lesson success, and ﬁnally making further revisions (e.g., Lewis et al., 2006).
Recently, a set of customized adaptations to the lesson study process have
been introduced in professional development projects for early years
mathematics teaers (see Moss et al., 2015). e Math for Young Children
project—a professional development initiative on geometry and spatial
reasoning in the early years—has, since 2011, adapted lesson study with
teams of early ildhood educators (ECEs), kindergarten to second grade
teaers, mathematics instructional leads, sool administrators, and
university mathematics educators who have collaborated on new
approaes to the teaing and learning of geometry and spatial reasoning.
Perhaps more than other types of professional development for teaers of
young ildren, lesson study provides teaers with a vivid picture of their
own students’ interests, assets, and allenges. As noted by Copley and
Padrón (1999), collaborative teaer professional development experiences
enable participants to be sensitive to and focus on the diversity of ildren
in their communities including those with special needs, ildren who are
culturally and linguistically marginalized, and ildren who come from
disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds.

Conclusions and Recommendations
In this apter we aimed to capture some of the most recent developments
in mathematics education resear that focus on ildren ages 4–7. We
have discussed the ambitious recommendations of NCTM, NAEYC, and
other organizations for the provision of rigorous mathematics learning for
all; identiﬁed the potential inequities that can arise based on diﬀerences in
bagrounds and mathematics readiness in the ﬁrst years of sooling;
described a representative sampling of early years curricula to support
young learners in performing above-typical expectations; and signaled a
renewed international interest in young children’s mathematics learning.
In summary, we highlight ﬁve important and productive areas of recent
mathematics education research:
1. e development by educational researers of a robust cluster of
longitudinal studies showing the importance of early mathematics as a
best predictor of overall school success (e.g., Claessens & Engel, 2013);
2. Mathematics education studies that are pushing the upper boundaries
of what was previously held knowledge of the capabilities of young
learners (e.g., English & Mulligan, 2013);
3. Exciting resear ﬁndings on the aracteristics of professional
development for early years teaers that broaden our repertoire of
ways to contextualize and customize professional learning in practice-
oriented models;
4. Newfound evidence of the potential of spatial reasoning as a
foundation and possible gateway to early years mathematics learning
(e.g., Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, Elia & Robitzsch, in press);
5. Resear-based insights into early years mathematics pedagogy
demonstrating the positive impact of intentional teaing and
structured, yet playful, mathematics learning opportunities (e.g., Fisher

et al., 2013).
With the evidence and developments in mind, we suggest that collective
eﬀorts need to be further directed to supporting educators of young
ildren in implementing high-quality classroom practices that further the
mathematics learning of all ildren. e three vignees oﬀered in this
apter from our Math for Young Children resear classrooms encapsulate
and substantiate the value of these eﬀorts, particularly in underresourced
communities. e vignees addressed all ﬁve areas noted: ey explicitly
focused on ildren aged 4–7, with the knowledge that this is a crucial time
in ildren’s mathematics development that has long-term implications
(Area 1). e three vignees provided examples of innovative lesson ideas
and tasks that address important mathematics content that is usually
reserved for older students (Area 4). e types of sophisticated spatial
reasoning that the young ildren exhibited in the vignees, su as
reasoning about reﬂections, rotations, translations and visualizations
provide a strong example of what it means to reexamine the boundaries of
our knowledge of young ildren’s capabilities (Area 2). e vignees also
served to illustrate a playful guided pedagogy approa (Area 5) that
combines open-ended and play-ﬁlled but planned activities with strong
curricular goals. Finally, to address new visions of professional development
(Area 3), the Math for Young Children program employed a highly
collaborative and classroom-embedded structure, in order to develop, test,
and reﬁne lessons and interventions. ere is a range of programs across
the globe with similar interests and developments—and while we are
encouraged by the burgeoning and international interest in resear on
young ildren’s mathematics learning, we also anowledge that there is
more work to be done, particularly in terms of scalability and equity issues.
To further the call to action in this apter, we oﬀer several considerations
for an immediate and future research agenda.

Study the Processes Involved in Teaching
Mathematics to Young Children
e resear base on young ildren’s mathematical development and
mathematics programs is increasing, yet there is limited aligned resear
that investigates mathematics teaing processes when working with
young ildren. In a clear and compelling manner, Ginsburg, Lewis, and
Clements (2008) argue that:
A crucial set of questions revolves around teaing. Many of the studies aempt to ensure the
ﬁdelity of instruction, in the sense of determining whether teaers tea the material more or
less as intended. But the studies pay very lile, if any, aention to the ways in whi teaers
implement the activities, incorporate them into their own teaing styles, ﬁnd some topics easier
to tea than others, interpret the materials, adjust teaing to meet student needs, and
understand (or misunderstand) the competence of their students. Teaers are at the heart of
any program and curriculum, yet the present studies tell us lile about their roles in the
enterprise.
(p. 9)
Mathematics has received less aention at the early ildhood level. We are
only at the beginning stages of developing a substantive knowledge base on
how to tea it and how young ildren learn it. Most of the cognitive
developmental resear that has provided a revolution in the way we
conceptualize young ildren’s mathematical abilities does not focus on
teaing or the processes of teaing. us exploratory and formalized
resear that focuses on teaing, teaer moves, and on ildren’s learning
from teaing in classroom contexts is needed. It is anticipated that ﬁndings
from this kind of resear would ultimately be of high practical value to
teachers of young children.
Increase the Focus on Mathematics in Educator

Preparation Programs
Many preparation programs for early years educators do not include mu
explicit mathematics content. Even preservice programs that train teaers
of elementary sool age may not be up-to-date in terms of current
resear, programming, policy, or mandates for math in the early years (see
Soenfeld & Stipek, 2011). One strategy for beginning to address this
allenge could involve an increase in the stringency of preservice courses
to require classroom placements in early years seings. Greater aention to
the deep mathematics content knowledge that educators of presool, and
the ﬁrst years of sooling, require is also essential. Given the rapid growth
of in-service professional development programs for mathematics, there
may be the potential to bring some of these models and practices to
preservice education programs. Ginsburg’s focus on practice (Ginsburg,
Hyson, & Wood, 2014) is still under development but makes a coherent
aempt to bridge these worlds of mathematics content learning, preservice
programming, and in-service professional development.
Expand and Refine the Range of Tools for
Measuring Professional Development Outcomes
As outlined in the professional development section of this apter, current
resear points to some key features of professional learning programs for
mathematics teaers of young ildren, with an emphasis on measuring
student aievement as the metric of success. Although student
achievement is of critical importance, what seems to be lacking are research
questions and related metrics for assessing teaer shis in aitudes
(Anderson et al., 2008), beliefs (Bruce et al., 2010), and practices (Tout,
Zaslow, & Berry, 2006) as a result of the professional development

opportunities for these teaers of young ildren. is gap in the resear
is partly due to the resource intensity and ﬁnancial demands of carefully
studying shis in classroom practice and teaer aitudes, but is also due to
the complexity of teasing apart the causal factors: Is it coaing, tenology
uses, face-to-face interactions, small group collaborations, in-classroom
experiences, video use/analysis, or a host of other factors that are having
the greatest impact on teaing practice and beliefs? (See Zaslow et al.,
2010.) What are the critical combinations of professional development
features in the particular context of mathematics learning environments for
young ildren? ese questions are considerably allenging given the
complexities of the classroom seing and the range of ildren learning in
those settings.
Push the Upper Boundaries of Mathematics
Curriculum for Young Children
“Mounting evidence illustrates that young ildren have the interest and
capacity to learn meaningful mathematics at early ages” (Newton &
Alexander, 2013, p. 23). Researers are continuing to expand the
knowledge base of what young ildren know and can do, and the
reﬁnement of assessment tools is central to this expansion. For example, for
decades ildren were tested on mental rotations using images (drawings)
of two-dimensional and three-dimensional ﬁgures only, rather than using
real ﬁgures. With the introduction and reﬁnement of the three-dimensional
mental rotation blos task (Bruce & Hawes, 2014; Hawes, Lefevre, Xui, &
Bruce, 2014)—a new tool for assessing mental rotations—researers have
learned that ildren at age 5 have the ability to mentally rotate three-
dimensional ﬁgures, a skill deemed too complex for 5 year olds in previous
resear trials. is one example, and many other recent studies, call into

question long-held beliefs that young ildren are incapable of considering
abstract or sophisticated mathematics ideas (English & Mulligan, 2013;
Ginsburg, 2009). When combined, the mounting evidence of what young
ildren know and can do has the potential to push up against or even
remove current curriculum ceilings in order to expose young ildren to
more sophisticated mathematics ideas. is upward movement includes
keen aention to the development of high-quality mathematics tasks for
young ildren that are engaging; involve important mathematics content;
require problem solving, effort, and persistence; encourage children to work
collaboratively; embed ongoing feedba to inform ildren’s actions; and
provide opportunities for ildren to develop a sense of ownership, self-
direction, and accomplishment (Soenfeld & Stypek, 2011) As Perry and
Doe (2013) remind us, “Children are unlikely to demonstrate their full
potential unless they are provided with the allenging and supportive
contexts that allow them to do so (Bobis et al., 2012; Hunting, Mousley, &
Perry, 2012)” (p. 156). We suggest, along with Stylianides and Stylianides
(2013), that there is still more work to be done involving systematic
classroom-based studies that demonstrate what ildren can learn in
classroom contexts, and that compare pedagogical approaes in their
eﬀects on the development of ildren’s mathematics understanding,
ultimately moving toward a “no-ceiling” approa to curriculum
development and implementation (Bruce et al., 2013).
Advance the Equity Agenda
is apter has highlighted some of the inequities and risks that ildren
from underserved communities may face in terms of their mathematical
development. is is not new, as Ginsburg and Russell (1981) called for
mathematics resear on disadvantaged ildren over 30 years ago. Yet

studies of young ildren’s mathematics in some underresourced contexts,
su as many aboriginal populations, are just now beginning to be reported.
One of the main allenges to this work is identifying particular strengths
and “points of leverage” that help young ildren develop to their potential
and close learning gaps, because the “resear on these ildren yields
results that are far more complex than usually assumed” (Soenfeld &
Stipek, 2011, p. 4). Extending the existing resear on the implementation
of mathematics programming and interventions that support the needs of
ildren from low-resourced bagrounds, including robust studies on the
role of mathematics language, the role of spatial reasoning, the eﬀects of
structured yet playful mathematics tasks, and the impact of providing
opportunities to learn, is urgent.
Final Thoughts
Researers of young ildren and educators alike are reaing a state of
constructive urgency in relation to the study and implementation of
pedagogies that foster deep mathematics understanding, particularly given
the recent and profound socio-economic learning gaps revealed in the
literature. e raising of voices in early years mathematics education and
related resear is just beginning to garner interest and legitimacy in the
wider resear and policy arenas to precipitate the necessary prioritizing of
early years mathematics and the shiing of funding priorities. Vigorous
resear programs, knowledge mobilization, and implementation of
researed-eﬀective pedagogy and curricula are indeed at the heart of our
work over the next two decades in mathematics education resear with
young children.

References
Alexander, K. L., & Entwisle, D. R., (1988). Aievement in the ﬁrst 2 years of sool: Paerns and
processes. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 53(2, Serial No 218).
Anderson, J., Bobis, J., & Way, J. (2008). Teachers as learners: Building knowledge in and through the
practice of teaing mathematics. In H. Forgaz, A. Barkatasas, A. Bishop, B. Clarke, S. Keast, W.
T. Seah, P. Sullivan, & S. Willis (Eds.), Resear in mathematics education in Australasia 2004–
2007 (pp. 313–335). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Anthony, G., & Walshaw, M. (2007). Eﬀective pedagogy in mathematics/pa¯ngarau. Wellington,
New Zealand: Ministry of Education.
Arnold, D. H., & Doctoroﬀ, G. L. (2003). e early education of socioeconomically disadvantaged
children. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 517–545.
Aubrey, C. (2004). Implementing the foundation stage in reception classes. British Educational
Research Journal, 30(5), 633–656.
Aubrey, C., Dahl, S., & Godfrey, R. (2006). Early mathematics development and later aievement:
Further evidence. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 18(1), 27–46.
Aunola, K., Leskinen, E., Lerkkanen, M.-K., & Nurmi, J.-E. (2004). Developmental dynamics of math
performance from preschool to grade 2. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(4), 699−713.
Australian Curriculum, Assessment, and Reporting Authority (2014). e Australian Curriculum .
Retrieved from www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/Curriculum/Overview
Balfanz, R. (1999). Why do we tea ildren so lile mathematics? Some historical considerations.
In J. V. Copley (Ed.), Mathematics in the early years (pp. 3–10). Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it
special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389–407.
Baroody, A. J. (2006). Why ildren have diﬃculties mastering the basic number combinations and
how to help them. Teaching Children Mathematics, 13(1), 22–31.
Baroody, A. J., Lai, M., & Mix, K. S. (2006). e development of young ildren’s early number and
operation sense and its implications for early ildhood education. In B. Spodek & O. Sarao
(Eds.), Handbook of resear on the education of young ildren  (Vol. 2, pp. 187–221). Mahwah,

NJ: Erlbaum.
Baroody, A. J., & Wilkins, J.L.M. (1999). e development of informal counting, number, and
arithmetic skills and concepts. In J. Copeley (Ed.), Mathematics in the early years, birth to ﬁve.
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Baista, M. T. (2007). e development of geometric and spatial thinking. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second
handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 843–908). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Bergen, D. (2009). Play as the learning medium for future scientists, mathematicians, and engineers.
American Journal of Play, 1(4), 413–428.
Blanton, M., & Kaput, J. (2003). Developing elementary teaers’ algebra eyes and ears. Teaching
Children Mathematics, 10(2), 70–77.
Bobis, J., Clarke, B., Clarke, D., omas, G., Wright, R., Young-Loveridge, J., & Gould, P. (2005).
Supporting teaers in the development of young ildren’s mathematical thinking: ree large
scale cases. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 16(3), 27–57.
Bobis, J., Higgins, J., Cavanagh, M., & Roe, A. (2012). Professional knowledge of practising teaers
of mathematics. In J. Greenlees, T. Logan, T. Lowrie, A. MacDonald, & B. Perry (Eds.), Review of
Australasian mathematics education resear: 2008–2011 (pp. 313–341), Roerdam, e
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Bowman, B., Donovan, M. S., & Burns, M.S. (Eds.). (2001). Eager to learn: Educating our presoolers.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Brizuela, B. M., Martinez, M. V., & Cayton-Hodges, G. A. (2013). The impact of early algebra: Results
from a longitudinal intervention. Journal of Resear in Mathematics Education / Revista de
Investigación en Didáctica de las Matemáticas, 2(2), 209–241.
Bruce, C., Esmonde, I., Ross, J., Gookie, L., & Beay, R. (2010). e eﬀects of sustained classroom-
embedded teaer professional learning on teaer eﬃcacy and related student aievement.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 26(8), 1598–1608.
Bruce, C. & Flynn, T. (2012). Integrating instruction and play in a Kindergarten to Grade 2 lesson
study project. In L. R. Van Zoest, J. J. Lo, & J. L. Kratky, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th annual
meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (pp. 853–856). Kalamazoo, MI: Western Michigan University.

Bruce, C., Flynn, T., McPherson, R., Benne, S. (2012). Mathematics for Young Children. Retrieved
from http://tmerc.ca/m4yc/.
Bruce, C. D., & Hawes, Z. (2014). e role of 2D and 3D mental rotation in mathematics for young
ildren? What is it? Why is it important? And what can we do about it? ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 47(3), 1–14. doi: 10.1007/s11858–014–0637
Bruce, C., & Moss, J. & Flynn, T. (2013). A “no-ceiling” approa to young ildren’s mathematics:
Preliminary results of an innovative professional learning program. In M. Martinez, & A. Castro
Superﬁne (Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th annual meeting of the North American Chapter of the
International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (p. 911). Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago.
Bruce, C. D., Moss, J., Sinclair, N., Whiteley, W., Okamoto, Y., McGarvey, L., … Davis, B. (2013,
April). Early years spatial reasoning: Learning, teaing, and resear implications. Paper
presented at the NCTM research presession: Linking research and practice, Denver, CO.
Caldera, Y., McDonald Culp, A., O’Brien, M. Truglio, R., Alvarez, M., & Huston, A. (1999). Children’s
play preferences, construction play with blos, and visual-spatial skills: are they related?
International 
Journal 
of 
Behavioural 
Development, 
23 
(4), 
855–872.
doi:10.1080/016502599383577
Cannon, J. S., Janowitz, A., & Painter, G. (2006). Is full beer than half? Examining the
longitudinal eﬀects of full-day kindergarten aendance. Journal of Policy Analysis &
Management, 25(2), 299–321. doi:10.1002/pam.20174
Carraher, D., Martinez, M., & Slieman, A. (2008). Early algebra and mathematical generalization.
ZDM: The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 40, 3–22.
Case, R., Griﬃn, S., & Kelly, W. (1999). Socioeconomic gradients in mathematical ability and their
responsiveness to intervention during early ildhood. In D. Keating & C. Hertzman (Eds.),
Developmental health and the wealth of nations: Social, biological, and educational dynamics
(pp. 125–152). New York: Guilford Press.
Case, R., & Okamoto, Y. (1996). e role of central conceptual structures in the development of
children’s thought. Monographs of the Society for Resear in Child Development, 61(1–2, Serial
No. 246).
Casey, B. M., Andrews, N., Sindler, H., Kersh, J. E., Samper, A., & Copley, J. (2008). e

development of spatial skills through interventions involving blo building activities. Cognition
and Instruction, 26, 269–309.
Cheng, Y. L., & Mix, K. S. (2012). Spatial training improves ildren’s mathematics ability. Journal
of Cognition and Development. Advanced online publication. doi: 10.1080/15248372.2012.725186
Chokshi, S., & Fernandez, C. (2004). Challenges to importing Japanese lesson study: Concerns,
misconceptions, and nuances. Phi Delta Kappan (March), 520–525.
Claessens, A., Duncan, G., & Engel, M. (2009). Kindergarten skills and ﬁh-grade aievement:
Evidence from the ECLS-K. Economics of Education Review, 28, 415–427.
Claessens, A. & Engel, M. (2011, April). How important is where you start? Early mathematical
knowledge and later sool success. Paper presented at the 2011 Annual Meeting of the
American Educational Research Association (AERA), New Orleans, LA.
Claessens, A. & Engel, M. (2013). How Important is where you start? Early mathematics knowledge
and later school success. Teachers College Record, 115, 1–29.
Clarke, D., Clarke, B., & Roe, A. (2011). Building teaers’ expertise in understanding, assessing
and developing ildren’s mathematical thinking: the power of task-based, one-to-one
assessment interviews. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 43 (6–7),
901–913.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2002). Eﬀects of a presool mathematics curriculum: Summary
resear on the Building Blos project. University of Buﬀalo, State University of New York.
Retrieved from gse.buffalo.edu/org/buildingblocks/index_2.htm
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2007). Eﬀects of a presool mathematics curriculum: Summative
resear on the Building Blos project. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 38(2),
136–163.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2008). Experimental evaluation of the eﬀects of a resear-based
preschool mathematics curriculum. American Educational Research Journal, 45, 443–494.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2009). Learning and teaing early math: e learning trajectories
approach. New York: Routledge.
Clements, D., & Sarama, J. (2011a). Early ildhood mathematics intervention. Science, 333, 968–
970.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2011b). Early ildhood teaer education: e case of geometry.

Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14(2), 133–148.
Clements, D. H.,, & Sarama, J. (2013). Rethinking early mathematics: What Is resear-based
curriculum for young ildren? In L. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.), Reconceptualizing early
mathematics learning (pp. 121–148). New York: Springer.
Clements, D. H., Sarama, J., Spitler, M. E., Lange, A. A., & Wolfe, C. B. (2011) Mathematics learned
by young ildren in an intervention based on learning trajectories: A large-scale cluster
randomized trial. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 42(2), 127–166.
Copley, J. V. (2004). e early ildhood collaborative: A professional development model to
communicate and implement the standards. In D. H. Clements & J. Sarama (Eds.), Engaging
young ildren in mathematics: Standards for early ildhood mathematics education  (pp. 401–
414). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Copley, J. V., & Padron, Y. (1999). Preparing teaers of young learners: Professional development of
early ildhood teaers in mathematics and science. Dialogue on early ildhood: Science,
mathematics, and tenology education. Washington, DC: American Association for the
Advancement of Science (AAAS).
Crosnoe, R., & Cooper, C. E. (2010). Economically disadvantaged ildren’s transition into
elementary sool: Linking family process, sool contexts, and educational policy. American
Educational Research Journal, 47(2), 258–291.
Cross, C. T., Woods, T. A., & Sweingruber, H. (Eds.) (2009). Mathematics learning in early
childhood. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
de Vries, E., omas, L., & Warren, E. (2010). Teaing mathematics and play-based learning in an
indigenous early ildhood seing: Early ildhood teaers’ perspectives. In L. Sparrow, B.
Kissane, & C. Hurst (Eds.), Shaping the future of mathematics education: Proceedings of the 33rd
annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia (pp. 719–722).
Fremantle: MERGA.
Desimone, L. (2011) A primer on effective professional development. Phi Delta Kappan, 92(6), 68–71.
Diamond, A., Barne, W. S., omas, J., & Munro, S. (2007). Presool program improves cognitive
control. Science, 318, 1387–1388. doi:10.1126/science.1151148
Doe, S. & Perry, B. (2007). Starting sool: Perceptions, experiences and expectations. Sidney:
University of New South Wales Press.

Doig, B., Groves, S. & Fujii, T. (2011). e critical role of task development in lesson study. In L.C.
Hart et al., (eds.), Lesson study resear and practice in mathematics education, Springer: New
York.
Duncan, G. J., Dowse, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K., Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., … & Japel, C.
(2007). School readiness and later achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43, 1428–1446.
Ehrli, S., Levine, S.C., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006). e importance of gesture in ildren’s spatial
reasoning. Developmental Psychology, 42(6), 1259–1268.
English, L. D. (2004). Promoting the development of young ildren’s mathematical and analogical
reasoning. In L. D. English (Ed.), Mathematical and analogical reasoning of young learners.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
English, L. D. (2012). Data modelling with ﬁrst-grade students. Educational Studies in Mathematics
Education, 81(1), 15–30.
English, L. D. (2013). Reconceptualizing statistics learning in the early years. In L. D. English & J.
Mulligan (Eds.). Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning, (pp. 67–82). New York: Springer.
English, L. D. & Mulligan, J. (2013). Perspectives on reconceptualizing early mathematics learning. In
L. D. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.), Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning (pp. 121–148).
New York: Springer.
Fennema, E., Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., Levi, L., Jacobs, V. R., & Empson, S. B. (1996). A
longitudinal study of learning to use ildren’s thinking in mathematics instruction. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 403–434.
Fisher, K. R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Newcombe, N., & Golinkoﬀ, R. M. (2013). Taking shape: Supporting
presoolers’ acquisition of geometric knowledge through guided play. Child development, 84(6),
1872–1878.
Frede, E., Jung, K., Barne, W. S., Lamy, C. E., & Figueras, A. (2007). e Abbo presool program
longitudinal eﬀects study (APPLES). Rutgers, NJ: National Institute for Early Education
Research.
Freudenthal, H. (1981). Major problems of mathematics education. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 12, 133–150.
Fukkink, R., & Lont, A. (2007). Does training maer? A meta-analysis and review of caregiver
training studies. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22(3), 294–311.

Gathercole, S. E., & Piering, S. J. (2000). Assessment of working memory in six- and seven-year old
children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 92, 377–390.
Geary, D. C., Hoard, M. K., Nugent, L., & Bailey, D. H. (2013). Adolescents’ functional numeracy is
predicted by their sool entry number system knowledge. PLoS ONE, 8, e54651.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054651
Ginsburg, H. P. (2006). Mathematical play and playful mathematics: A guide for early education. In
D. Singer, R. M. Golinkoﬀ, & K. Hirsh-Pasek (Eds.), Play = Learning: How play motivates and
enhances ildren’s cognitive and social-emotional growth (pp. 145–165). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Ginsburg, H. P. (2009). e allenge of formative assessment in mathematics education: Children’s
minds, teachers’ minds. Human Development, 52, 109–128. doi: 10.1159/000202729
Ginsburg, H. P., & Ertel B. (2008). Knowing the mathematics in early ildhood mathematics. In O.
Sarao & B. Spodek (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on mathematics in early ildhood
education (pp. 45–66). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Ginsburg, H. P., Hyson, M., & Woods, T. A. (Eds.). (2014). Preparing early ildhood educators to
teach math: Professional development that works. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Ginsburg, H. P., Lee, J. S., & Boyd, J. S. (2008). Mathematics education for young ildren: What it is
and how to promote it. Social Policy Report of the Society for Resear in Child Development,
22, 3–23.
Ginsburg, H. P., Lewis, A., & Clements, M. (2008). Sool readiness and early ildhood education:
What we can learn from federal investments in resear on mathematics programs? A working
paper prepared for a working meeting on recent sool readiness resear: Guiding the synthesis
of 
early 
ildhood 
resear. 
Washington, 
DC: 
October 
21–22. 
Retrieved 
from
http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/10/SchoolReadiness/apb3.pdf.
Ginsburg, H. P., & Pappas, S. (2004). SES, ethnic, and gender diﬀerences in young ildren’s informal
addition and subtraction: A clinical interview investigation. Journal of Applied Developmental
Psychology, 25, 171–192.
Ginsburg, H. P., & Russell, R. L. (1981). Social class and racial inﬂuences on early mathematical
thinking. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 46 (6, Serial No. 193).
Goldsmith, L. T., Doerr, H. M., & Lewis, C. C. (2014). Mathematics teaers’ learning: a conceptual

framework and synthesis of research, Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 17(1), 5–36.
Graham, T. A., Nash, C., & Paul, K. (1997). Young ildren’s exposure to mathematics: e ild
care context. Early Childhood Education Journal, 25(1), 31–38.
Gravemeijer, K. (1994). Developing realistic mathematics education. Utrecht: Freudenthal Institute.
Greenes, C., Ginsburg, H., & Balfanz, R. (2004). Big math for lile kids, Early Childhood Resear
Quarterly, 19, 159–166.
Griﬃn, S. (2004). Number Worlds: A resear-based mathematics program for young ildren. In D.
H. Clements, J. Sarama, & A.-M. DiBiase (Eds.), Engaging young ildren in mathematics:
Standards for early ildhood mathematics education (pp. 325–342). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Griﬃn, S. (2007). Early intervention for ildren at risk of developing mathematical learning
diﬃculties. In D. B. Ber & M. M. Mazzocco (Eds.), Why is math so hard for some ildren?
e nature and origins of mathematical learning diﬃculties and disabilities (pp. 373–396).
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing.
Griﬃn, S., & Case, R. (1996). Number worlds: Kindergarten level. Durham, NH: Number Worlds
Alliance.
Griﬃn, S., Case, R., & Siegler, R. (1994). Rightstart: Providing the central conceptual prerequisites for
ﬁrst formal learning of arithmetic to students at risk for sool failure. In K. McGilly (Ed.),
Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 24–49). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Guskey, T. R. (2003). What makes professional development eﬀective? Phi Delta Kappan, 84(10),
748–750.
Haey, A. (2013). e early ildhood mathematics education revolution. Early Education and
Development, 24, 419–430.
Hamre, B. K., Pianta, R. C., Burinal, M., & Downer, J. T. (2010, Mar). A course on supporting
early language and literacy development through teaer-ild interaction: Eﬀects on teaer
beliefs, knowledge and practice. Presentation at the Meetings of the Society for Resear in
Educational Effectiveness, Washington, DC.
Hawes, Z., Lefevre, J., Xui, C., & Bruce, C. (2014). Development of a new reliable 3D mental rotation
blocks task (3D MRBT) for clinical interviews, Mind, Brain and Education, 8(3).

Hirsh-Pasek, K., Hyson, M., & Rescorla, L. (1990). Academic environments in presool: Do they
pressure or challenge young children? Early Education and Development, 1 (6), 401–423.
Hunting, R. (2003). Part–whole number knowledge in presool ildren. Journal of Mathematical
Behavior, 22, 217–235.
Hunting, R., Bobis, J., Doig, B., English, L., Mousley, J., Mulligan, J., … Young-Loveridge, J. (2013).
Mathematical thinking in presool ildren in rural and regional Australia: Resear and
practice. Camberwell: ACER Press.
Hunting, R. P., Mousley, J. A., & Perry, B. (2012). A study of rural presool practitioners’ views on
young 
ildren’s 
mathematical 
thinking. Mathematics Education Resear Journal.
doi:10.1007/s13394–011–0030–3
Jansen, P., Smelter, A., aiser-Pohl, C., Neuburger, S., & Heil, M. (2013). Mental rotation
performance in primary sool age ildren: Are there gender diﬀerences in ronometric tests?.
Cognitive Development, 28(1), 51–62.
Jones, K. (2000). Teaer knowledge and professional development in geometry. In Rowland, T. (Ed.),
Proceedings of the British Society for Research into Learning Mathematics 20(3).
Jordan, N., Kaplan, D., Olah, L. N., & Locuniak, M. (2006). Number sense growth in kindergarten: A
longitudinal investigation of ildren at risk for mathematics diﬃculties. Child Development,
77, 153–175.
Jordan, N., & Levine, S. (2009). Socioeconomic variation, number competence, and mathematics
learning difficulties in young children. Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, 15, 60–68.
Klibanoﬀ, R., Levine, S. C., Huenloer, J., Vasilyeva, M., & Hedges, L. (2006). Presool ildren’s
mathematical knowledge: e eﬀect of teaer “math talk.” Developmental Psyology, 42(1),
59–69.
Kolstad, R. K., & Hughes, S. (1994). Teaer aitudes towards mathematics. Journal of Instructional
Psychology, 21, 44–48.
Kowalski, K., Prei-Frontczak, K., & Johnson, L. (2001). Presool teaers’ beliefs concerning the
importance of various developmental skills and abilities. Journal of Resear in Childhood
Education, 16, 5–14.
Lee, J. S. (2006). Presool teaers’ shared beliefs about appropriate pedagogy for 4-year-olds. Early
Childhood Education Journal, 33(6), 433–441.

Lee, J. S. (2010). Exploring kindergarten teaers’ pedagogical content knowledge of mathematics,
International Journal of Early Childhood, 42, 27–41. doi:10.1007/s13158-010-0003-9
Lee, J. S., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2007). Presool teaers’ beliefs about appropriate early literacy and
mathematics education for low- and middle-socioeconomic ildren. Early Education and
Development, 18(1), 111–143.
Lee, J. S., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2009). Early ildhood teaers’ misconceptions about mathematics
education for young ildren in the United States. Australasian Journal of Early Childhood,
34(4), 37–45.
Lee, V. E, & Burkam, D. T. (2002). Inequality at the starting gate: Social baground diﬀerences in
achievement as children begin school. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Levenson, E., Tirosh, D., & Tsamir, P. (2011). Presool geometry theory, resear, and practical
perspectives. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Levine, S. C., Huenloer, J., Taylor, A., & Langro, A. (1999). Early sex diﬀerences in spatial skill.
Developmental Psychology, 35(4), 940–949.
Lewis, C., Perry, R., & Murata, A. (2006). How should resear contribute to instructional
improvement: The case of lesson study. Educational Researcher, 35(3), 3–14.
Lin, H-L., Lawrence, F. R., & Gorrell, J. (2003). Kindergarten teaers’ views of ildren’s readiness
for school. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 18(2), 225–237.
MacDonald, A., Davies, N., Doe, S., & Perry, B. (2012). Early ildhood mathematics education.
In B. Perry, T. Lowrie, T. Logan, A. MacDonald & J. Greenlees (Eds.). Resear in Mathematics
Education in Australasia 2008–2011 (pp. 169–192). Roerdam, e Netherlands: Sense
Publishers.
Marcon, R. (2002). Moving up the grades: Relationship between presool model and later sool
success. Early Childhood Research and Practice, 4(1), 1–23.
Mast, J. & Ginsburg, H. (2010). Child study/lesson study: Developing minds to understand and tea
ildren. In N. Lyons (Ed.), Handbook of reﬂection and reﬂective inquiry: Mapping a way of
knowing for professional reflective inquiry (pp. 257–271). New York: Springer.
Mix, K. S., & Cheng, Y-L. (2012). e relation between space and math: Developmental and
educational implications. Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 197–242.
Moss, J., Caswell, B., Chang, D., Hawes, Z., Naqvi, S., & Tepylo, D. (2012). Math for Young Children.

Retrieved 
from www.oise.utoronto.ca/robertson/Inquiry-
based_Mathematics/Math_For_Young_Children/index.html.
Moss, J., Hawes, Z., Naqvi, S., & Caswell, B. (2015). Adapting Japanese Lesson Study to enhance the
teaing and learning of geometry and spatial reasoning in early years classrooms: A case study.
ZDM: The international journal on mathematics education, 15(3).
Moss, J. & London-McNab, S. (2011) An approa to geometric and numeric paerning that fosters
second grade students’ reasoning and generalizing about functions and co-variation. In J. Cai &
E. Knuth (Eds.), Early algebraization: A global dialogue from multiple perspectives (Advances in
Mathematics Education). New York: Springer.
Mulligan, J. T., & Mitelmore, M. (2009). Awareness of paern and structure in early mathematical
development. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 21(2), 33–49.
Mulligan, J. T., & Mitelmore, M. C. (2013). Early awareness of mathematical paern and
structure. In L. D. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.). Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning
(pp. 29–45). New York: Springer.
Mulligan, J. T., Presco, A., Papic, M., & Mitelmore, M. C. (2006). Improving early numeracy
through a Paern and Structure Mathematics Awareness Program (PASMAP). In P. Grootenboer,
R. Zevenbergen & M. Chinnappan (Eds.), Identities, cultures and learning spaces: Proceedings of
the 29th annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia, (pp.
376–383). Canberra: MERGA.
Murata, A. (2013). Diversity and high academic expectations without traing: Inclusively responsive
instruction. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 21(2), 312–335.
National Association for the Education of Young Children and the National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics. 
(2002). Position statement: Early ildhood mathematics: Promoting good
beginnings. Retrieved from www.naeyc.org/about/position/psmath.asp.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics (2000). Principles and standards for sool
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
National Mathematics Advisory Panel. (2008). Foundations for success: e ﬁnal report of the
National Mathematics Advisory Panel. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
National Resear Council. (2009). Mathematics learning in early ildhood: Paths toward
excellence and equity. Commiee on Early Childhood Mathematics, C. T. Cross, T. A. Woods, &

H. Sweingruber (Eds.), Center for Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Newcombe, N. (2010). Picture this: Increasing math and science learning by improving spatial
thinking. American Educator, 34(2), 29–35.
Newcombe, N. S. (2013). Seeing relationships: Using spatial thinking to tea science, mathematics,
and social studies. American Educator, 37(1), 26–31.
Newcombe, N., & Fri, A. (2010). Early education for spatial. intelligence: Why, what, and how.
Mind, Brain and Education, 4(3), 102–111.
Newton, K., & Alexander, P. (2013). Early mathematics learning in perspective: Eras and forces of
ange. In L. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.). Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning, (pp. 5–
28). New York: Springer.
Papic, M. (2013). Improving numeracy outcomes for young Australian Indigenous ildren through
the Paerns and Early Algebra Presool (PEAP) Professional Development (PD) Program. In L.
D. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.). Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning (pp. 253–281).
New York: Springer.
Papic, M., Mulligan, J. T., & Mitelmore, M. C. (2011). Assessing the development of presoolers’
mathematical patterning. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 42(3), 237–268.
Perry, C. (2011). Motivation and aitude of preservice elementary teaers toward mathematics.
School Science and Mathematics, 111(1), 2–10.
Perry, B., & Doe, S. (2002). Young ildren’s access to powerful mathematical ideas. In L. D.
English (Ed.). Handbook of international resear in mathematics education: Directions for the
21st century (pp. 81–111). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Perry, B. & Doe, S. (2008). Young ildren’s access to powerful mathematical ideas. In L. D.
English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd ed., pp. 75–
108). New York, Routledge.
Perry, B., & Doe, S. (2013). Reﬂecting on young ildren’s mathematics learning. In L. D. English
& J. T. Mulligan (Eds.), Reconceptualizing Early Mathematics Learning, Springer Series:
Advances in Mathematics Education, 149–162.
Presser, A. L., Clements, M., Ginsburg, H., & Ertle, B. (2012). Eﬀects of a presool and kindergarten
mathematics 
curriculum: 
Big 
Math 
for 
Lile 
Kids 
(pp. 
1–55). 
Retrieved 
from

cct.edc.org/sites/cct.edc.org/files/publications/BigMathPaper_Final.pdf
Purpura, D. J., Baroody, A. J., & Lonigan, C. J. (2013). e transition from informal to formal
mathematical knowledge: Mediation by numeral knowledge. Journal of Educational Psyology,
105, 453–464.
Radford, L. (2008). Iconicity and contraction: A semiotic investigation of forms of algebraic
generalizations of paerns in diﬀerent contexts. ZDM: e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 40, 83–96.
Ritie, S. J., & Bates, T. C. (2013). Enduring links from ildhood mathematics and reading
achievement to adult socioeconomic status. Psychological Science, 24(7), 1301–1308. doi: 10.1177/
0956797612466268
Sarama, J. (2004). Tenology in early ildhood mathematics: Building Blos™ as an innovative
tenology-based curriculum. In D. H. Clements, J. Sarama & A.-M. DiBiase (Eds.), Engaging
young ildren in mathematics: Standards for early ildhood mathematics education  (pp. 361–
375). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2002). Building Blos for young ildren’s mathematical
development. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 27(1&2), 93–109.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2008). Linking resear and soware development. In G. W. Blume &
M. K. Heid (Eds.), Resear on tenology and the teaing and learning of mathematics: Vol. 2.
Cases and perspectives (pp. 113–130). New York: Information Age Publishing.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). Early ildhood mathematics education resear: Learning
trajectories for young children. London: Routledge.
Saxe, G. B., Guberman, S. R., & Gearhart, M. (1987). Goals and contexts: A reply to the
commentaries. Reply to commentaries of Social Processes in Early Number Development (1987),
Monographs for the Society for Research in Child Development, 52(2), 160–163.
Seo, K., & Ginsburg, H. (2004). What is developmentally appropriate in early ildhood mathematics
education? Lessons from new resear. In D. Clements, J. Sarama, & A. Dibiase (Eds.), Engaging
young ildren in mathematics: Standards for early ildhood mathematics education  (pp. 91–
104). Hillsdale: Erlbaum.
Soenfeld, A., & Stipek, D. (2011). Mathematics maers: Children’s mathematical journey starts
early. Report of a conference held November 7–8. Berkeley CA. University of California Berkeley.

Shulman, L. (1986). ose who understand: Knowledge growth in teaing. Educational Researer,
15(2), 4–14.
Simpson, A., & Linder, S. (2014). An examination of mathematics professional development
opportunities in early childhood settings. Educational Journal, 42(5), 335–342.
Sinclair, N., & Bruce, C. (2014). Spatial reasoning for young learners (resear forum). In Liljedahl, P.,
Nicol, C., Oesterle, S., & Allan, D. (Eds.). Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of PME 38 and PME-
NA 36 (Vol. 1). Vancouver, Canada: PME.
Sinclair, N., & Crespo, S. (2006). Learning mathematics with dynamic computer environments.
Teaching Children Mathematics 12(9), 436–444.
Sinclair, N., & Jaiw, N. (2011). TouchCounts [computer soware]. Tangible Mathematics Project,
Simon Fraser University.
Sinclair, N., & Moss, J. (2012). e more it anges, the more it becomes the same: e development
of the routine of shape identiﬁcation in dynamic geometry environments. International Journal
of Education Research, 51&52, 28–44.
Singer, D., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (Eds.). (2006). Play = Learning: How play motivates
and enhances ildren’s cognitive and social-emotional growth. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Starkey, P., & Klein, A. (2008). Sociocultural inﬂuences on young ildren’s mathematical
knowledge. In O. Sarao & B. Spodek (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on mathematics in
early childhood education (pp. 253–276). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Starkey, P., Klein, A., & Wakeley, A. (2004). Enhancing young ildren’s mathematical knowledge
through a pre-kindergarten mathematics intervention. Early Childhood Resear arterly, 19,
99–120.
Stipek, D. (2013). Mathematics in early ildhood education: revolution or evolution? Early
Education and Development, 24: 431–435. doi: 10.1080/10409289.2013.777285
Stipek, D. (2014). Play and mathematics: An equation that works. Presool Maers … Today! A
blog 
of 
the 
National 
Institute 
for 
Early 
Education 
Resear. 
Retrieved 
from
http://preschoolmatters.org/2014/03/14/play-and-mathematics-an-equation-that-works/
Stockard, J., & Engelmann, K. (2008). Academic kindergarten and later academic success: e impact
of direct instruction (Tenical Report 2008–7). Eugene, OR: National Institute for Direct

Instruction.
Stylianides, A. J., & Stylianides, G. J. (2013). Seeking resear-grounded solutions to problems of
practice: Classroom-based interventions in mathematics education. ZDM: e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(3), 333–340.
Takahashi, A., & Yoshida, M. (2004). Ideas for establishing Lesson-Study communities. Teaching
Children Mathematics (May), 436–443.
Timperley, H., Wilson, A., Barrar, H., & Fung, I. (2007). Teaer professional learning and
development: Best evidence synthesis iteration [BES]. Wellington, New Zealand: Ministry of
Education.
Tirosh, D., Tsamir, P., & Levenson, E. (2011). Using theories to build kindergarten teaers’
mathematical knowledge for teaing. In K. Ruthven & T. Rowland (Eds.), Mathematical
Knowledge in Teaching (pp. 231–250). Dordrecht: Springer.
Tirosh, D., Tsamir, P., Levenson, E., & Taba, M. (2011). From presool teaers’ professional
development to ildren’s knowledge: Comparing sets. Journal of Math Teaer Educators, 14 ,
113–131.
Tout, K., Zaslow, M. & Berry, D. (2006). ality and qualiﬁcations: Links between professional
development and quality in early care and education seings. In M. Zaslow & I. Martinez-Be
(Eds.). Critical issues in early ildhood professional development. Baltimore, MD: Brookes
Publishing.
Tzuriel, D., & Egozi, G. (2010). Gender diﬀerences in spatial ability of young ildren: e eﬀects of
training and processing strategies. Child development, 81(5), 1417–1430.
Ual, D. H., Meadow, N. G., Tipton, E., Hand, L. L., Alden, A. R., Warren, C., & Newcombe, N. S.
(2013). e malleability of spatial skills: A meta-analysis of training studies. Psychological
bulletin, 139(2), 352.
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M. (Ed.) (2008). Children learn mathematics. A learning-teaing
trajectory with intermediate aainment targets for calculation with whole numbers in primary
school. Rotterdam /Tapei: Sense Publishers.
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., & Buijs, K. (2005). Young ildren learn measurement and
geometry. A learning-teaing trajectory with intermediate aainment targets for the lower
grades in primary school. Utrecht, The Netherlands: Freudenthal Institute.

Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., & Buys, K. (Eds.). (2008). Young ildren learn measurement and
geometry. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., Elia, I. & Robitzs, A. (in press). Kindergartners’ performance in
two types of imaginary perspective taking. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics
Education (3).
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M., Kühne, C., & Lombard, A. P. (2012). Learning pathway for number
in the early primary grades. Illovo, South Africa: Macmillan.
Van Hiele, P. (1999). Developing geometric thinking through activities that begin with play.
Teaching Children Mathematics (February), pp. 310–316.
van Nes, F., & de Lange, J. (2007). Mathematics education and neurosciences: Relating spatial
structures to the development of spatial sense and number sense. e Montana Mathematics
Enthusiast, 4(2), 210–229.
Verdine, B. N., Golinkoﬀ, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Newcombe, N., Filipowocz, A. T., & Chang, A. (2013).
Deconstructiong builidng blos: Presoolers’ spatial assembly preformance relates to early
mathematics skills. Child Development. doi: 10.1111/cdev.12165
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2009). Spatial ability for STEM domains: Aligning over ﬁy
years of cumulative psyological knowledge solidiﬁes its importance. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 101, 817–835.
Warren, E., & Cooper, T. J. (2008). Generalising the paern rule for visual growth paerns: Actions
that support 8 year olds thinking. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 67, 171–185.
Warren, E., & ine, J. (2013). Enhancing teaer professional development for early years
mathematics teaers working in disadvantaged contexts. In L. D. English & J. Mulligan (Eds.).
Reconceptualizing early mathematics learning (pp. 283–308). New York: Springer.
Was, T., Duncan, G., Siegler, R., & Davis-Kean, P. (2014). What’s past is prologue: Relations
between early mathematics knowledge and high sool aievement. Educational Researer, 43
(7), 352–360.
Webster-Wright, A. (2009). Reframing professional development through understanding authentic
professional learning. Review of Educational Research, 79(2), 702–739.
West, J., Denton, K., & Germino-Hausken, E. (2000). America’s kindergarteners. Statistical analysis
report, NCES2000–070. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Oﬃce of Educational

Research and Improvement, National Center for Education Statistics.
Whiteley, W. (2002). Teaching to see like a mathematician. Presentation at the Visual Representation
and 
Interpretation 
conference, 
Liverpool, 
UK. 
Retrieved 
from
www.math.yorku.ca/~whiteley/Teaching_to_see.pdf.
Zaslow, M. (2010) ality Measurement in Early Childhood Seings. In M. Zaslow, I. Martinez-
Be, K Tout, T Halle H P. Ginsburg & M. Hyson (Eds.), Towards the identiﬁcation of features
of eﬀective professional development for early ildhood educators. Prepared for Policy and
Program Studies Service, Oﬃce of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, U.S.
Department of Education. Retrieved from www.ed.gov/about/offices/list
Zaslow, M., Tout, K., Halle, T., Whiaker, J. V., & Lavelle, B. (2010). Towards the identiﬁcation of
features of eﬀective professional development for early ildhood educators. Prepared for Policy
and Program Studies Service, Oﬃce of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, U.S.
Department of Education. Retrieved from www.ed.gov/about/offices/list.

6 Powerful Ideas in Elementary School
Mathematics
David W. Carraher
TERC
Analúcia D. Schliemann
Tufts University

Introduction1
We develop here the idea that functions, and more generally, relations,
have a critical role to play throughout elementary sool mathematics
education. This claim is based on the notions that functions and relations are
already implicit throughout the content of present-day elementary
mathematics curricula, that they merit greater prominence in elementary
education, and that they are accessible to young students. We argue that
fostering students’ early understanding of functions and relations can
deepen and integrate their knowledge about topics in the current
curriculum, increase their ability to make mathematical generalizations, and
beer prepare them for a later, more formal introduction to algebra and
functions.
By the early introduction of functions and relations, we have in mind
approaes that diﬀer notably from formal axiomatic approaes. To be
sure, formal rules of syntax gradually take on importance, but young
students’ reasoning about functions gains considerable support from
representing and reﬂecting on the structure of situations described through
word problems.
e ﬁrst half of the apter looks at how functions and relations bear on
common topics and representations in elementary mathematics. We begin
by presenting four recurring powerful ideas, beginning with the idea that
the operations of arithmetic are themselves functions. From the standpoint
of mathematics, the four ideas are fairly straightforward and
uncontroversial, as are the definitions of function and relation. Even so, they
merit careful scrutiny because they are not widely anowledged in
elementary mathematics education. As we shall see, this stems in part from
diﬀerences in how functions and relations may be represented in the
elementary classroom and their conventional forms in mathematics.
e remainder of the apter focuses on resear and theory about

elementary sool students learning under circumstances in whi functions
and other relations are assigned a more prominent role in the curriculum. In
many places we draw on our own longitudinal classroom investigations
from Grades 2 through 8 (Carraher, Sliemann, & Brizuela, 2000, 2005;
Carraher, Sliemann, & Swartz, 2008; Carraher, Sliemann, Brizuela, &
Earnest, 2006, 2014; Sliemann, Carraher, & Brizuela, 2007, 2012;
Sliemann, Carraher, & Caddle, 2013; Sliemann, Carraher, Goodrow,
Caddle, & Porter, 2013).
ree main bodies of work contribute to the present analysis: (1) early
algebra resear (e.g., Blanton, 2008; Blanton & Kaput, 2000; Brizuela &
Earnest, 2008; Brizuela & Sliemann, 2004; Cai & Knuth, 2011; Carpenter &
Franke; 2001; Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003; Carraher, Sliemann, &
Brizuela, 2000, 2005; Carraher, Sliemann, & Swartz et al., 2008;
Carraher, Sliemann, Brizuela, & Earnest et al., 2006, in press; Davydov,
1991; Dougherty, 2008; Carraher & Sliemann, 2007; Kaput, 1998; Moss &
Beay, 2006; Sliemann et al., 2007, 2012), (2) studies of additive and
multiplicative structures (e.g. Carpenter, Moser, & Romberg, 1982; Harel &
Confrey, 1994; Lesh & Landau, 1983; Vergnaud, 1982, 1983, 1994), and (3)
work on functions (e.g., Romberg, Fennema, & Carpenter, 1993; Sfard, 1991;
Dubinsky & Harel, 1992; Schwartz, 1996; Schwartz & Yerushalmy, 1992).

Powerful Ideas
Elementary sool mathematics introduces students to the operations and
properties of integers, to rational numbers via fractions and decimals, and
to basic ideas about geometry and measurement. It places considerable
emphasis on the mastery of key representational systems associated with
place-value notation, wrien expressions and equations (without variables),
tables, number lines, simple graphs, and mathematical statements in natural
language, su as word problems. e history of mathematics education is
replete with aempts to implement powerful ideas in elementary sool
mathematics. For example, in the early 20th century, learning theorists
from a behaviorist sool of thought (e.g. orndike) advocated teaing
methods aimed at reinforcing desired behaviors of students, typically, the
solving of routine arithmetical computations and word problems. In the
second half of the 20th century proponents of the “New Mathematics
Movement” aempted to make elementary sool mathematics more
powerful using ideas from set theory that, in the 19th century, had helped
provide coherent and rigorous foundations for arithmetic. Although the
mathematical rationale of the movement was generally anowledged as
sound, the outcomes fell far short of their aspirations.2 An historian of
mathematics might stress time-honored mathematical ideas and notational
advances, su as the invention of the place value system that, once
adopted, allowed people to solve a wider range of problems with less eﬀort
than ever before and paved the way for further advances, su as algebraic
notation. More recently, mathematics educators have highlighted the
importance of what students already know, how they reason, and how their
reasoning plays a role in learning the content of mathematics (e.g. Langrall,
Mooney, Nishet, & Jones, 2008).
For the purposes of this apter, “powerful ideas” include those that
facilitate in-depth learning, understanding, and teaing of key

mathematical content areas and promote key long-term developments. We
will build the present analysis around four powerful ideas, listed in Table
6.1, that foreshadow what is to come. eir meaning and implications will
become clearer as the analysis unfolds.
e ﬁrst powerful idea is that the operations of arithmetic are literally
deﬁned as functions. Indeed, they are the ﬁrst examples of functions that
students encounter in mathematics. However, the domain and codomain of
functions, whi are the source of variables, tend to be tacit at best. In
addition, the overwhelming majority of problems posed in elementary
school concern bound, rather than free, variables.
e second powerful idea highlights why functions and relations deserve
a more prominent role. ese concepts are critical for the expansion of
elementary students’ concept of number beyond the natural numbers and
for the introduction of variables as placeholders for elements of sets.
Table 6.1 Four powerful ideas.
(1)  e four basic operations of arithmetic—addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division—are functions.
(2) Mathematical generalizations can be fostered by making the domain
and codomain of functions prominent and leaving otherwise bound
variables free to vary.
(3)  Functions and relations help integrate arithmetic, algebra, and
geometry.
(4)  Equations and inequalities can naturally be interpreted as the
comparison of two functions.
e third powerful idea concerns the role of functions in uniting
arithmetic, algebra, and geometry. It is precisely the abstract nature of
functions that permits and, from a pedagogical standpoint, requires them to
be represented in su diverse forms, most notably as data tables, as points
on the line and graphs in the Cartesian plane, as arithmetic and algebraic

expressions, as diagrams, and as statements in spoken and written language.
e fourth powerful idea builds on the fact that equations and
inequalities can be regarded as the comparison of two functions across their
domains. Equations may be regarded as statements expressing the
conditions under whi two functions provide the same output for a given
input. Likewise, inequalities can be interpreted as statements representing
the conditions under whi one of the functions yields a greater output than
the other function. Equations and inequalities conventionally take the form
of algebraic notation. However, they can be expressed through any of the
various forms for representing functions.
From an educational standpoint, the ideas we propose confer power to
the extent that they contribute to student learning. So, equally important
are pedagogical insights about how to successfully plan, stage, and
implement programs of instruction, drawing upon tools for representing,
deriving, and communicating mathematical ideas. eir impact also
depends on the degree to whi curricula and classroom activities make use
of resear regarding how students reason and learn about selected topics.
is is one reason we include detailed descriptions of studies on students
learning in classrooms.
What ideas qualify as powerful also depends to a degree on the abilities
and concepts one hopes to foster. In the present apter we will be focusing
in particular on students’ ability to model situations described in word
problems. By modeling situations we mean providing coherent and useful
descriptions of how various quantities of interest are interrelated. Note that,
throughout this paper, we take quantity to represent a “property of a
phenomenon, body, or substance, where the property has a magnitude that
can be expressed as a number and a reference” (JCGM, 2012, p. 2); this
convention is consistent with certain usages in mathematics (e.g. Whitney,
1968a) and mathematics education Fridman (1991). In principle, descriptions
of how quantities are interrelated may enable the student to make

inferences about one quantity from information about others. ey should
serve to handle particular cases as well as a range of cases with varying
values.
Accordingly, we will be paying aention to the students’ growing use of
variables in their models of situations. As is to be expected, this requires
examining students’ uses of notation for stating relationships among
numbers and quantities, ﬁxed and variable. It also demands special
aention to how students use natural language to express models. And as
numbers and numeric operations increasingly take on geometric form as
positions, distances, and ultimately transformations on the real line and in
the plane, it becomes necessary to pay close aention to how students use
number line diagrams and graphs to express relationships.
Viewing basic topics of elementary sool mathematics through the lens
of functions and relations can serve to unite—for teaers as well as
students—key ideas and teniques that might otherwise seem unrelated. It
can facilitate problem solving by making more readily accessible the tools
through whi relations and functions are routinely represented: number
lines, bar diagrams, graphs, arithmetic and algebraic notation, tables, and
specialized language structures. It also beer prepares students for
mathematics in middle and high sool, minimizing diﬃculties that are
exacerbated by excessively computational approaes to arithmetic (Booth,
1988; Kaput, 1998; Lacampagne, 1995; Sliemann et al., 2007; Soenfeld,
1995). A major allenge for educators consists in ﬁnding opportunities for
switing the focus from computations on speciﬁc values to relationships
among sets of values.
Additive, Multiplicative, and Linear Structures
In past decades mathematics education researers increasingly examined

knowledge about arithmetical operations beyond knowing how to compute
sums and differences, products, and quotients (Carpenter et al., 1982; Lesh &
Landau, 1983; Swartz, 1996; Vergnaud, 1982, 1983, 1994). One oen
employs the terms “additive and multiplicative structures” to encompass
this broader sort of arithmetical knowledge.
In the present context, the term structure alludes to the logical relations
among the quantities in a problem. Additive structures are associated with
statements of the form A + B = C and variants such as C – B = A and C – A
= B, where the leers, A, B, C, etc., may stand for numbers or for quantity
values of multitudes or magnitudes; they also correspond to inequalities
su as A + B < C. Multiplicative structures entail problems that might be
represented by A × B = C and variants su as C ÷ B = A. Linear structures
are those associated with an equation su as A × B + C = D. Su
relational structures are aributed to word problems regardless of whether
the problems contain algebraic notation and whether they expressly include
variables.
Problems having the same relational structure may nonetheless be
conceptualized as having diﬀerent structures in another sense. As mu
resear has shown (e.g., Vergnaud, 1982), young students may treat
problems of part-whole compositions (C consists of two parts, A and B),
transformations (A undergoes the additive ange, B, resulting in C),
comparisons (A is greater than C by B), and net anges (the composition
of ange A with ange B constitutes a net ange, A + B) as having
diﬀerent “conceptual structures,” even though they have the same
underlying relational structure, A + B = C (Vergnaud, 1982). Unfortunately,
to refer to part-whole compositions, transformations, and so on, as
structures is potentially misleading because one hopes that students will
ultimately realize that conceptual structures may obscure a common
underlying relational structure. Teaers need to be cognizant of both kinds
of structure and realize that the relational structure is the more elusive of

the two.
e ri features of situations also may obscure underlying relational
structures. Furthermore, the relational structure is less salient in problems
that assign values to all or all but one of the variables. In eﬀect, when all
but one variable are bound, students are prone to regard the unbound
variable as a secret or missing number rather than as a placeholder for all
elements of a domain. ere are ways to address this issue. Indeed, we will
examine examples in whi problems are formulated in su a way as to
leave variables “free to vary.”
Nonmathematicians commonly conﬂate the operations of arithmetic
with the speciﬁc procedures or rules used for computing sums, diﬀerences,
products, and quotients. is view is problematic, for it implies that
alternative procedures necessarily constitute diﬀerent operations. e
ancient Egyptians “doubling and halving” procedure, though certainly
diﬀerent from modern column multiplication, is nonetheless a valid form of
multiplication. Likewise, a Brazilian street vendor’s mental calculation of
the diﬀerence, 200–35, entails the operation of subtraction even if it does
not make use of the minus sign, place value notation, and column-wise
computation (Carraher, Carraher, & Schliemann, 1985).
e symbolic forms of problems are a critical component of
mathematical knowledge and problem solving that we must keep in mind
in the upcoming analysis. ey need to be distinguished from the
underlying relational structure of problems.
Algebraic Structures
We are trying to weigh the relative merits of treating the operations of
arithmetic as functions. In this venture, another sort of structure can be of
help in providing a deeper understanding of the properties of the

arithmetical operations. In mathematics, algebraic structures correspond to
the sets or classes of numbers under consideration and, in a looser sense, to
the properties of operations deﬁned over those sets. For elementary sool
mathematics, the initial algebraic structure will be the natural or counting
numbers, 1, 2, 3… roughout elementary sool the students expand their
understanding of numbers to include integers, rational numbers, in the form
of fractions and decimal numbers, and eventually the real numbers. As new,
more inclusive, classes of numbers enter the scene, the arithmetic properties
of the operations will change. For real numbers, these properties include the
additive 
and 
multiplicative 
properties of closure, commutativity,
associativity, distributivity, identity, inverse, and order properties su as
transitivity and additive and multiplicative compatibility (Rosen, 2012). Not
all of these properties hold for the other, “earlier,” less-inclusive classes of
numbers. As we proceed to reconceptualize the operations of arithmetic as
functions, we need to keep in mind that the domains of the functions and
relations, the very numbers the student will presumably be working with,
will be anging. e operation of division over natural or counting
numbers is not closed. at is one of the reasons that integer division, or
more precisely, division of natural numbers with a remainder, is the ﬁrst
form of division that students encounter. Rational numbers open the door
to long division, a diﬀerent function from integer division. Multiplication of
counting numbers never results in a product less than the multiplicand. is
property no longer holds for integers and rational numbers. As we shall see,
functions and relations, whi bring domains into the light of day, can help
teaers and curriculum developers take into account the student’s evolving
sense of what numbers are.
Syntactical Structure

Consider an algebraic expression in conventional form su as 2x + 3. e
syntactical structure of the expression may be clearly represented through
tree notation:
Tree notation expresses the hierary of operations in an expression through the vertical
arrangement of nodes. As well, in tree notation leers are used to represent operations that may
be indicated only tacitly by positioning of symbols in ordinary notation.
(Kirshner & Awtry, 2004, pp. 232–233)
Syntactical structure may also be expressed by a string of aracters that
depicts the level and order of operations through braeting. For instance,
in Wolfram Language, aka Mathematica, the expression 2 x + 3 in full form
is represented as “Plus [3,Times[2,x]].” A treeform diagram of the
expression is generated by the code, TreeForm [2 x + 3]. In addition, tree
structure can be described and clariﬁed through “precise declarative
accounts of algebraic structures and processes” (Kirshner & Awtry, 2004, p.
249) embodied in spoken or written language.
Although syntactical structures are important for students’ mastery of
arithmetic and algebra, we will not focus on su structures in the present
analysis.
Relations and Functional Relations (Functions)
To appreciate the mathematical meaning of a relation, consider tables, that
is, tabular representations of data or information. For most purposes, any
table of information can be regarded as a relation. Ea tuple—that is,
ordered pair, triple, quadruple, etc., that makes up a row of information—is
a member of the relation.3
For convenience, consider the set numbers that a single dice can return:
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. e possible outcomes for a pair of dice, along with their
sum, are the triples (1, 1, 2), (2, 1, 3), (1, 2, 3), (2, 2,4), …, (6, 6, 12). In

mathematics one oen takes the set of tuples as the relation itself. is
notion of a relation as a list of cases applies as well to inﬁnite sets, su as
the integers, rationals, or real numbers. Of course, we cannot make a table
of inﬁnite length. But we can imagine su a table—and we can work,
together with students, on a subset of su a table even though it does not
comprise the entire relation.
If we exclude empirical data (rainfall data, position time pairs on an
actual trip), most relations of interest to elementary sool mathematics
may also be described through words and algebraic notation. For example,
“given the integers n, m that are elements in the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and s
that is an element of {2, 3, 4, …12}, the relation can be described as {n, m, n +
m}” Note that we may describe the relation equally well as the triples {n=s–
m, m,s},{n,s–n,s}, or even{n=s–m,m=s–n,s=n+m}. It does not maer that, in
real life, one ﬁrst throws the dice and then sums the outcomes to get the
total. A relation need not convey a sense of input and output.
e reader will note that some representations of the described relation
highlight subtraction while others highlight addition. From a relational
point of view, every addition problem is a subtraction problem—actually,
two subtraction problems. Every division problem can be regarded as a
multiplication problem, provided the divisor is not zero. Two symbolic
representations of a relation are interangeable if they correspond to the
same tuples.
One of the principal virtues of a relational approa to addition and
subtraction is the degree to whi it facilitates the reformulation of an
indirect problem as a direct problem. Consider the following simple
problem:
Some birds are siing in a tree. Two more birds ﬂy to the tree, and then there are ﬁve. How
many birds were there in the tree at first?
(Mikulina, 1991, p. 186)

e problem is indirect because a valid solution is not produced by
carrying out addition as alluded to in the story through the phrase “Two
more birds ﬂy to the tree.” One can represent the relational structure of the
problem as x+2=5 but one more straightforwardly solves this missing
addend problem by recognizing that the structure may also be represented
by x=5–2. We might justify this rewriting of the relation through rules of
syntax. But the young student may initially ﬁnd it more natural to work
through the relation in story form, coming to the realization that the
current covey of birds in the tree consists of those that were there from the
beginning together with those that arrived later. Eliminating the “joiners”
from the current set of birds leaves the original birds; subtracting the
number of joiners from the current number of birds yields the number of
the original birds.
A relational approa aims at describing how diverse numbers or
quantities in a problem ﬁt together. is supports the discovery of
alternative, yet equivalent, symbolic formulations that can then be more
easily simpliﬁed. Eventually rules of syntax can guide the rewriting; but in
the beginning, the student’s understanding of the semantics of the problem
may be the principal driver for finding equivalent expressions.
A (binary) function is a relation in whi ea and every “piece of
information” (element) from one set (the domain) is associated with a
single piece of information from the second set, the codomain or target. We
exemplify this for the case of multiplication. e “times seven” table
represents the relation {(1, 7), (2, 14), (3, 21), (4, 28), …, (12, 84)}. ere is an
implied asymmetry, a direction, reﬂected in the functional notation, x↦7x
(to be read as “x maps to 7x”), where x stands in for the elements in the
domain and 7x for elements in the codomain. is asymmetry—“you can
always produce f(x) from x”—is consistent with the view that a function is a
unidirectional procedure or a process. However, there are many occasions
in whi one needs to view a function as an object that can be acted upon

and compared with other functions (see Sfard, 1991, for the distinction of
function as a process versus function as an object). As we shall see, in
treating equations and inequalities as comparisons of functions, it is useful
to think of functions both as processes and as objects.
When one conceives of multiplication as a binary function, ea element
in the ﬁrst set is itself an ordered pair, (x, y). For example, we may
represent multiplication as the function (x, y) ↦ x × y. e relation can
also be represented as {(x, y), x × y}.
A functional approa to arithmetic provides students with opportunities
to analyze physical quantities and situations and to build and understand
mathematics concepts. It can empower teaers and students to learn the
standard topics in a deeper, more interconnected way. From the decimal
system, to arithmetic operations, to fractions, ratio, and proportion, a
functional approa can pave the way for a smooth transition to the middle
and high sool curriculum and to the future learning of algebra
(Soenfeld, 1995; Sliemann et al., 2012) and even calculus (Oehrtman,
Carlson, & Thompson, 2008).
First, by recognizing arithmetic operations as functions, teaers will
more easily pay aention to domain and codomain of arithmetic operations
(Powerful Idea #2). is is important given that young students typically
enter sool with a limited understanding of natural numbers and, yet, by
the end of elementary sool, will be expected to have become familiar
with operations (hence functions) over integers and rational numbers, ea
class of whi introduces additional properties, new notational and
representational advances (unary operators, fractional and decimal forms,
additional uses of the number line, etc.), and new kinds of situations to be
modeled.
Second, treating the operations of arithmetic as functions oﬀers many
opportunities for using variables (Powerful Idea #2). Computable functions,
namely, those for whi outputs can be uniquely determined from inputs

by using an algorithm (a clearly speciﬁed list of steps or formula), consist of
variables, constants, and operators that, when conﬁgured in certain ways,
enable focusing on sets of values rather than individual values. is shi in
focus from particular numbers to variables encourages the production of
mathematical generalizations.
ird, by treating the operations of arithmetic as functions, mathematical
structures and relations become more evident. Mathematical structures
reveal themselves through features shared by diﬀerent actions, su as
computations. (For example, the sequence of computations 1 × 3 + 7, 2 × 3
+ 7, 3 × 3 + 7, 4 × 3 + 7 highlights the invariant syntactical structure, □ × 3 +
7). Over time, relatively deep structures, will become increasingly
accessible.
Fourth, when viewing the basic operations of arithmetic as functions,
algebra, algebraic thinking, and geometry are seen as inherent to arithmetic
and arithmetical reasoning (Powerful Ideas #3 and 4). is can mitigate the
clash between arithmetic and algebra that many students currently
experience when, aer years of dealing with a computational view of
arithmetic, they are formally introduced to algebra.
As we will aempt to show, a functional approa to elementary sool
mathematics can be closely allied with other powerful ideas su as
generalizing, modeling, and using multiple representations. It leads to
viewing isolated examples and topics as instances of more abstract ideas
and concepts. We believe that su ideas can make a diﬀerence in teaing
and learning at the elementary school level.

Learning About Additive Relations
What opportunities are there for young students to learn about additive
relations in the broad sense in whi we are using the term? To make
relations explicit, one needs to introduce variables. is leads us to ask,
“How can young ildren understand variables, if at all, and use them in
discussing relations?”
A variable is a short name or placeholder for a set of elements. Although
this may seem far removed from everyday experience, we regularly use
words and expressions to stand for indeterminate and variable quantities.
For example, a service arge might be set as 15% of the cost of dinner,
whatever that cost may be.
Relations, including functions, are fundamentally about associations
between sets (of elements) that we denote through variables. When the
elements in question are numbers, the variable can be thought of as a
generalized number. Sometimes the elements in question are understood to
be values associated with quantities su as number of items, length, time,
or mass, or of derived quantities su as speed, density, or person-hours. In
su cases the variables may be referred to as variable magnitudes
(Aleksandrov, 1999) or variable quantities. It is a maer of considerable
debate how to meaningfully bridge the realms of numbers and quantities.
Some would hold that students learn about numbers and then apply this
knowledge to situations involving quantities. Others suggest that students
acquire mathematical knowledge primarily through extra-mathematical
situations.
Relations and Additive Structures
In the 1960s a group of Soviet researers (see Davydov, 1991), initiated a

long-term program to introduce students to algebra from their very ﬁrst
days in sool. Despite the well-documented success of the program and
the care with whi the ideas were developed and published, the approa
has enjoyed relatively lile inﬂuence on early mathematics curricula
outside of the former Soviet republics. Studies by Dougherty (2008) and
Schmittau and Morris (2004) are notable exceptions.
Smiau and Morris (2004) provide a useful description of the initial
activities of the Davydov approa in ﬁrst grade, whi highlights additive
relations among physical quantities:
e grade 1 curriculum begins with an exploration of quantitative properties of real objects.
Length, width, volume, area, and weight, are examples of “quantities.” Children learn to isolate
and identify a single quantitative property of an object (e.g., the surface area of a glass) and to
abstract it from the object’s spatial orientation. ey learn to compare objects and to determine
whether they are equal with respect to some quantitative property, and to use a line segment
model to represent the results of their comparison of quantities. Initially they draw two equal
line segments, “ ||,” to indicate that two objects are equal with respect to some property and two
unequal line segments to show that they are not equal. Children then learn to use an uppercase
leer to represent a quantitative property of an object, and to represent equality and inequality
relationships with the signs =, ≠, >, and <. For example, they compare the lengths of two boards,
name the lengths A and B, and represent the relationship between them as A = B,A ≠ B,A > B,A
< B. ere is no reference to numbers during this work: “A” represents the unmeasured length of
the board.
(Schmittau and Morris, 2004, p. 60)
e authors further note that an inequality (e.g. K > D, where K and D
are, for example, the unmeasured lengths of two objects) leads naturally to
an equation involving three objects: “If K > D (by A) then K – A = D and K
= D + A” (Schmittau & Morris, 2004, p. 64).
e Davydov approa takes welcome steps in the direction of giving
algebraic expression to relations. It introduces variable notation while
stopping short of explicitly introducing variables as placeholders for all
elements in a set.

Addition and Subtraction as Functions
From here on, we describe in detail examples of classroom discussions that
took place in our longitudinal intervention studies designed to investigate a
particular approa to functions and other relations in elementary sool.
We will argue that the data provide evidence that participating students
understand a relation as a correspondence between two variables, not
simply between two numbers or quantity values. is would suggest that
relations and functions, in the particular sense adopted here, are within
reach of even young elementary students.
e ﬁrst example comes from a three-year intervention, from third
through ﬁh grade, in whi students were introduced to variables and
functions (Carraher, Sliemann, & Swartz, 2008). In four third grade
classrooms of 8 and 9 year olds, the instructor told the students he was
going to discuss the number of candies that two students, John and Mary,
had. In his le hand he held a box of candies that he identiﬁed as John’s
candies. In his right hand he held a similar-looking box, Mary’s box, along
with three loose candies taped onto the top. He stated that there was
exactly the same number of candies inside ea box, although Mary had
three additional candies atop her box.
Unlike standard addition problems given to third-grade students, this
problem does not have a unique solution in that many ordered pairs
representing John’s and Mary’s amounts satisfy the constraints of the
problem. Given that an actual box contains a ﬁxed amount at a given time,
the lesson introduces a tension between the empirical reality (How many
candies are actually in the boxes?) and the logical possibilities (What are all
the possible pairs of amounts that satisfy the conditions of the problem?).
At the beginning of the lesson, the students treated the problem as being
about speciﬁc amounts, an interpretation the instructor did not immediately
aempt to dispel. e boxes were circulated among the students who,

perhaps not surprisingly, heed and shook them to help estimate the
amounts. Because paing paper prevented the candies from raling, the
instructor had to reassure students not only that the boxes contained
candies but also that they contained precisely the same number of candies.
Aer this, the students were asked to individually draw or describe on
paper what they knew or could say about the number of candies John and
Mary had. Approximately two-thirds of the students aributed a speciﬁc
value to John’s and Mary’s amounts. In the majority of cases the number
ascribed to Mary was three greater than the number ascribed to John. Some
students refrained from aributing speciﬁc values and described instead the
relation between the amounts, namely, that Mary had three more than
John, or that Mary had more than John. In isolated cases, a student used a
symbol (a question mark or an empty square or box) to indicate unknown
amounts; in su cases, however, the same type of placeholder was used for
John’s and Mary’s amounts.
Aer collectively reviewing the students’ work, the teaer asked ea
student to state the number of candies they thought John and Mary might
have had. e teaer registered students’ estimates on a whiteboard in a
three-column data table, with a student’s name and her estimates for John
and Mary’s amounts in ea row. Aerwards, and without opening the
boxes, the teaer initiated a discussion about the validity of the various
guesses, that is, about whi answers were in accordance with how the
problem was stated. e teaer’s intent was to shi the conversation from
the actual number of candies to all ordered pairs of numbers consistent with
the narrative. Here is where the table’s role as a tool for displaying relations
was put to use.
Occasionally, a student gave an answer that violated the constraint that
Mary had three more candies than John, for example, by proposing that
John had seven candies while Mary had 13. Other students quily noticed
su inconsistencies and claimed that the ordered pair could not be correct.

From our perspective they were claiming that the pair was not in the
relation. ey pointed out that, even though there could be any amount in
the boxes, the amount in ea box had to be the same and Mary had to
have exactly three more candies than John. Students eventually agreed that
once an amount is aributed to one of the students, the other student’s
amount must take on a particular value. ey also reaed the consensus
that any and all answers consistent with the information given in the
problem were legitimate. As one student expressed it, once the invalid pairs
were removed from the table: “Everybody had the right answer because
everybody… has three more [for Mary], always.”
In one classroom, a student had oﬀered to represent the amounts in the
box by a question mark and, with the instructors’ guidance, the student
proposed to represent Mary’s amount as “? + 3.” In another classroom, the
instructor proposed using the leer N to represent the indeterminate or
variable amount. Students ﬁrst speculated that N could be 19, 90, or 14 (N is
the14th leer in the alphabet). e instructor recommended that they adopt
the convention that N stands for any number and asked: “How many
should we say that Mary has if John has N candies, and N can stand for
anything?” Several students suggested that Mary’s amount also be called N.
e instructor then asked, “Well, if we write N here [on the blaboard,
next to the N assigned to John] doesn’t that suggest that they [John and
Mary] have the same amount? Students at ﬁrst rejected this proposal,
claiming that N “could mean anything.” e instructor agreed, but raised
the issue that “some people would look at it [the adoption of N to represent
both John’s and Mary’s amounts] and say it’s the same anything if you’re
calling them both N.” A student then proposed to represent Mary’s amount
as N + 3 and explained: “I thought, ‘cuz she could have three more than
John. Write N plus three ‘cuz she could have any amount plus three.”
Another student agreed, explaining “‘cuz if it’s any number, like if it’s
ninety, you could just, like add three and it’d be ninety-three.”

In the four classrooms students eventually adopted the convention that if
N represents the amount of candy in a box, Mary’s amount might be called
“N plus three.” (In one classroom, a student submied, with a gleam in his
eye, that if there were 1 billion candies in ea box, Mary would have 1
billion and three candies!) e student clearly realized that 1 billion candies
could not possibly ﬁt in the box; his point appears to have been that the
wording of the problem did not exclude this possibility. In a sense, the
student was aempting to test the limits of the domain the teaer would
consider legitimate. He was playfully overlooking the physical constraints
and focusing solely on the constraints imposed by the wording of the
problem.
Some may regard the inherent ambiguity of the problem as a possible
source of confusion. Yet it is the story’s ambiguity that allows the teaer
and students to hold a meaningful discussion about the sort of truth they
were to pursue: empirical truth, consistent with the “facts on the ground” or
logical proof consistent with the wording of the problem. rough su
conversations students can begin to appreciate the tension between realistic
considerations (there is only one answer for the number of candies John and
Mary have) and logical possibilities (valid answers are those consistent with
the information given, regardless of whether they correspond to a
particular case at hand).
e results from the Candy Boxes task suggest that young students can
learn to shi their focus from individual instances to sets of numbers and
their interrelations (Powerful Idea #2). In this view the mathematical object
is no longer a relation between two constants but rather the relation
between two variables. More recent work by Brizuela, Blanton, Gardiner,
Newman-Owens, & Sawrey, (in press) found that even ﬁrst and second
graders can discuss problems and come to use variables to represent
relations among quantities. But we must be careful not to overinterpret
promising ﬁrst steps: the Candy Boxes lesson represented the beginning of

a long conversation about variables that extended over months and years
and across a wide variety of contexts.
Representing Additive Functions on a Number
Line
e Candy Boxes activity introduced third graders to functions through a
table of values, simple algebraic notation, and number lines. One of the
long-term goals was to exploit key geometrical representations for
expressing relations on the number line and in the Cartesian plane. Here we
brieﬂy describe how additive relations are introduced as displacements on
the number line, preparing students for dealing later with transformations
of the real line. We also show how variables enter the discussion through
what we called the “N-number line” or the “variable number line.”
In the classroom resear the number line was ﬁrst introduced by means
of a length of twine streted across the classroom with numerals to
represent successive integers aaed at approximately one-foot intervals.
Students at ﬁrst tended to consider only the numerals shown on the twine
but, aer discussing where the number line would ﬁnish, they quily came
to regard the number line as an imaginary construct that can “go through
walls” and continues indeﬁnitely in opposing directions. In subsequent
lessons, number lines were represented on paper or projected onto a large
screen. To emphasize intervals, as opposed to points on the number line,
arrows linking points on the same line represented anges in values, and
longer arrows connecting shorter ones were used to lead students to
consider shortcuts that went from the tail of the ﬁrst arrow to the head of
the last arrow. For example, the operation “+ 7 – 9” could be composed and
represented as subtracting 2, something occasionally referred to as a
“shortcut.”

Whereas we might think of a number line as the embodiment of the
continuous and dense real line (a mathematical object), young students are
likely to interpret number lines as holding nothing but integers separated
by voids. Students are sometimes inclined to consider the diﬀerence
between numbers on the number line as the number of ti marks between
one number and the other rather than distances as measured by some unit
of distance or metric. Geing students to think of numbers and number
operations as entailing distances, slopes and rates of ange, and geometric
transformations (translations, dilations, reﬂections, etc.) is a long-term
process of unifying arithmetic and geometry that culminates in analytic
geometry. We may informally refer to this process as helping students
move “onto the real line” and later “onto the coordinate plane.”
Students also used number lines to model additive relations in word
problems by displacing themselves along a number line drawn on the
classroom ﬂoor or by showing displacements on paper. In preparation for
the work with positive and negative integers, in one of the lessons we
proposed a situation involving money and debts (see Carraher et al., 2006
and Peled and Carraher, 2008, for details on the allenges and progress
made by third graders on adopting the conventions for representing
problems on the number line).
We later introduced the “N number line”—a variation (Figure 6.1) where
positions were identiﬁed as N – 2, N – 1, N, N + 1, N + 2, etc. Su a
representation allowed students to represent additive relations as functions
of one variable.
Students were asked to solve addition and subtraction problems with
indeterminate values and to focus on variables and notation for variables.
Solving Multistep Additive Problems Using the N

Number Line
e following description of a lesson in a third-grade classroom of 16
students shows how the variable number line helped students reﬂect upon
and represent the following statements of a multistep problem involving
addition and subtraction and, at the end, solve the problem (see Figure 6.1):
Mary and John each have a piggy bank.
On Sunday they both had the same amount in their piggy banks.
On Monday, their grandmother comes to visit them and gives $3 to ea
of them.
On Tuesday, they go together to the bookstore. Mary spends $3 on Harry
Poer’s new book. John spends $5 on a 2001 calendar with dog
pictures on it.
On Wednesday, John washes his neighbor’s car and makes $4. Mary also
made $4 babysitting. They run to put their money in their piggy banks.
Only aer the whole story had been discussed and represented through
Wednesday were the students shown the additional statement:
On Thursday Mary opens her piggy bank and finds that she has $9.
ey were then asked to determine how mu money was initially in
ea piggy bank, how mu money John and Mary ea ended up with,
and the difference between their final amounts.
Representing Unknown Amounts
Aer a class discussion about ea step of the problem, students worked
alone or in pairs to provide their own wrien accounts about the

information given. Members of the resear team asked individual students
to explain what they were doing and raised questions that encouraged
them to develop more adequate representations. We will highlight main
points related to students’ insights and representations. For a detailed
description of the lesson implementation (see Carraher et al., 2006 and
Carraher et al., in press).
Figure 6.1  The N number line. This was used to represent successive additive operations upon an
indeterminate number or amount, N.
Sunday: Aer a student read the Sunday part for the whole class, the
instructor asked whether anyone knew how mu money ea of the
aracters in the story had. e students agreed that they did not, and did
not appear to be bothered by that. A few uered: “ N” and one of them
stated, “N, it’s for anything.” Others called out “any number” and
“anything.” A student proposed, “You could make [sic] some money in
them, but it has to be the same amount” and, when the instructor reminded
him that the amount was unknown, the student suggested that he could
write N to represent the unknown amount. ey all started writing in their
handouts, whi contained a copy of the N number line. e instructor
reminded them that they could use the N number line and drew a copy of
the N number line on the board.
Aer approximately three minutes, four students had aributed speciﬁc
values for Mary and John on Sunday, ﬁve represented the amount as N,
two placed a question mark inside or next to ea piggy bank, and ﬁve
drew piggy banks with no indication of what ea would contain (Figure
6.2).
One of the students (ﬁrst example in Figure 6.2) explained that she used

N because “You don’t know how mu amount they have” and “ N means
any number.” When further asked, “Is it that they have, like, ten dollars
each?” she answered: “No…. Because we don’t know how much they have.”
Figure 6.2 Three examples of students’ use of N to represent the amounts in the piggy bank.
Representing Changes in Unknown Amounts
Monday: When the students read that ea ild received $3 on Monday,
they inferred that Mary and John would continue to have the same amount
of money as ea other and that they both would have $3 more than the

day before. A student proposed that, on Monday, they would ea have N
plus 3 “Because we don’t know how mu money they had on Sunday, and
they got plus, … and they got three more dollars on Monday.” e second
and third examples in Figure 6.2 show spontaneous depictions of N + 3. As
one student explained, “when the grandmother came to visit them they had
like, N. And then she gave Mary and John three dollars. at’s why I say
[pointing to N + 3 on paper] N plus three.”
By the end of the lesson, students’ wrien work showed that 11 of the 16
students had adopted N + 3 for the amounts on Monday, one student used
speciﬁc amounts in his work sheet, and four produced drawings that could
not be interpreted, or wrien work that included N but inconsistently, as in
N + 3 = N.
Operating on Unknowns With Multiple Representations
Tuesday: Some students wondered whether there would be enough money
in the piggy banks on Tuesday for the purases. A student suggested that
the ildren in the story probably had $10; others assumed that there must
be at least $5 in ea piggy bank by the end of Monday, otherwise John
could not have bought a $5 calendar. e students also concluded that, at
the end of Tuesday, John and Mary would have diﬀerent amounts of
money and that Mary would have more money than John, but the same
amount that she had on Sunday.
The instructor encouraged the class to use the N number line to represent
what has happened from Sunday to Tuesday. With input from the students,
she drew arrows going from N to N + 3 and ba to N again to show the
anges in Mary’s amounts. In parallel, she used algebraic notation,
narrating the anges from Sunday to Tuesday, step by step, and geing
students’ input while she wrote N + 3 – 3. She then wrote a braet under
+3–3, with a 0 below it, and extended the notation to N + 3 – 3 = N + 0 =

N. A student explained how the $3 spent cancels out the $3 given by the
grandmother: “Because you added three, right, and then she took, she spent
those three and she has the number she started with.” With the students’
input, the instructor eventually wrote N + 3 – 5 to express John’s amount at
the end of Tuesday. Some students suggested that this amount was equal to
“N minus 2,” an inference that she registered as N + 3 – 5 = N – 2.
e boom example in Figure 6.2 shows that, for Tuesday, the student
ﬁrst drew iconic representations of the calendar and the book next to the
values $5 and $3, respectively. While discussing with an in-class
interviewer, he wrote the two equations (N + 3 – 5 = N – 2 and N + 3 – 3 =
N), using the N number line as support for his decisions (Powerful Idea #3).
Later, when he learned that N was equal to 5 (from the information about
the amount on ursday) he wrote 8 next to N + 3 on the Monday section
of his worksheet.
Wednesday: Students concluded that on Wednesday Mary and John
would end up with diﬀerent amounts, then explained that Mary would
have N + 4 and John N + 2. A student volunteered to show why N + 3 – 3 +
4 equals N + 4 by crossing out the subexpression + 3 – 3 saying, “We don’t
need that anymore.” Another student stated that this is the same as 0.
e students then took turns helping the instructor write out an equation
conveying what happened to John’s amounts throughout the week. Going
through ea step in the story, they built the equation N + 3 – 5 + 4 = N +
2. Before they agreed upon the expression for the right-hand side of the
equation, the instructor had to help them visualize the operations leading to
N + 2 on the N number line, starting with +3 – 5 and then –2 + 4 leading to
2. As one of the students explained: “ N is anything, plus 3, minus 5, is minus
2; N minus 2 plus 4, equals (while counting on his ﬁngers) N plus 2.” is
student also grouped the numbers diﬀerently, ﬁrst adding 3 and 4 and then
taking away 5, giving the instructor the opportunity to stress that the order
of operations did not matter.

Solving the Problem Once the Solution Set Is Constrained to a Single Value.
Thursday: When a student learned that Mary ended with $9, several
ildren suggested aloud that N had to be 5. Some of them claimed that
John (whose amount was represented by N + 2) had “two more,”
apparently meaning “two more than N.” Others answered 7, by adding 5 +
2 or by subtracting 2 from Mary’s ﬁnal amount of 9. One student expressed
that N + 2 (John’s amount) is two less than N + 4 (Mary’s amount).
e instructor concluded the lesson by working with the students in
ﬁlling out a 2-by-4 table displaying the amounts that Mary and John had
across the four days. Some students suggested expressions with unknown
values; others suggested using the actual values, as inferred aer the
information about Thursday’s events.
is early work on number lines not only helped students beer solve
arithmetic problems, but also prepared them to later work in the Cartesian
space. is transition was aieved by ﬁrst representing in parallel number
lines and then rotating one of them to become perpendicular to the other,
thereby creating a coordinate space.
The N Number Line in a New Context: Differences Between Heights
It is possible to mix unbound measures with known measures. Figure 6.3,
for instance, exempliﬁes a problem that provides speciﬁc diﬀerences in
heights among ildren while leaving the heights of the three protagonists
unbound, that is, free to vary (Carraher et al., 2006). Representing the
relationships among heights—whether through a drawing, through
alternative verbal descriptions, or through equations—may initially be
allenging for third graders. But in the course of a single lesson or two,
students become comfortable with such problems.
e following week, in the eighth lesson in third grade, we asked the
same group of students to work on the problem in Figure 6.3 (see Carraher

et al., 2000, 2007, for a previous analysis of the same problem with another
group of students). e problem states the diﬀerences in heights among
three aracters without revealing their actual heights. e heights could be
thought to vary insofar as they could take on a set of possible values. e
point of researing the issue was to see what sense the students made of
such a problem.
Aer discussing ea statement in the problem, the instructor
encouraged the students to focus on the diﬀerences between the
protagonists’ heights (see Carraher, Brizuela, & Earnest, 2001, for details on
this ﬁrst part of the class) and to represent the problem on individual
worksheets. Most of the students used vertical bars or lines to show the
three heights (see example in Figure 6.4).
Figure 6.3 The Heights Problem.
To our surprise, one of the students ose to represent the heights on a
variable number line, mu like the one they had been working with
during previous meetings (see Figure 6.5). e instructor adopted her
number line as a basis for a class discussion of the relations among the
heights and about her assumption that Maria is located at N on the variable

number line (middle number line in Figure 6.6). In the discussion, most
students easily accepted that if Maria’s height was located at N on the line,
Tom’s height should be at N + 4 and Leslie’s at N + 6.
It is impressive that the student realized that the N number line would
help to clarify the problem at hand, and that the remaining students easily
accepted her idea and represented Tom and Leslie’s heights (N + 2, N + 4,
respectively), from Maria’s (N). e instructor then pushed the students
even further, asking them to assume, instead, that Leslie’s height was N.
ey noted that Tom’s height would be N – 2 and Maria’s would be N – 6
(the bottom number line in Figure 6.6). They determined this by making the
appropriate displacements on the variable number line. When the instructor
proposed them to place Tom at N, again, aer some adjustment to the
work of a student who counted points instead of intervals, Leslie was
correctly placed at N + 2 and Maria at N – 4 (top number line in Figure 6.6).

Figure 6.4 A student’s drawing and notation for the Heights Problem.


Figure 6.5 A student’s drawing (notches) showing differences but no origin. She also uses a variable
number line that becomes the basis of subsequent discussion.
Figure 6.6 Three “variable number line” representations drawn by students and their teacher to
discuss the cases where Maria is attributed the height of N (middle number line); Leslie is assigned
the height of N (the bottom number line); and the Tom is assigned a height of N (the upper number
line).
By the end of the lesson, the students were relating the given numerical
diﬀerences to algebraic notation, line segment diagrams, number lines
(including variable number lines), subtraction, counting, and natural
language descriptions. e ﬂuidity with whi they moved from one
representational form to another suggests a ﬂexible understanding of

additive structures. Their willingness to use N to represent the height of any
of the three aracters in the story (as long as the relations among the three
heights are kept invariant) shows an encouraging degree of robustness in
their thinking.
Further Challenges in Learning About Additive
Relations and Structures
In the preceding examples, we focused on the progress young students can
make in identifying additive structures and reasoning about variables. We
should be careful not to underestimate the time and eﬀort su progress
demands. Students may quily accept the idea that there are negative
integers on the number line and yet remain puzzled when negative
numbers arise in extra-mathematical contexts. Many students, for example,
think of monetary amounts as physical commodities that they can hold in
their hand. By this standard, the least amount that they can have is no
money at all. e idea that they might spend more money than they have,
and express the result of this action as a negative value, demands that they
view debits as negative amounts and, ultimately, a net balance as a sum of
credits and debits. e interested reader will ﬁnd useful discussions of su
issues by Peled and Carraher (2008).

Learning About Multiplicative and Linear
Relations Among Quantities
Multiplication and division are generally modeled by, or serve as models of,
situations involving unlike quantities or a combination of numbers and
quantities. Students face situations in whi, of the two inputs, multiplier
and multiplicand (a) one refers to a quantity while the other will refer to a
number (six seconds times ﬁve) or (b) the two entities refer to diﬀerent
kinds of quantities (e.g. a distance multiplied by a speed resulting in a time
or a length times a length yielding an area). us, multiplication and
division of quantities exhibit an asymmetry that does not occur in the realm
of number, where two numbers are input, resulting in a third number.
As Vergnaud (1983) notes, understanding multiplication as part of the
conceptual ﬁeld of multiplicative structures rests on understanding
proportionality. We would add that a deep understanding of multiplication
is grounded on an understanding of linear functions.
is situation has led some to propose that quantities be explicitly
integrated into the mathematical models used to solve applied problems
(Whitney1968a, 1968b). For the present discussion, to the extent that
quantities play a role in how students conceptualize mathematical
problems, we will need to take them into account as we examine issues
regarding multiplicative structures.
Viewing Multiplicative Structures as Relations
Let’s now examine the prospects of introducing multiplicative problems
and linear functions wherein relations among variables are given a
prominent role. We will examine two successive lessons about the seating
capacity around conﬁgurations of dinner tables (see detailed analysis by

Carraher, Martinez, & Sliemann, 2008), implemented during the laer
half of third grade. e 15 students in the classroom were part of another
three-year longitudinal classroom intervention and aended a Boston
sool in a minority and immigrant community. e previous 33 lessons
aimed at helping students to note and articulate the general relations they
see among variables. During the lessons, students aempted to represent
and determine, using data tables and mathematical notation, the relation
between the number of tables and the number of people who can be
served.
In the ﬁrst lesson the tables were separated and four people could be
seated at ea one. In the second, tables were set end to end in a line that
grew with ea additional table. e two tasks corresponded, respectively,
to the functions f(n) = 4n and g(n) = 2n + 2, where n refers to the number of
tables and f(n), g(n) refer to the number of people that can be seated at n
tables. e tasks were introduced to the third grade students as a word
problem.
The Separated Dinner Tables Problem
e constraint of ﬁlling ea dinner table was clariﬁed during a 10-minute
discussion about the terms maximum and minimum: For a separated table,
“zero seats” was the minimum and four was the maximum number of
people at ea table. e students’ task was to determine the maximum
number of people that could be seated at varying numbers of separated
dinner tables.
e students then completed a handout for one, two, three, and nine
dinner tables and the instructor registered the agreed-upon results in
tabular form on the whiteboard. e gap between the rows for three and
for nine tables was intended to interrupt a column-wise, building-up

strategy (see Sliemann, Carraher, & Brizuela, 2001 and Vergnaud, 1983)
and to encourage students to consider within-row, input-output, an
approa considered more congenial to closed form expressions of the
function. e students ﬁlled in the data table in the handouts by multiplying
the number of dinner tables by four, by adding four plus four, plus four
repeatedly (once for ea dinner table), and by adding four to the number
of people in the prior row. One student noted that, when the rows of the
data table were not arranged in a regularly increasing fashion, it was
diﬃcult to make use of the values in one row to obtain to values in the
next.
In the discussion of the meaning of the wrien computations within the
dinner table context, ildren at ﬁrst described what we might term
“number of people per table” as “number of people.” e instructor
systematically rephrased ildren’s statements or helped them to do so,
diﬀerentiating between total number of people and number of people per
table. A student, building on previous work on notation for variables,
proposed to use t for the number of tables and stated that “four times t ”
expresses the total number of people.
e problem was also used to give rise to discussions regarding the
inverse function, t = p/4: To answer the question “What if we have 20
people total?” a student said that four times ﬁve is 20 and that you can
think of 20 divided by ﬁve and the answer is four. Another proposed that
one can also think of 20 divided by four, and a third one viewed the
question as, “Four times what number equals 20?”
The Joined Dinner Tables Task
In the lesson on joined dinner tables, we examined the various ways in
whi students aempt to determine the relation between the number of

tables and the number of people who can be served, with particular regard
to what the elements in an equation refer to.
e instructor ﬁrst reviewed the previous lesson and students recalled
what they had done then. Five minutes into the lesson the instructor asked
them to determine how many people could sit at two tables that are joined
together. Students concluded that the answer was six people. e instructor
counted along the outside edges of two tables drawn on the board and
asked: “Now, how come that when we had two tables there were eight and,
now we have two tables and we have six?” A student, pointing in the
drawing at the two inside edges where the tables meet and where guests
cannot sit explained: “Because of these two sides, right here.” Aer
agreeing that seats would be lost between adjacent tables, other students
discussed how many people would sit at two and at three joined tables. A
student aempted to generalize how seating capacity increased according
to the number of tables by saying: “You keep adding two.”
e instructor then built a data table on the board, with headers for the
number of dinner tables (t) and the maximum number of people (p) that
could sit at separate tables (the Tuesday column), and at joined tables
(ursday), as shown in Figure 6.7. Working together with the ildren, she
ﬁlled in the results for two and three separate dinner tables, and then when
they are joined. As ea row of data was completed she contrasted the
results for the two situations. Again, some students expressed, for the joined
dinner tables, that “You are adding two each time.”
Fieen minutes into the lesson, to motivate students to seek a general
rule for relating the number of tables to the number of seats, instead of
simply extending the number of people by two ea time a table was
added, the instructor asked: “How many people could be seated at 100
tables?” One student answered 200 people, and another said 101, apparently
just trying to guess. As the instructor reminds them of the previous lesson,
several students mention that they had to multiply by four. Aer some

discussion, with input from the students, she writes the equation t × 4 = p
for the case of separate tables and asks them to state what ea of its
elements stands for. She rephrases students’ suggestions and expresses that
t stands for number of tables, 4 for number of people per table, and p for
total number of people. Before going back to the question on the number of
people that can sit at 100 joined tables, she asks the students to propose a
formula for the case of joined tables.
Figure 6.7  Table relating the number of dinner tables to number of people that could sit if the
tables were separated (Tuesday) or joined (Thursday).

One of the students, pointing to ea row in the data table on the board
shown in Figure 6.7, examines how the seating capacity of joined tables
diﬀers from the seating capacity of separate tables and mentions that, as the
number of tables increases, joined tables hold ever-fewer guests than
separate tables. e instructor agrees with the student but stresses that she
is looking for a general statement that does not rely upon the number of
people for separate dinner tables. She then asks, once more, how many
people can sit at 100 tables. A student predicts that 202 people can be seated
at 100 tables. She agrees with him and proposes that the students move to
working in small groups on their handouts (Figure 6.8).
Most ildren ose to draw tables and count the number of external
table edges to determine the number of people who could sit at the joined
tables. is may appear unnecessary, given that they had already discussed
the same case as the data table on the board was ﬁlled in. However, the
drawings constituted a path to the multiple types of generalizations the
ildren came to develop as they aempted to represent a general rule
corresponding to the closed form expression of the function and as they
aempted to answer the question: “If I tell you the number of dinner tables
lined up, how can you ﬁgure out the maximum number of people that can
sit down?”
While working in small groups, a student proposed a general rule and
described it as: “t times two plus two equals p.” In another group, a student
generated drawings for ea case and successively added two for the next
total. When a researer in the classroom asked him to ﬁnd the number of
people for 100 tables, he stated that 202 people could sit at the tables and
generated a general rule for the function. He later explained to the whole
class, drawing a long rectangle on the board: “‘cuz if you have one table, on
that side is 100, 100 over there [along the other long side] and then two
over here [at the heads of the table]… 200 plus 2 equals 202.” When asked
to propose a formula for “whatever number of tables,” she proposed “t

times two plus two” and wrote on the board t × 2 + 2. Another student
suggests surrounding t × 2 by parentheses. e instructor writes the
equation (t × 2) + 2 = p on the board and asks the students to state what
each element in the equation represented.
e equation (t × 2) + 2 = p constitutes a closed form representation of
the relation between the number of joined dinner tables and the maximum
number of people that could be seated. In the class handouts, eight of the 15
ildren aending the lesson answered the question “If I tell you the
number of dinner tables lined up, how can you ﬁgure out the maximum
number of people that can sit down?” e other seven relied on drawings
and counting or didn’t answer the question. A review of the videos of the
lesson and of their wrien work showed that, in their development towards
the closed form representation favored by the instructor, the students
produced several equivalent expressions that fall into one of two broad
categories: a recursive formula versus a closed form expression. ey were
alternative correct representations for the relation (see details in the
original paper by Carraher, Martinez, & Sliemann, 2008). e classroom
discussions and the students’ wrien work stress the conceptual shi that
some students need to go through to abandon their own models and
construct something that is closer to the mathematical relationships and
representations we want them to learn. It shows how students can come to
gradually appropriate the general representational tools of mathematics.


Figure 6.8  Handout for the Dinner Tables Problem.

Equations and Inequalities as the Comparison of
Functions
Equations and inequalities can be interpreted as a comparison of functions
(Powerful Idea #4). Let us exemplify and explain.
Some authors (e.g. Filloy and Rojano, 1989) have noted that many
students who are just beginning to study algebra will ﬁnd an equation su
as w + 8 = 3 × w to be allenging because the variable, w, appears on both
sides of the equal sign. e diﬃculty presumably lies in operating on (or
with) the so-called unknown.
Subtracting w from ea side of the equation yields the equation 8 = 2w.
is equation may be solved by dividing ea side by 2 and obtaining a
solved equation in the canonical form, × = 4. But by interpreting the
equation, w + 8 = 3 × w, as a comparison of the function w + 8 with the
function 3 × w, novel ways for approaing the solution to equations
emerge.
We noted that functions may be expressed through a variety of forms,
including graphs and verbal formulations. For example, the graph of the
function w + 8 can be ploed as a line, with slope of 1 that intersects the
point (0,8). Likewise, the function 3 × w can be ploed as a line of slope 3
that passes through the origin.
We have designed lessons for students as young as 9 years that exploit
the interpretation of an equation as the comparison of functions. One
implementation employed the functions w + 8 and 3 × w we have been
discussing; the lesson and results are described in detail elsewhere
(Carraher, Sliemann, & Swartz, 2008). Here we will summarize the
points of interest to the present chapter.
We posed the following problem to students in the laer part of fourth
grade (about 10 years old):

Mike has $8 in his hand and the rest of his money is in his wallet;
Robin has exactly three times as much money as Mike has in his wallet.
What can you say about the amounts of money Mike and Robin have?
e ﬁrst statement was intended to embody the function, w + 8. e
second statement was to embody the function 3 × w.
It took approximately 10 minutes of class discussion, led by the
instructor, to rea an agreement about the asserted relation that Robin had
three times as mu money as Mike had in his wallet. Until then, many
interpreted the statement as meaning that Robin’s amount was three times
Mike’s total amount. en the students were asked to individually
represent the situation in writing. Over 60% of the students used algebraic
notation to capture the functional relationships among the variables (Figure
6.9).
However, as the discussion progressed, most students believed that one
of the boys had more money than the other. ey were then encouraged to
examine the amounts in the wallet as well as Mike’s total and Robin’s total
under scenarios that varied according to the amount of money in the wallet.
e instructor showed how to ﬁll in the three-column table (w, w + 8, and
3w) for the cases where the wallet had $0, $1, and $2. ey then produced
data tables and graphs relating possible amounts in the wallet to the
amounts Mike and Robin ea would have. By examining the data table
and the graphs they found that when there was $4 in the wallet they would
have the same amount of money; for amounts smaller than $4 Mike would
have more money; and for those larger than $4 Robin would have more.


Figure 6.9  An 11-year-old student’s representation of the wallet problem.
Over the course of two lessons, the students came to realize, and to
express comfortably in their own words, whi if either of the boys had
more money. e students realized that the answer to this question
depended on how mu money was in the wallet: when there was less than
$4 in the wallet, Mike had more money, when there was exactly $4 in the
wallet, the boys had the same amounts, and when there was more than $4
in the wallet, Robin had more.
ey spoke of the wallet as “ﬁlling up” as they scanned over increasing
values in the wallet. ey noted that Mike’s total was increasing more
slowly (by $1 for ea additional dollar the wallet held) than Robin’s total,
which increased by $3 for each additional dollar in the wallet.
It was clear from the discussions and the student work that the students
were treating the amount of money in the wallet, as well as the students’
amounts, as variables and the amounts of Mike and Robin as functions.
For them, w (the amount of money in the wallet) was not an “unknown”
but instead a variable. e functions were equal only for the case when
there was $4 in the wallet. For all other conditions, one of the boys had
more money than the other.
We interpret su results as showing that fairly young students can work
with and understand variables as placeholders for sets (rather than simply a
single missing value) and algebraic expressions as denoting functions that
can be compared.
We have also found that fourth grade students can learn to act directly
on the algebraic representations of equations. is required additional
instruction regarding subtleties of notation usage that we will not describe
here. We believe that facility with syntactic rules can and should build upon
the intuitions that students build and extend when algebra is employed to
model quantitative situations. At some point, we would hope and expect

that students will eventually be able to treat algebraic expressions as
providing suﬃcient information for deriving new expressions. We happen
to believe, however, that this is beer viewed as a long-term goal rather
than a starting point for learning about functions. And, even so, there will
always be occasions for using algebra to model extra-mathematical
situations.
In our classroom intervention studies, fourth and ﬁh graders proceeded
to learn about the Cartesian space, and to solve equations by comparing
two functions by drawing the graph of ea function and by using the
syntactic rules of algebra, topics that typically only appear in middle and
high sool. It suﬃces to say that, as they were aempting to solve
problems related to the situations we brought to the classroom, they were
applying number facts and dealing with arithmetic operations. Most
importantly, they were beginning to master relations among sets of
quantities and numbers.
Wrien assessments at the end of ea year of the intervention showed
that the treatment students outperformed their peers in all grades. At the
end of the project (ﬁh grade), the treatment students fared beer than
controls on algebra problems. e power of our approa was also
measured two and three years later. en, participating students were more
successful than their peers in learning to solve more advanced algebra
problems and beer proﬁted from algebra instruction in seventh and eighth
grade (see detailed report by Schliemann et al., 2012).

Discussion and Conclusions
Many curriculum developers and mathematics educators have failed to note
that addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division operations are
deﬁned as functions and that this idea can provide important insights for
elementary sool mathematics. In introducing arithmetic operations as
functions, it is crucial to consider situations and quantities that may lead to
discussion of the covariation between two sets of values, the mathematical
representations that may help highlighting the covariation of the two sets,
and students’ own ways of ﬁrst approaing the proposed situations. Within
a relational approa to arithmetic, topics in the curriculum are viewed as
instances of more abstract ideas and concepts. is not only enries
ildren’s understanding of arithmetic, but can also build the foundations
for the meaningful learning of elementary algebra.
However, elementary sool students do not need to be acquainted with
terminology surrounding functions (function, domain and codomain,
ordered pairs, Cartesian product). Nonetheless, a certain degree of
formalization is desirable even at the elementary level. It is important and
feasible that elementary sool students learn to use and master other key
representations, including number lines, graphs of functions, and algebraic
notation. is, of course, requires careful planning and design of situations
that, over the long run, strike a balance between theorems-in-action and
theorems (Vergnaud, 1996), between intuition and logic (Poincaré, 1969),
and between using and reflecting upon mathematical tools and ideas.
In traditional elementary sool curricula, young students are introduced
to mathematical relations indirectly through number facts or simple
problems such as 6 + 4 = □.
However, two of the variables have been bound, a consequence of whi
is that the equation will be true if and only if the third variable equals 10.
And the fact that the third variable is already isolated on one side of the

equation eliminates the need to state the relation in another, equivalent
form, using the operation of subtraction. Addition and subtraction entail
diﬀerent calculation procedures. But the very same relations can be
represented through addition and subtraction when the relations are
described through equations or inequalities. Equivalent forms are
understood as conveying the same information. Likewise, by introducing
the equals sign together with other relational operators (>,<, ≥, ≤), a major
opportunity is gained for emphasizing variables, not simply “unknowns.”
One need not wonder that young students are inclined to believe that “=”
stands for “makes” or “yields” (Kieran, 1981); that is precisely how it is
introduced and explained to them. But the equals sign means mu more
than this. e relational operators, (,≤, =, ≥) are comparison operators. e
algebraic expression of a relation, regardless of whi operator is used, can
always be regarded as a comparison of an amount (magnitude or
multitude) on one side of the operator with the amount on the other. is
same approa can be extended to equations with one or more unbound
variables.
In the Candy Boxes problem, we saw that young students could quily
grasp the idea of the function x + 3, or the relation between x and x + 3,
without assigning a value to x and while fully realizing that x could stand
for any number of candies that could conceivably ﬁt in the box. In the
problem of comparing two students’ amounts of money over several days,
students were able to operate on variable amounts, only later solving the
problem for particular value of x aer they were told that, on ursday, the
amounts, the students had become equal.
However, even when students are willing to treat quantities as variable,
there may be additional issues to explore. Imagine a fourth grade student
who is facing the relation x < 6. She might place her ﬁnger at 6 on a
number line and claim that numbers to the le of that position satisfy the
relation, x < 6, and that numbers to the right of 6 make the relation false

(“they are greater than 6”). So far, so good. But more is required for us to
conclude that the relation the student is referring to is the relation we may
have in mind. Does she believe that the relation holds for all values in the
domain, for example, real numbers? What about –7, –8, and so on? Does
the student believe negative integers are less than 6? What about fractions?
Does the student believe 2/3 and –3/17 to be among the numbers to the le
of 6? Does she realize that there are inﬁnitely many fractions to the right of
6 and also inﬁnitely many between 5.5 and 6? We cannot conclude that a
student has the same understanding of a particular relation that we do
merely because we are in agreement for a few selected cases.
We do not wish to imply that teaers should aempt to introduce real
numbers explicitly early on. It will take years just to gain an initial grasp of
rational numbers through fractions and decimals; real numbers will take
even longer to master. Nor do we wish to argue that algebraic notation be
the sole means for examining relations, especially with young students.
Relations can also be expressed in natural language, for instance, in
statements in word problems. ey can be described with tables of data.
Relations can also be represented through diagrams, displacements on a
number line, or graphs in the coordinate plane. Students learn about and
express their understanding of relations, including functions, while using
multiple representations in concert.
Functions can initially be taught to and understood by ildren as a
dependency of one amount on another—and they need to be ﬁrst
introduced to view, rather than the more abstract, modern view of
functions as ordered pairs.
Elementary teaers and textbooks tacitly work with functions well
before they introduce the term function. Exposing the functional aracter
of arithmetic explicitly helps elementary sool ildren shi their focus
from individual numbers to sets of numbers and quantities (i.e., variables)
and their interrelations. is shi naturally leads students to consider

relationships between variables. Isolated examples can always be treated as
instances of more general cases. “Plus three” can be viewed as an operation
on an indeterminate number, a variable. Eventually students can begin to
appreciate numeric operations as movements on (transformations of) the
number line (i.e. the real line).

Closing Thoughts
We focused here on four powerful ideas. ere are several other powerful
ideas that played roles in the present analysis and may be of interest to
mathematics educators at the elementary school level:
Every arithmetic expression is a particular instance of one or more
algebraic expressions.
Every mathematical idea of importance is embodied in multiple
representations; some hinge on connections among multiple
representations.
Variables are symbols representing sets of numbers or quantities.
Although the elements of the sets may refer to properties of real-
world objects, events, or phenomena, students need to understand
when the elements of a domain are established solely through the
aﬀordances and constraints of statements in the form of language or
mathematical statements.
Expanding number from the naturals to include positive rationals,
integers, rationals, and reals requires assimilating many new ideas
about what numbers are for and how they can be expressed. e
operations of arithmetic over these classes of numbers also have
different sets of properties.
Amounts, whether numbers or values of quantities, can be composed
and decomposed in many ways.
Numbers and quantities can be represented in space both as locations
and movements (ﬁrst on the number line) and, from middle sool
onwards, in the plane and beyond.
e sort of deep mathematical understanding we would like students to
develop will not be aieved through an occasional inclusion of the term

function in the early mathematics curriculum any more than will embracing
slogans su as “Pay aention to students’ reasoning,” “Algebra for all,” or
“Promote discussions and interaction among students.” e devil is in the
details. Speciﬁc topics and examples raise a host of issues for curriculum
developers, teaers, and, ultimately, students to contend with. For
example, in discussing the order of decimal numbers, issues regarding place
value notation and the location of points on the real line must be
considered. Teaers need to realize that students need to reconcile how the
ordering of decimal numbers builds on, yet diﬀers from, the ordering of
integers. It will be even more allenging to establish conventions for
displaying operations on the line and in the plane. Ultimately, success in
learning potentially powerful ideas will heavily depend on the staging and
sequencing of learning activities as well as the continued engagement of
students, ea of whi can beneﬁt from the growing expertise of their
teaers.We focused, in this apter, on a handful of potentially powerful
ideas. Since they can be succinctly stated, it may be tempting to believe that
they lend themselves to straightforward implementations in the classroom.
is is only partly true. e sort of tasks discussed here, su as the candy
boxes problem, the heights problem and the wallet problem, seem to be
ordinary arithmetic word problems. But, in the hands of a skilled teaer,
students soon ﬁnd that the problems raise issues that they and their peers
may not immediately agree upon and sele. is occurs especially when a
problem leaves one or more quantities free to vary. Students commonly
propose answers or best guesses using their intuitions and prior knowledge
about related situations. ey work, so to speak, with a ‘logic of meanings’
(Piaget and Garcia, 1991; Sliemann, 1998) tied closely to the situation at
hand. Pedagogically, this may be a useful starting point but it is
unsatisfactory as an end point. A supportive mathematics teaer will want
to encourage formalizations of the problem,4 formalizations that will rely
on conventional representational tools of mathematics including tables,

number line diagrams, graphs in the plane, and a variety of notations. As
syntactical and relational structures become more prominent, students’
understanding relies less and less on references to particular, extra-
mathematical features.

Notes
1. We thank the National Science Foundation for funding the classroom studies described in this
apter through Grants #9722732, #9909591, and #0310171. We are also grateful to our many
collaborators over the years. Among those, we specially thank Bárbara M. Brizuela, a permanent
contributor to all studies, and Montserrat Teixidor-i-Bigas for our many discussions on
mathematics content as we jointly work in the Poincaré Institute for Mathematics Education
(NSF Grant #0962863). e views presented here represent the work of the authors and not
necessarily the funding agency.
2. Functions played a prominent role in “New Mathematics.” but they were introduced in very
different ways from those to be discussed here.
3. We are deﬁning a relation for our present purposes. How relations are conceptualized by teaers
and students is an important but very diﬀerent issue. 4. Here a “formalization” refers loosely to
any representation that serves to highlight the underlying structure of a problem, thereby
portraying the problem as one instance of a class of problems having a similar structure.

References
Aleksandrov, A. D. (1999). A general view of mathematics. In Aleksandrov, A. D., & Kolmogorov, A.
N. (Eds.). (1999). Mathematics: its content, methods and meaning. N. Chelmsford, MA: Courier
Dover Publications.
Blanton, M. (2008). Algebra and the elementary classroom: Transforming thinking, transforming
practice. New York: Pearson Education.
Blanton, M., & Kaput, J. (2000). Generalizing and progressively formalizing in a third grade
mathematics classroom: Conversations about even and odd numbers. In M. Fernández (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the for the Psyology of Mathematics Education,
North American Chapter (p. 115). Columbus, OH, ERIC Clearinghouse (ED446945).
Booth, L. R. (1988). Children’s diﬃculties in beginning algebra. In A. F. Coxford & A. P. Shulte
(Eds.), e ideas of algebra, K-12: 1988 Yearbook  (pp. 20–32). Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Brizuela, B. M., Blanton, M., Gardiner, A., Newman-Owens, A., & Sawrey, K. (in press). A ﬁrst grade
student’s exploration of variable and variable notation. Estudios de Psicología. Abingdon, UK:
Taylor & Francis.
Brizuela, B. M., & Earnest, D. (2008). Multiple notational systems and algebraic understandings: e
case of the “best deal” problem. In J. Kaput, D. Carraher, & M. Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the
Early Grades (pp. 273–301). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Brizuela, B. M., & Schliemann, A. D. (2004). Fourth graders solving linear equations. For the Learning
of Mathematics, 24(2), 33–40.
Cai, J. & Knuth, E. (Eds.). (2011). Early algebraization: A global dialogue from multiple perspectives.
New York, NY: Springer.
Carpenter, T. P., & Franke, M. (2001). Developing algebraic reasoning in the elementary sool:
Generalization and proof. In H. Chick, K. Stacey, J. Vincent, & J. Vincent (Eds.), e future of the
teaing and learning of algebra. Proceedings of the 12th ICMI Study Conference (Vol. 1, pp.
155–162). Melbourne, Australia: The University of Melbourne.
Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). inking mathematically: Integrating arithmetic
and algebra in elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Carpenter, T. P., Moser, J. M., & Romberg, T. A. (1982) (Eds.), Addition and subtraction: A cognitive
view. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Carraher, D. W., Brizuela, B. M., & Earnest, D. (2001). e reiﬁcation of additive diﬀerences in early
algebra. In H. Chi, K. Stacey, J. Vincent, & J. Vincent (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twelh ICMI
Study Conference: e future of the teaing and learning of algebra  (Vol. 1, pp. 163–170).
Melbourne, Australia: University of Melbourne Press.
Carraher, D. W., Martinez, M., & Sliemann, A. D. (2008). Early algebra and mathematical
generalization. ZDM – The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 40(1), 3-22.
Carraher, D. W. & Sliemann, A. D. (2007) Early algebra and algebraic reasoning. In F. Lester (ed.)
Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning: A project of the National
Council of Teaers of Mathematics  (Vol 2, pp. 669–705). Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A. D., & Brizuela, B. (2000, October ). Early algebra, early arithmetic:
Treating operations as functions. Plenary address at the 22nd Meeting of the Psyology of
Mathematics Education, North American Chapter, Tucson, AZ (available in CD-ROM).
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A. D., & Brizuela, B. (2005). Treating operations as functions. In D.
Carraher & R. Nemirovsky (Eds.), Monographs of the Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 8, CD-ROM only.
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A. D., Brizuela, B. M., & Earnest, D. (2006). Arithmetic and algebra in
early mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 37(2), 87–115.
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A. D., Brizuela, B., & Earnest, D. (2014). Arithmetic and Algebra in
early Mathematics Education. In E. A. Silver & P. A. Kenney (Editors). Lessons Learned from
Resear: Volume 2. Useful Resear on Teaing Important Mathematics to All Students .
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Carraher, D. W., Sliemann, A. D., & Swartz, J. L. (2008). Early algebra is not the same as algebra
early. In J. Kaput, D. Carraher & M. Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the early grades. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Carraher, T. N., Carraher, D. W., & Sliemann, A. D. (1985). Mathematics in the streets and in
schools. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 3(1), 21–29.
Davydov, V. V. (1991). Psyological abilities of primary sool ildren in learning mathematics

(Vol. 6). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Dougherty, B. (2008). Measure up: A quantitative view of early algebra. In J. Kaput, D. Carraher, &
M. Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the early grades. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dubinsky, E., & Harel, G. (Eds.) (1992). e concept of function: Aspects of epistemology and
pedagogy. Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Filoy, E., & Rojano, T. (1989). Solving equations: e transition from arithmetic to algebra. For the
Learning of Mathematics, 2, 19–25.
Fridman, L. M. (1991). Features of introducing the concept of concrete numbers in the primary
grades. In V. V. Davydov (Ed.), Psyological abilities of primary sool ildren in learning
mathematics. Vol 6: Soviet studies in mathematics education (pp. 148–180). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Harel, G. & Confrey, J. (1994) (Eds.), e development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of
mathematics. Albany: State University of New York Press.
JCGM (2012) International vocabulary of metrology: Basic and general concepts and associated
terms (VIM, 3rd ed.). Sèvres, France: Bureau Internacional de Poids et Measures (BIPM), Joint
Commiee for Guides in Metrology, JCGM 200:2012 (JCGM 200:2008 with minor corrections).
Retrieved from www.bipm.org/en/publications/guides/, May 5, 2015.
Kieran, C. (1981). Concepts associated with the equality symbol. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 12, 317–326.
Kaput, J. (1998). Transforming algebra from an engine of inequity to an engine of mathematical
power by “algebrafying” the K–12 curriculum. In National Council of Teaers of Mathematics
and Mathematical Sciences Education Board Center for Science, Mathematics and Engineering
Education, National Resear Council (Sponsors). e Nature and Role of Algebra in the K-14
Curriculum (pp. 25–26). Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Kirshner, D., & Awtry, T. (2004). Visual salience of algebraic transformations. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 35(4), 224–257.
Lacampagne, C. B. (1995). e Algebra Initiative Colloquium . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education, OERI.
Langrall, C., Mooney, E. S., Nishet, S. & Jones, G. S. (2008). Elementary sool students’ access to
powerful mathematical ideas. In L. D. English & D. Kirshner (Eds.) Handbook of international

research in mathematics education (2nd ed., pp. 109–135). New York, Routledge.
Lesh, R. A & Landau, M. (Eds.) (1983). Acquisition of mathematics concepts and processes. New York:
Academic Press.
Mikulina, G. G. (1991). e psyological features of solving problems with leer data. In V.
Davydov (Ed.), Soviet studies in mathematics education (vol. 6, pp. 181–232). Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Moss, J. & Beay, R. (2006). Knowledge building in mathematics: Supporting collaborative learning
in pattern problems. Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 1, pp. 441–465.
Oehrtman, M. C., Carlson, M. P., & ompson, P. W. (2008). Foundational reasoning abilities that
promote coherence in students’ understandings of function. In M. P. Carlson & C. Rasmussen
(Eds.), Making the connection: Resear and practice in undergraduate mathematics (pp. 27–42).
Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Peled, I., & Carraher, D. W. (2008). Signed numbers and algebraic thinking. In J. Kaput, D. W.
Carraher, & M. Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the early grades. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.Piaget, J., & Garcia, R. (1991). Vers une logique des signiﬁcations. Geneva: Murionde
Editeur.
Poincaré, H. (1969). Intuition and logic in mathematics. e Mathematics Teaer, 62 (2), pp. 205–
212.
Romberg, T., Fennema, E., & Carpenter, T. (1993) (Eds.) Integrating resear on the graphical
representation of functions (pp. 41–68). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rosen, K. (2012). Axioms for the real numbers and positive integers. In Discrete Mathematics and its
applications (pp. A1–A6). New York: McGraw-Hill.Sliemann, A. D. (1998). Logic of meanings
and situated cognition. Learning and Instruction, 8(6), pp. 549–560.
Sliemann, A. D., Carraher, D. W. & Brizuela, B. M. (2001). When tables become function tables. In
M. v. d. Heuvel-Panhuizen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 25th Conference of the International Group
for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 4, pp. 145–152). Utret, e Netherlands:
Freudenthal Institute.
Sliemann, A. D., Carraher, D. W., & Brizuela, B. M. (2007). Bringing out the algebraic aracter of
arithmetic: From ildren’s ideas to classroom practice. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Sliemann A. D., Carraher D. W., & Brizuela B. M. (2012). Algebra in elementary sool. In L.
Coulange & J.-P. Drouhard (Eds.) Enseignement de l’algèbre élémentaire: Bilan et perspectives
(pp. 109–124). Special Issue of Recherches en Didactique des Mathématiques.
Sliemann, A. D., Carraher, D. W., & Caddle, M. (2013). From seeing points to seeing intervals in
number lines and graphs. In B. Brizuela & B. Gravel (Eds.) Show me what you know: Exploring
representations across STEM disciplines. New York: Teachers College Press.
Sliemann, A. D., Carraher, D. W., Goodrow, A., Caddle, M., & Porter, M. (2013). Equations in
elementary sool. In A.M. Lindmeier & A. Heinze (Eds.). Proceedings of the 37th Conference of
the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 4, pp. 161–168). Kiel,
Germany: PME.
Smiau, J. & Morris, A. (2004) e development of algebra in the elementary mathematics
curriculum of V. V. Davydov. The Mathematics Educator, 8(1), 60–87
Soenfeld, A. (1995). Report of Working Group 1. In C. B. Lacampagne (Ed.), e Algebra Initiative
Colloquium: Vol. 2. Working Group Papers  (pp. 11–18). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Education, OERI.
Swartz, J. L. (1996). Semantic aspects of quantity. Unpublished manuscript, MIT and Harvard
Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, MA.
Swartz, J. & Yerushalmy, M. (1992). Geing students to function on and with algebra. In E.
Dubinsky & G. Harel (Eds.), e concept of function: Aspects of epistemology and pedagogy (pp.
261–289). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Sfard, A. (1991). On the dual nature of mathematical conceptions: Reﬂections on processes and
objects as different sides of the same coin. Educational Studies in Mathematics 22, 1–36.
Vergnaud, G. (1982). A classiﬁcation of cognitive tasks and operations of thought involved in
addition and subtraction problems. In T. P. Carpenter, J. M., Moser, & T. A. Romberg (Eds.),
Addition and subtraction: A cognitive view (pp. 39–59). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Vergnaud, G. (1983). Multiplicative structures. In R. A. Lesh & M. Landau (Eds.), Acquisition of
mathematics concepts and processes (pp. 127–174). New York: Academic Press.
Vergnaud, G. (1994). Multiplicative conceptual field: What and why? In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.),
The development of multiplicative reasoning in the learning of mathematics (pp. 41–59). Albany:

State University of New York Press.
Vergnaud, G. (1996). e theory of conceptual ﬁelds. In L. Steﬀe & P. Nesher (Eds.), eories of
mathematical learning (pp. 219–239). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Whitney, H. (1968a). e mathematics of physical quantities: Part I: mathematical models for
measurement. American Mathematical Monthly, 75(2), 115–138.
Whitney, H. (1968b). e mathematics of physical quantities, Part 2: antity structures and
dimensional analysis. American Mathematical Monthly, 75(3), 227–256.

7 Students’ Access to Mathematics
Learning in the Middle and Junior
Secondary Schools
Teresa Rojano
Center for Research and Advanced Studies of the National Polytechnic Institute (Cinvestav)

Introduction
is apter focuses on analyzing the role of sense development and
meaning assignment as processes that give access to middle and junior
secondary sool students (MJSS) to lifelong mathematics learning. Mu
has been wrien about the concept that aieving lifelong mathematics
learning for all depends to a good extent on individuals having contact with
sources of meaning that are aligned with their daily lives, age group, sool
level, and prior mathematics experience.
From the works of the 90s by Arcavi (1994) on symbol sense, up to the
recent studies by Ho and Dreyfus (2006) on structure sense in high sool
algebra, all provide theoretical and empirical inputs that make it possible to
raise the resear questions concerning the learning of mathematical
contents, in su a way that the essence of lifelong learning underlies the
very notion of sense production. Added to the foregoing studies is resear
in mathematics education that adopts a semiotic approa, su as the
works of Filloy, Rojano, and Puig (2008), Oe (2005), Puig (2003), Presmeg
(2005), and Radford (2000), for instance.
Some of those new ways of raising the theme of lifelong mathematics
learning are sketed here, aempting to illustrate the new focus via
concrete examples. Also dealt with is the thesis that assignment of meaning
is the result of developing sense through actions of reading/ transforming
texts1 that are presented to students during the process of teaing them
mathematics. It is also argued that delving deeper into those processes of
meaning production (semiosis) and of their relationship with the
mathematics and linguistic experience of MJSS students will make it
possible to conceive teaing models that are appropriate for this student
population. In order to accomplish that deepening, a proposal is made in the
subsection entitled “Sense Production in Mathematics Learning: The Case of
Algebraic Read-Writing.” e proposal is grounded in the theoretical

elements (inspired by notions of semiotics) developed by Filloy and
coauthors, and extensively presented in recent publications (for example in
Filloy et al., 2008; Filloy, Rojano, & Solares, 2010; Rojano, Filloy, & Puig,
2014). It is noteworthy to mention that when these authors speak of sense
and meaning production processes, they are not referring to those processes
solely associated with mathematical signs or expressions. ey associate
them with texts composed of signs of a heterogeneous nature, whi in
addition to the signs of mathematics proper, can also include signs from
natural language, ﬁgures, diagrams, representations of situations from daily
life or the physical world, scenes on a computer screen, etc. e previously
mentioned subsection also includes introduction of a broad notion of
mathematical sign system that allows for inclusion of the texts described
here.
As well, this version of the apter revisits the theme of the inﬂuence of
digital tenologies in the teaing and learning of mathematics. In more
particular terms, the apter analyzes aspects and modes of tenology use
that oﬀer MJSS students the possibility of having democratic access to
mathematics knowledge. e term democratic access is understood in a
broad sense, so that, inter alia, it can include early introduction (in MJSS) to
advanced mathematics topics, as well as a practical approa to the
complex notions of the mathematics of variation and modeling. For
example, resear topics derived from the following are addressed: 1) the
possibility of incorporating, by way of using Dynamic Geometry programs,
three-dimensional geometry topics into the middle sool curriculum; 2)
the possibility of using computer algebra systems (CAS) either to reduce
the emphasis on the manipulative aspects of algebra and focus student
work on conceptual tasks (Kieran, 2007) or to promote both the conceptual
and technical aspects of mathematics (Lagrange, 2003); and 4) the possibility
of using recent versions of spreadsheets that oﬀer a friendly environment to
different groups of students for mathematical modeling activities.

Some of the most renowned didactical potentials of digital tenologies
include deploying multiple representations of mathematics concepts and
objects, and of the dynamic interconnections between them. e laer
gives learning tenology environments a sources-of-meaning nature that
diﬀers from that of the sources of meaning that pertain to static
representations. In turn, the foregoing gives cause for raising the hypothesis
that in su environments, meaning production processes also have a
diﬀerent nature, amongst other reasons, due to the type of interaction
between the user and the dynamic representations of the objects of
knowledge. Using the terms introduced at the beginning of this section, one
can hence hypothesize that the read/transformation processes of the texts in
a teaing model that incorporates digital tenologies are diﬀerent
because of their dynamic and interactive nature. at possible relationship
between the nature of representations (or texts) and processes of semiosis is
not discussed in this apter. e hypothesis will be le as material for
future research instead.
On another line of thought, albeit along the same line as digital
tenologies, the evolution of these tools is also discussed, as will their role
in the projection of future resear. In the recent versions for mobile
devices (digital tablets, for example) of tenology learning environments
or microworlds developed and used in the 90s, users can practically tou
and physically manipulate multiple representations of mathematical objects.
is probably will have an impact on the epistemological and cognitive
levels of mathematics learning. Whereas with incorporation of intelligent
systems into the microworlds, means of feedba that are already known
can be optimized and new ones imagined. Later on in this apter, there is
also a discussion concerning how the foregoing innovations and the
connectivity via the Internet might ange the way in whi digital
tenologies can be integrated into the mathematics curriculum. is is
anticipated to occur both in terms of the educational material and contents

accessible on the cloud, and because students and teaers can work
collaboratively within virtual communities. ese new scenarios can in turn
become the subject of resear for mathematics education, speciﬁcally in
MJSS.
In short, the two themes discussed in this apter are resear into
lifelong mathematics learning, based on development of sense and
assignment of meaning; and democratic access to mathematics knowledge
in MJSS, by way of using the more recent versions and modes of digital
tenologies. It has already been made clear that the link between the
foregoing two lines of resear will not be analyzed here. It is rather being
proposed that it be dealt with in future works.
e two following sections deal with the themes of life-long
mathematics learning and democratic access to mathematics knowledge in
MJSS. e ﬁrst one begins with a review of what some oﬃcial education
documents consider lifelong learning n mathematics and in the second
describes a variety of conceptions about sense in mathematics in the
resear literature. At the end of this portion of the apter, it is intended to
connect mathematics sense development processes with lifelong learning.

Access to Lifelong Mathematics Learning in the
MJSS
e goal of enabling students to use mathematics knowledge learned at
sool in varying contexts and beyond their sool lives has become
universal. at is to say that it is present in diﬀerent forms in the curricular
mathematics documents of many countries and in the documents of world
organizations. Some of su documents include the speciﬁc goal of taking
students toward a mathematics learning that will not only allow them to
move ﬂuently through their diﬀerent sool levels, but rather also that will
make it possible for them to approa problems in their post-sool lives in
a scientific and flexible manner. For instance, in Principles and Standards for
Sool Mathematics (NCTM, 2000), that goal is formulated in terms of a
conception of learning mathematics with understanding, as opposed to a
meanical and memory-based learning process (NCTM, 2000, pp. 20–21).
In that document, while referring to the resear of Bransford, Brown, and
Cocking (2000) it is pointed out that conceptual comprehension is one of the
important components of proﬁciency, whi, together with factual
knowledge and procedural facility, enable students to ﬂexibly use their
knowledge, appropriately applying what they have learned in one setting in
another. at same document also refers to the work of Soenfeld (1988),
who asserts that when students connect, in a meaningful way, the new
knowledge with already existing knowledge, they then are able to make
sense of mathematics and their applications. In the National Curriculum of
Mathematics of the UK (Stage 3), the following objective is stressed: “e
study of mathematics should enable pupils to apply their knowledge, skills
and understanding to relevant real-world situations” aliﬁcations and
Curriculum Authority (2007). e oﬃcial documents of the Ministry of
Education in Mexico point out that one of the main objectives of the 2006
Reform of the Secondary Sool curriculum is that “students not only study

and learn more but that they learn meaningfully and use what they learn
not only to solve particular problems, but are able to pose new questions
and study by themselves continuously” (SEP, 2006, p. 9).
With respect to this generalized interest of having students make ﬂexible
and sensible use of learned mathematics (during and aer sool), within
the sphere of the resear, the currents of realistic mathematics
(Gravemeijer, 1994, 2004; Streeﬂand, 1991; Van Den Heuvel-Panhuizen,
2003) and mathematics in context (Sierpinska, 1995) have contributed
essential elements. e underpinning thesis in both currents is the idea that
if the teaing of mathematics uses problem situations (realistic or
contextual in general) as the starting point, the students will have the extra-
mathematical referents and meanings associated with the knowledge built.
is will then make it possible for them to apply that knowledge in
situations and to problems of varying contexts, and that entire cycle will
help the students to make sense of school mathematics.
It should however be noted that in addition to the relevance of the
connection with situations of daily life or with context problems, resear
has indicated that the sense of mathematics is also found in mathematics
itself. And there, from a broad point of view, this apter emphasizes the
need to undertake resear into the processes by whi sense is produced
and by whi meanings are assigned on the basis of contexts, be they of a
mathematical or extra-mathematical nature. e apter also emphasizes
the importance of focusing that resear on production of meaning by
MJSS students, but not just around symbols and concepts, rather also on
mathematics methods. In order to provide a broad spectrum of related
resear, the next section refers to a series of authors who have broaed
the topic of the sense of mathematics from diﬀerent perspectives and with
respect to diﬀerent aspects of sool mathematics. Even though one of the
examples discussed pertains to the university level, the case is indeed
relevant to any sool level in view of the fact that it clearly illustrates the

determining role that appropriate use of notation can play in the resolution
of mathematics problems.

Sense and Assigning Meaning in Mathematics
During several decades of intensive resear on the diﬃculties faced by
students in learning mathematics, emphasis was placed on the study of
conceptualization processes in particular mathematical contents (for
instance, concepts of fraction, variable, proportionality), as well as on the
analysis of frequent and persistent errors that were reported at the
beginning of the 80s. In this respect, the analysis carried out by Kieran
(1981) on the interpretations of the sign “=” and the English Concepts in
Secondary School Mathematics and Science (CSMS)2 project that deals with
literal equations and expressions in algebra stand out. As of that analysis of
errors, there arose the resear line of reading-interpretation of
mathematics symbols by learners. is line of resear has continued to be
cultivated from varying perspectives, some of whi area of interest has
extended into the study of the processes by whi meaning and sense are
assigned to mathematical symbolism.
Examples are presented in this section that are taken from both the
works of the line of interpretation of mathematics expressions and symbols
(Arcavi, 1994; Ho, 2007; Ho & Dreyfus, 2006), and the works interested
in more general signiﬁcation processes (semiosis) in mathematics (Presmeg,
2005). Important and practical contributions are identiﬁed in both cases for
the teaching and learning of mathematics in MJSS.
Later, in the same section, the ﬁndings of several studies are presented,
also with a semiotic approa, albeit focused speciﬁcally on algebraic
concepts and methods of MJSS (Filloy et al., 2008) and on generalization
processes (Radford, 2000).
In the next subsections, arguments are presented concerning the reasons
that signification processes that foster strategic thinking among students can
evolve into lifelong mathematics learning.

Symbol and Structure Sense in the Learning of
Mathematics
In a 1994 essay, Arcavi speaks of “symbol sense” as a series of skills that,
inter alia, include “the intuitive feel for when to call on symbols in the
process of solving a problem, and conversely, when to abandon a symbolic
treatment for beer tools” (Arcavi, 1994, p. 25). e foregoing author also
refers to symbol sense as certain types of instantiations, su as
“interrupting a meanical symbolic procedure to inspect or to reconnect
oneself to the underlying meanings” (Arcavi, 1994, p. 27). To illustrate the
laer skill, Arcavi resorts to the example of a secondary sool student
who, in an equation simpliﬁcation process to obtain the solution, arrives at
the equation 3x + 5 = 4x. Instead of meanically carrying out the
corresponding algebraic manipulation (subtracting the 3x term from both
sides of the equation), she stopped and anged to a diﬀerent approa
(symbol reading), and saw that in order to obtain the 4x term on the right,
based on the 3x term on the le, it was enough to just add an x on the le
side and as a result, 5 should be the value of x. With respect to this case,
Arcavi asserts that although the standard algebraic method and the
student’s method are mathematically indistinguishable, there is an
important diﬀerence at the psyological level and that the example is a
“small but healthy instance of symbol sense” (Arcavi, 1994, p. 27).
In more recent work, Ho and Dreyfus (2006) and Ho (2007) speak of
“structure sense” for high sool algebra, as the capability that students
have to: 1) recognize a familiar structure in its simplest form; 2) deal with a
compound term as a single entity and, through an appropriate substitution,
recognize a familiar structure in a more complex form; and 3) oose
appropriate manipulations to make best use of a structure. Based on the
foregoing deﬁnition, the authors formulated a structure sense teaing
approa for grade 11 students by using tasks su as the following

sequence of exercises, 1–5, taken from Ho & Dreyfus, 2010, p. 530). e
purpose of these tasks was to have students familiarize themselves with
equations that could be perceived with a quadratic or linear structure, if the
variable is considered as a product (for instance, xy).
1. Find xy : 8xy + 15 = 0
2. Find xy : 8x2y2 + 6xy – 9 = 0
3. Find 3xy : 17xy – 25 = 13 + xy 90
4. Find 2xy : 34xy – 4x2y2 = 10xy – 13
5. Find x : 17x2 – 45 = 0
Faced with this list of exercises during an interview with instruction the
students were asked about the structure of the equations, so that aerward
they could formulate other similarly structured equations and, in some
cases, so that they could indicate eﬃcient ways of resolving them. In
Exercise 5, the students were asked if the equation would have to have a
different structure if the instruction was to “find the value of x2.”
In both of the previous cases, the authors resort to a catalogue of skills to
communicate the meaning of symbol sense and structure sense. Moreover,
even if in their studies one can note an absence of theorization, those works
are still very useful both to verify whether the students possess the skills
described or not, and to propose and test teaing approaes that help
them to develop those skills (su as the example of linear or quadratic
structure of the equations in the exercise from Hoch & Dreyfus, 2010).
e researes undertaken by Arcavi (1994), and Ho and Dreyfus
(2006), together with the studies by Linevski and Liveneh (1999), and
Griﬃn (2004) on number sense are located in the sphere of strategic
thinking in mathematics. Given that aracteristic, these works open the
door to extending the possibility of teaing strategic thinking to a variety
of algebraic topics and problem solving of the MJSS curriculum. For

instance, on the one hand it would be important to identify manifestations
of number and symbol sense among students at that sool level, when
they are asked to apply the Cartesian method (method of “puing into an
equation”) in the resolution of word problems or the algebraic methods in
resolution of both linear and quadratic equations and linear equation
systems with two unknown quantities. Su ﬁndings would be very useful
for delving deeper into the analysis of the interaction between the strategic
thought of students with their use of methods established at sool. On the
other hand, formulating and testing teaing sequences relative to structure
sense in the algebra of MJSS represents an interesting didactic allenge, as
well as the possibility of anging the focus in the didactics of symbolic
algebra at this school level.
Moreover, in the light of the fundamentally symbolic and structural
nature of mathematics, development of strategic thinking related to symbol
and structure sense are an essential component for mathematics learning at
higher educational levels and throughout life.
Comprehension of Mathematics as Semiosis
Processes
On a par with the works of Arcavi (1994) and of Ho and Dreyfus (2006),
some authors express their concern to develop theory that aempts to
explain the processes by whi meaning is assigned in mathematics, and in
their resear they resort to semiotics or the science of signs. Generally, in
semiotic approaes to the problems raised in mathematics education,
comprehension of mathematics concepts and symbols is remied to
semiosis processes. at is to say that they are remied to processes of
producing and operating with signs in order to produce meaning.
e processes of semiosis and their components are conceived in

diﬀerent ways, according to the varying authors and currents of semiotics.
In this section, reference is made to elements of the theory of Peirce (1931–
1958), given that further along in this apter there is a discussion
concerning mathematics education studies that are based on su theory.
One of the aracteristics of that theory is that the processes, rather than
the signs themselves, are emphasized (Hoopes, 1991)—and that emphasis is
present even in the very idea of sign. In Peirce’s multiple deﬁnitions, he
points out that signs are not aracterized by a signiﬁer/signiﬁed dyadic
relationship (as is proposed in the theory of Saussure), but they are rather
triadic between the sign (S), its object (O), and a mind (the interpretant I)
for whi the sign is related to its object in su a way that, for certain
purposes, it can be treated as if it were that other3. Hence, in the triad (S, O,
I) S and I are signs, and I is a new sign S', whi in the mind creates another
sign as interpretant, I', of object O, that is to say a new cognition I', su
that the object O is the link between the two triads (S, O, I) and (S', O, I').
is has to do with the open nature of the sign of a semiosis process that
has no end, as explained by Peirce in one of his definitions:
Sign [Lat. signum, a mark, a token]: Ger. zeichen; Fr. signe; It. Segno. (1) Anything whi
determines something else (its interpretant) to refer to an object to whi itself refers (its object)
in the same way, the interpretant becoming in turn a sign, and so on ad infinitum.
(Peirce, 1931–1958, Vol. 2, p. 169), ()
Just as Peirce (1868) proposes several deﬁnitions, he also proposes several
typologies of signs, one of whi consists of three categories: icons, indices
and symbols. is typology deﬁnes the way in whi the sign refers to its
object: the icon by a quality of its own, the index by real connection to its
object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant.4
In the ﬁeld of mathematics education, the more or less recent publication
of collections of works on semiotics and mathematics and on semiotics and
mathematics learning reveal the noted interest in that ﬁeld for this type of

approa (see, for instance, Hoﬀmann, Lenhard, & Seeger, 2005; Radford,
Subring, & Seeger, 2008). Among the authors who share this interest and
incorporate elements of Peirce’s theory in their studies is Oe (2005). is
author proposes to study fundamental problems of mathematics
comprehension from the standpoint of semiotics. Su problems include
mathematical objects and the proof paradox (Oe, 2005, p. 9). Oe analyzes
the role of the categories of signs that were formulated by Peirce (icons,
indices, and symbols) in mathematics signiﬁcation. Whereas Presmeg
(2005), inspired by Oe’s ideas, studies the deﬁnition of those categories of
representation in terms of metaphors and metonymies, and formulates a
nested model of signs that is based on Peirce’s triadic formulation (for a
description on the model, see Presmeg, 2005, pp. 106–107). Using an
anecdote about a session of class with university students, Presmeg
illustrates how, through a ange of notation, relations among the lengths
of segments of a geometric ﬁgure become clear to her and to her students.
In her anecdote, the measurements had to be used to demonstrate the
existence of the Nagel point of a triangle, whi is the point of intersection
of the line segments from the vertices of the triangle to the points of
tangency of the opposite escribed circles (in Figure 7.1, N is the Nagel point
of the triangle ABC).
e ange of notation consisted of expressing the AB segment as c1 +
c2; the BC segment as a1 + a2; and the AC segment as b1 + b2. With this,
during the analysis of ﬁgure, it became clear that c1+c2+a1 and b2+b1+a2
were semi-perimeters of the ABC triangle; this fact that enabled them to
carry out the required proof that had remained “hidden” while the notation
using capital leers for the AB, BD, AC and CD segments were used. In
Presmeg’s own words:
In semiotic terms the representamen on one day AB + BD = AC + CD was not a suﬃciently
iconic likeness of the semi-perimeter of the triangle to make it clear, ﬁrstly, that the object was a
semi-perimeter, and secondly, that ea of the six given expressions represented a semi-perimeter,

and that they were therefore all equal to one another. Somehow the representamen c1 + c2 + a1
= b2 + b1 + a2 together with the similar equations, had helped to make the relationships
apparent. Both of these representations were symbolic: both were conventional ways of
expressing relationships among the lengths of line segments. In both cases, the interpretants were
all-important in determining the outcomes of the actions taken, successful or otherwise. e
diﬀerence between the two symbols appears to reside in their metaphoric and metonymic
features, that is, how they behaved as icons and indices in representing the abstract structure of
the conﬁguration of circles and lines […]. As a metaphor, the icon of a lower-case representamen
was more efficient in suggesting an interpretant that would unpack the relationships.
(Presmeg, 2005, pp. 113–114)
Presmeg’s anecdote, analyzed with respect to the metaphorical and
metonymic traits of the symbols, is an example of the relevance of the
notations used in mathematics teaing and in professional mathematics
work, itself. is particular case demonstrates that the signs or
representamen play (for themselves and acting in their capacity of icons) a
determining role in signiﬁcation processes vis-à-vis certain parts of a
geometric conﬁguration, processes through whi relations among the
elements of the conﬁguration, whi are the basis of the required
demonstration, become evident. It is noteworthy to mention that even if
this example corresponds to topics of university geometry (Nagel point;
Ceva theorem), the theoretical explanations of the signiﬁcation processes
can well be applied to topics and cases of MJSS mathematics, su as shape,
space and measurement, statistics, and representation (not necessarily
algebraic) of situations and word problems.

Figure 7.1 Nagel point N of a triangle ABC (Presmeg, 2005, p. 112).
Sense Production in Mathematics Learning: The
Case of Algebraic Read-Writing
As mentioned previously, in the line of resear that deals with the reading
(interpretation) of algebraic symbols, researers have studied the manners
in whi 11–16 year old students tend to read algebraic symbols by
aempting to unravel the nature of those readings (Booth, 1984; Filloy &
Rojano, 1989; Freudenthal, 1983; Kieran, 1981; Küemann, 1981). Some
authors approaed the problem from the standpoint that considers algebra

to be a language. In this sense, one should clarify that resear that resorts
to semiotics diﬀer from resear that uses linguistics: the laer studies
mathematics as a language and analyzes its syntactic and semantic aspects
(see Drouhard, 1992; Kirshner, 1987, 1989); whereas the former studies
mathematics as a system of signs. e laer gives rise to the inclusion of
not just mathematics signs, but also of the signs of vernacular language and
of other types of signs as well. is is very advantageous in the ﬁeld of
mathematics education because in that ﬁeld the mathematics texts involved
in teaing and learning are made up of signs that come from diﬀerent
systems (Puig, 2003).
With the broad notion of Mathematical Sign System (MSS) originally
formulated by Filloy (1993), whi includes the productions of students
when they resolve a mathematics task, Filloy et al. (2008) adapt elements of
Peirce’s 
theory 
on 
processes 
of 
semiosis 
to 
describe 
the text
reading/transformation processes of one MSS in mathematics learning and
teaing situations (in this case, the texts can be tasks or problems that are
proposed to the students and/or their productions as they broa and
resolve the tasks or problems). As mentioned earlier, according to Peirce’s
theory, the condition of the sign’s openness in an unending process of
semiosis is derived from the link that is established between the two triads
(S, O, I) and (S', O, I'), through O (Peirce, 1931–58, p. 135). In the work of
Filloy et al. this process of semiosis is conceived with respect to texts and
not to isolated signs, and this makes it possible to speak of ains of
reading/transformation of texts in whi a text T is read and transformed
into a new text T', whi is opened to a new reading (for a mind) to be
transformed into another text T''. From that perspective, diﬀerentiation
among T, T' and T'' is actually a distinction between positions of a text in an
ad inﬁnitum process of reading/transformation (Filloy, et al., 2008, p. 125).
In Peirce’s theory, processes of semiosis lead to production of sense with
respect to signs; while in Filloy et al., production of sense in the learning

and teaing of mathematics arises in processes of reading/transformation
of mathematical texts (under the broad notion of mathematical texts
referred to earlier).
Now, in the ﬁeld of learning and teaing MJSS algebra, the interest lies
in studying production of sense both with respect to concepts (for instance,
the concept of unknown, variable, function) as well as to methods (for
example, algebraic methods for resolution of equations and word
problems). Previous resear has shown that at the sool level in question,
learning algebraic concepts and methods implies crucial transitions in
student thought. Su transitions include: expanding conceptions su as
that of equality or of variable; overcoming the diﬃculty of operating with
unknown quantities; moving from arithmetic or intuitive methods in the
resolution of word problems to the method of “puing into equation” the
statement of a problem (Cartesian method). Some of those transitions have
recently been researed from the standpoint of the above-cited processes
of reading/transformation of texts. For example, Filloy, Rojano and Solares
(2010) carried out a study with secondary sool students in whi they
conducted clinical interviews that included sections with instruction. e
study deals with learning algebraic resolution of problems with two
unknown quantities, in whi the progress of the students is analyzed in
terms of their ability to operate the unknown when this unknown is
represented by an expression that involves a second unknown. In curricular
terms, the study was undertaken when the students had already mastered
algebraic resolution of a linear equation, but they still had to learn classic
algebraic methods for resolving systems of two linear equations with two
unknown quantities, of the type specified here:

With x and y as unknowns, and A, B, C, D, E and F as known quantities,
and for the resolution of whi it is eventually necessary to operate the
unknown at a second level of representation. That is to say, expressed as:
At the beginning of the interview, the students were asked to take on a
word problem with two unknown quantities. Over the course of their
resolutions (whi, before the instruction, began with intuitive strategies), it
became clear that in order to progress in line with the algebraic syntax
toward working with two unknown quantities, it was not suﬃcient for
them to have overcome the diﬃculties involved in operating one unknown
in linear equations, nor was it enough to name the two unknowns with
leers. It is rather necessary to imbue operating with a single unknown,
expressed in terms of the other unknown, with sense, and this in turn
implies endowing the equalization and algebraic substitution with new
sense (Filloy et al., 2010, p. 76). In order to illustrate su processes of
semiosis, whi lead to sense production with respect to operating
unknowns and to algebraic substitution, an interview episode with L (a
student who participated in the study) is reproduced here. In this episode L
was presented with the “Age Problem,” whi involves two unknown
quantities (Filloy et al., 2010, p. 4).
As was mentioned before, at the moment of the interview, L mastered
the algebra syntactic rules to solve linear equations with one unknown, but
had not been taught the algebraic methods to solve systems of two linear
equations with two unknowns. At this stage of the interview, L had already
solved simpler problems with two unknown quantities and was taught
(during the interview) how to translate this sort of problems into a system
of equations.
e Age Problem: e age diﬀerence between Juan and Carlos is 12

years. Within four years, Juan, who’s the older of the two, will be twice
Carlos’s age. How old are they both now?
L used the leers J and C to represent the unknown quantities (Juan’s
and Carlos’s ages) and translated the word problem into the following
system of equations:
is translation into the algebraic code is an important act of
reading/transformation of the text corresponding to the word problem.
L could ﬁnd Juan’s age when Carlos’s age had a speciﬁc value, but was
unable to ﬁnd the algebraic expression that enables one to calculate Juan’s
age in terms of Carlos’s age (J = C+ 12). She could not operate on the
unknowns J and C, because she did not know their numerical values. In
other words, to read/transform the text corresponding to the equation
system she needed to assign a numerical value to one of the unknowns (C).
In order to help L obtain the appropriate expression, the interviewer (I)
suggested she thinks again of unknown C as a known number:
I: Here you have that Juan’s age minus Carlos’s age equals 12. If we had
a number here, for example 10, could you find Juan’s age value?
I points to the equation J – C = 12, and writes 10 below C in that
equation.
L: Yes! Adding these two.
L points to 10 and 12.
I: OK. So, if we knew Carlos’s age, could we calculate Juan’s age?
L: Yes!
I: How?
L: By adding Carlos’ age to 12.
I: en, if I represent Carlos’s age with C, how mu is the value of

Juan’s age?
I points to C and J in the equation: J – C = 12.
L: I don’t know it yet.
Although L was competent in solving linear equations with one
unknown, she was unable to undertake a suitable reading/transformation
act of the text J – C = 12 in order to produce the expression J – C + 12.
Then I intervened:
I: What would J’s value be? It is a number, a number you don’t know, but
it is a number. Suppose that I already knew what number it is, but I do
not want to tell you. I’ll call it C. I tell you: it is C. en, how mu is
the value of Juan’s age?
I points to J in J – C = 12.
L: C plus 12.
L writes J = C + 12, and after a while, she also writes (C + 12) + 4 = 2(C +
4),
and then she simplifies to (C + 12) + 4 = 2C + 8.
I: What did you do? Why did you put that here?
I points to C + 12 in the equation (C + 12) + 4 = 2C + 8.
L: So that … Do you remember when P … when here … we replaced it
with ﬁve a ? Well, here I substituted J by C plus 12, so that there are
only Cs.
L points to the perimeter problem (a problem that she had just solved
during the interview). en she indicates the J in the equation J + 4 = 2C +
8, and C + 12 in the equation (C + 12) + 4 = 2C + 8.
L explains her reasoning as follows: “I substituted J by C plus 12 so there
are only C s.” Here she refers to the equation she obtained in terms of the
unknown C: (C + 12) + 4 = 2C + 8.

At this point, L solves this equation without any trouble, obtaining C = 8.
Then she obtained J = 20 by substituting the value of C in J = 12 + C.
e interviewer’s intervention, suggesting that L think of C as a known
quantity, together with L’s reference to a previous simpler problem solved
by her, was determinant in the sense production with respect to
read/transform the equation J – C = 12 in J = C + 12 and substitute the
leer J by C + 12 in the equation J + 4 = 2(C + 4). is moment of sense
production was crucial for L to recover her syntactic competence of solving
linear equations with one unknown and consequently to be able to solve
the system of two linear equations with two unknowns.
In operational terms, in equation systems su as those above,
substitution of 
 in the second equation, together with a reference
to what y represents in the context of the problem, leads the majority of
students to make sense both of the equalization of expressions that result
from the substitution, as well as of the substitution method itself for
resolution of systems of two equations with two unknown quantities (Filloy
et al., 2010, pp. 70–75).
Studies su as that described here are examples of the fact that
transition processes that move toward competent use of the MSS of algebra
are ongoing throughout MJSS. ey furthermore go through critical points
that demand sense production vis-à-vis algebraic actions, su as
substitution and equalization, and this goes beyond aieving an “adequate”
reading—interpretation of algebraic signs. Under this perspective, whi
conceives the learning and teaing of mathematics as processes of semiosis
(of production of sense) by way of actions of reading/transformation of
mathematics texts, it is possible to revisit old resear problems, su as
progress in the mathematics thought of MJSS students, from particular to
general, from numerical to algebraic, from concrete to abstract. It should be
noted that aieving this type of progress among MJSS students prepares

them for long-term mathematics learning because things of a general
nature, of a symbolic nature (algebraic), and of an abstract nature are
endemic to mathematical thinking.
Signs and Meanings in Mathematics
Generalization
In Radford’s (2000) study on signs and meanings in the emerging algebraic
thought of students, he uses a socio-cultural theoretical framework that also
includes a semiotic perspective. On the one hand, this framework is based
on the Vygostkian idea that our cognitive functioning is aﬀected by the use
of signs, while on the other, it is based on the idea that the signs with whi
an individual acts and thinks belong to symbolic cultural systems that
transcend the individual level. In this way, the signs that an individual
thinks with are framed by meanings and rules of social usage, and they
provide that individual with social means of semiotic objectiﬁcation
(Radford, 2000).
According to that perspective, Radford (2000) conceives learning algebra
“as the appropriation of a new and speciﬁc mathematical way of acting and
thinking whi is dialectically interwoven with a novel use and production
of signs whose meanings are acquired by the students as a result of their
social immersion into mathematical activities” (p. 241). Radford uses this
theoretical approa to analyze data from a study with eighth grade
students, whose main purposes are: “1) To investigate the way in whi
students use signs and endow them with meaning during their very ﬁrst
tasks related to the algebraic generalization of paerns. And 2) to provide
accounts about the students’ emergent algebraic thinking” (Radford, 2000,
p. 238). In relation to both purposes, this author presents the analysis of
protocols from a small group of students that engaged in a generalization

activity that consisted of ﬁnding a formula to calculate the number of
elements in ﬁgure n in a ﬁgurative sequence. Figure 7.2 shows the task
presented to the students.
From a semiotic analysis of an episode in whi students worked on
Figure 12 of the sequence, in their way to produce a general formula,
Radford reports that
objectiﬁcation of generality was discursively elaborated as potential act articulated in two key
linguistic elements: the use of deictic terms and adverbs of generative action out of whi a
concrete example (here the Figure [7.2] of the sequence) functioned as a metaphor. e
metaphoric Figure [7.2], craed with terms like ‘rank’, ‘vertical’ and ‘horizontal’ allowed the
students to accomplish an apprehension and a discursive representation of the general and
provided them with a way for expressing the general through the particular. In addition, the
objectiﬁcation of the general in natural language proved to be fundamental to the rise of the
symbolic formula in that the symbolic formula appeared as contracted or abbreviated spee. An
important result was to have identiﬁed that the leer-signs resulting from this process of
semiotic objectification correspond to the category of indexes.
(Radford, 2000, pp. 260–261).

Figure 7.2 Problem presented to the students during the small group activity (Radford, 2000, p. 254).
In another part of the article, Radford concludes that “the passage from a
non-symbolic to a symbolic algebraic expression of generality means two
ruptures: one with the sensual geometry of the paerns and the other with
the numerical feature of them.” (Radford, 2000, p. 261). ese quotations
from Radford’s article illustrate the semiotic and socio-cultural nature of the
theoretical approa he uses in the analysis of students’ productions when
they interact with a variety of MSS. Furthermore, the case reported
demonstrates that using su a semiotic standpoint, new ﬁndings

concerning generalization processes in secondary sool students (a theme
widely researed during the last three decades) arise. Among these
findings are: 1) the metaphoric nature of the processes that allowed students
to verbalize the general, in a way, that they could express the general
through the particular; and 2) the findings concerning the students’ breaking
away from certain traits of the particular along the way from nonsymbolic
expression to symbolic expression of generalities.
A New Way of Viewing Mathematics Learning
Reference has been made in this section to a variety of resear focused on
studying the processes by way of whi meaning and sense are assigned to
mathematical signs and texts (please consider the previously described
broad notion of texts). Empirical ﬁndings and theorizations from this
resear have given rise to a new way of viewing mathematics
comprehension and learning. It has been argued that this new view enables
delving into the analysis of the transitions of the mathematical thought of
MJSS students, and that these transitions involve essential anges in the
relationship of learners with mathematical sign systems. It is conjectured
that based on a deepening of those transitions, teaing approaes that
favor them can be designed and, in this manner, help students to advance
toward learning the mathematics of higher levels of education.

Digital Technologies and MJSS Mathematics
In the second edition of this Handbook, this author (Rojano, 2008) presented
an analysis of the role that digital tenologies can play in the teaing and
learning of generalization and mathematics of variation in MJSS. Su
analysis made it clear that, based on resear done in the 90s, it was feasible
to introduce MJSS students to complex mathematical ideas at an early age.
is was because the resear in question showed the potential of those
tenologies to help students with regularity symbolization processes for
ﬁgurative and numerical sequences, as well as in the analysis of variation
phenomena in multiple representations, without the students having to deal
with the analytical expressions of functions (Rojano, 2008). e edition in
question also mentioned the possibility of incorporating topics of three-
dimensional geometry into the curriculum of that sool level, by using
new versions of Dynamic Geometry programs with whi it is possible to
manipulate three-dimensional ﬁgures and study and visually discover their
geometric properties (Rojano, 2008, pp. 146–148). In this section, the theme
of “digital tenologies—mathematics of MJSS” is taken up again, with
emphasis placed on the possible impact of tenological evolution on the
curriculum and classroom practices.
Technological Innovation and Curricula of MJSS
Despite certain skepticism that still exists among the community of
mathematics teaers and sool authorities concerning the potential
impact of digital tenologies on mathematics curricula, the ﬁndings of
empirical studies undertaken over the last decade, in whi a large variety
of specialized soware and applications were used, have indeed wielded
inﬂuence on curricular anges at diﬀerent levels (Sutherland & Rojano,

2012), and particularly at the MJSS level. This influence can be seen in terms
of how digital tenologies have helped to: 1) Connect diﬀerent curricular
areas (for instance, mathematics and natural sciences, exploiting the
possibility of working with multiple representations of concepts or
situations that are dynamically linked to one another). 2) Give students
early access to powerful mathematical ideas, su as for instance, the
possibility of introducing the study of mathematics of variation as of the
elementary level. 3) Enable students to analyze large sets of authentic data
in themes of statistics, and information presentation and management. 4)
Incorporate new topics into the curriculum. 5) Eliminate classic curricular
themes (Royal Society & JMC, 1997). Su is the case of the UK where a
good deal of manipulative algebra was taken out of the curriculum in the
90s. In that curricular proposal, resolution of equations and problems is
done by trial and reﬁnement with the help of a calculator. It is worth
mentioning that some time later and due to ﬁndings reported with respect
to resear on the didactics of algebra, educational authorities retracted the
decision and today one can see a notable presence of topics related to
paper-and-pencil algebra in the UK’s curriculum (Sutherland, 2007).
In terms of particular topics of the MJSS curriculum, some of the more
recent developments have become potential factors of ange. For
example, recent developments in three-dimensional Dynamic Geometry
(DG) enable students to obtain visual information regarding three-
dimensional ﬁgures. Hence, themes of spatial geometry that had
traditionally been reserved for university curriculum and that required
analysis of analytical expressions of the ﬁgures or mastery of advanced
mathematics properties and theorems, can now be broaed by junior
secondary school students (Figure 7.3).
On the basis of resear carried out in CAS environments, researers
have found that it is possible to reduce the emphasis on manipulative
aspects of algebra and to focus the work of students on conceptual tasks

(Kieran, 2007) or to promote both conceptual and tenical aspects of
mathematics (Artigue, 2002; Lagrange, 2003).
e open-source Dynamic Geometry soware program Geogebra favors
the connection between Euclidean geometry, Cartesian geometry, and
analytical geometry. While in reference to soware that was not
speciﬁcally designed for educational purposes, recent versions of
spreadsheets oﬀer a friendly environment for mathematical modeling
activities that involve multiple mathematics representations and simulators
of physical world phenomena (Horton & Leonard, 2005).
In spite of the fact that su innovations may inﬂuence anges in oﬃcial
curricula, there is a need to study their inﬂuence on the enacted curriculum
of MJSS, for whi there are robust theories in existence today on processes
of instrumentation, of orestration (Troue, 2004), and of semiotic
mediation (Bartolini & Marioi, 2008) in the mathematics classroom. is
opens promising areas for future research.
Figure 7.3 Cabri-3D Geometric Figure. Through dragging the vertices of the cones, it can be shown
that cones with equal bases and with the same height can have different areas but the same volume.

Technological Innovation and Classroom Practices
e introduction of digital tenology to sools has lead to a myriad of
modes of using that tenology, amongst whi are those that have
aempted to keep pace with tenological innovation. Su is the case of
use of calculators and personal computers in the classroom, whi are
supplemented by use of the electronic whiteboard. In the laer mode,
individual or team work can be combined with displays on the large screen
of student productions, hence creating the right conditions for group
discussions, comparison of solutions, and institutionalization of knowledge
(Troue, 2004) amongst other practices for social construction of
knowledge.
Over the course of the last 10 years, government projects with those
aracteristics were implemented in several regions of the world. In
Mexico, interactive materials in line with the free primary sool textbook
program were developed for display and manipulation on interactive
whiteboards (Trigueros et al., 2006). While in the UK, mass use of
whiteboards was introduced in compulsory teaing classrooms (Kenewell,
2009). Despite the fact that neither of the foregoing two experiences
reported very optimistic results with respect to use of the interactive
whiteboards, one can say that with the modes of use that stemmed from
the tenology, the very notable diotomy of the 80s came to an end. is
diotomy concerned tenologies designed for personal and private use
(su as graphic calculators) on the one hand, and the tenologies with
whi personal work was made public (su as personal computers), on the
other (Rojano, 2014).
On a very diﬀerent line of thought, albeit also related to the
transformation of practices, tenological innovations have been developed
more recently that are anging the conditions for learning mathematics.
For instance, access on mobile devices (through the network) to new

applications (apps for tablets) and to interactive materials developed in
previous decades (for example, GD, spreadsheets, CAS) can encourage
more ﬂexible multimodal use of digital tenology, both in terms of
teaing and learning (Hegedus & Tall, Chapter 23 in this volume). In
particular, the possibility of doing individual work on those devices, with
applications designed for self-study, places the learner at the center.
Moreover, in this case the digital tenology functions as a means for
autonomous learning and lifelong learning. In those developments the
emphasis on teaing is reduced, as is the case of Apple iPad apps su as
iFactor and iFactor Pro, whi were designed for factorization of quadratic
expressions and for resolution of second-degree equations, respectively.
Su applications can be used to verify the results of tasks done previously
by students with paper and pencil algebra, and hence supporting those
students in developing their manipulative algebra skills. ose types of
applications have the trait of presenting, in an automated fashion, families
of algebraic problems or exercises that include variants in the structure of
the expressions and in the numerical domain of equation coeﬃcients and
solutions.
Apps have also been developed for tablets in whi users practically
“tou” and manipulate the geometric objects, without mediation of a
mouse or keyboard. With su direct interaction with the object of
knowledge, one would imagine that working with those materials would
have repercussions at the cognitive and epistemological levels; that is to
say, it will have an eﬀect on the manner in whi students build
mathematics knowledge (Figure 7.4).
Other innovations include an intelligent support system that provides
feedba to users when they work in a digital learning environment. is
includes the soware eXpresser, whi was developed in the London
Knowledge Lab (www.lkl.ac.uk) and with whi students work in a
microworld to learn generalization on the basis of building and analyzing

paerns in ﬁgurative sequences (Figure 7.5). While a task is being worked
on, the system poses the user questions or prompts him/her at speciﬁc
points deemed by the activity designers to be “learning opportunities”
(Noss et al., 2009).
Figure 7.4 Direct manipulation of a geometric figure on the touch screen of a digital tablet. Sources:
Hegedus (2012); James Kaput Center, University of Massachusetts (www.kaputcenter.umassd.edu).

Figure 7.5 eXpresser screen. On the left there is a window of the general world, and on the right a
“my world” window. Intelligent support feedback appears in the top right hand of the screen.
In the Intelligent Dialogue interactive units, developed in collaboration
by the Laboratorio de Innovación Tecnológica y Educativa (LITE)
(Laboratory for Technological and Educational Innovation) and the Instituto
de Matemáticas (Mathematics Institute) of the National University of
Mexico (UNAM), there is a simultaneous display on the screen of a
microworld window and a at window that are dynamically linked to
ea 
other 
(see Diálogos 
con 
Prometeo,
http://arquimedes.matem.unam.mx/Dialogos/). e system enters into a
dialogue with users while they are working in the microworld. In this case,
interaction is with the two systems. One action by the student in the
microworld can lead to a question or a suggestion by the system in the at
window. In turn, the answers given by the user in that window can lead to
feedba in both windows. Like in eXpresser, the design of interactive
Intelligent Dialogues includes previously identiﬁed critical feedba points.
In speciﬁc cases, when unit content includes science-modeling activities,
those points correspond to behavior prediction points of a phenomenon,
confirming a conjecture or validating the model (Figure 7.6).

Figure 7.6 Screen for the molecular diffusion model in Intelligent Dialogues. On the right, the
microworld window opens (graphics with parameters that can be varied) and, on the left, the
dialogue window appears.
It is important to point out that in the two preceding examples,
interactions between the user and the digital environment are of a complex
nature. ey diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the type of applications that used to
be developed in the 80s with artiﬁcial intelligence systems and that lead to
the so-called tutorials, the design of whi was based on models of
programmed learning (Rojano & Abreu, 2012). In fact, that complex
interaction is related to the intentionality of the didactic design, given that
in both cases the intelligent support is conceived as a timely, speciﬁc, and
personalized support, as a supplement to feedba from the teaer or
classmates. at is to say, that the design of those tools includes the
intention of helping to transform classroom practices in terms of the
possibilities oﬀered by focused feedba (Noss et al., 2009; Rojano &

García-Campos, 2014). e emergence of novel modes of usage, derived
from digital innovations, leads to the need for the corresponding resear
that can be used to verify the didactic and digital design hypothesis, for
devices apps and specialized soware. In other words, the future of digital
tenology usage for teaing and learning mathematics ought not only to
depend on tenological evolution, rather it ought also to depend on the
ﬁndings of resear that make the potential and limitations of those
innovations transparent for teaers and curriculum designers (Rojano,
2014).

Lifelong Learning, Digital Technologies and
Signification in Mathematics: Final Remarks
This chapter is located in the Handbook section entitled “Democratic Access
to Mathematics Learning” and in the light of that title, in the initial sections
this author has raised the need to deepen our knowledge of the processes
by way of whi meanings are assigned and sense is produced among MJSS
students with respect to mathematics objects, symbols, texts, and methods.
e fact that part of the contents of the apter was devoted to this theme
is due to the implicit hypothesis that access to lifelong learning in
mathematics depends ﬁrst and foremost on those signiﬁcation processes. In
the brief overview undertaken of the resear that has focused on the study
of meaning (and of sense) in mathematics, special reference has been made
to studies that adopt a semiotic approa; that is to say, to those that
conceive of learning in mathematics as processes of semiosis. e decision
to discuss this type of approa, instead of the realistic mathematics and
mathematics in context currents, is not due to a la of appreciation for the
important contribution that the foregoing currents have made to resear
into the mathematics—real-world relationship as a source of meanings in
teaing of mathematics (Gravemeijer, 2004; Sierpinska, 1995; Streeﬂand,
1991; and Van Den Heuvel-Panhuizen, 2003)—but rather because semiotic
approaes make it possible to hone the analysis of learners’ relationships
with the mathematical sign systems involved in learning. e interest in
bringing semiotic approaes to the table, speciﬁcally in this apter
devoted to MJSS mathematics, also has to do with the fact that the
transitions needed in the thought processes of adolescent students in order
for them to gain access to the mathematics thought of that level assume
deep anges in their manner of reading/interpreting/transforming
mathematical signs, notations, and texts. e processes of reading
mathematical texts have been illustrated by way of examples of diﬀerent

levels of domains of knowledge, su as that of geometry (Presmeg’s
anecdote) and that of algebra (second level of representation of the
unknown in resolution of systems of linear equations with two unknown
quantities; resolution of word problems using the Cartesian method;
algebraic expression of generality). Although in some cases the examples
presented are from tertiary (structure sense and symbol sense) and
university (the metonymical and metaphorical nature of signs) levels, this
author has pointed out the advisability of taking up once again the themes
and foci proposed in those examples and extending them to problems
pertaining to MJSS.
e section “Sense and Assigning Meaning in Mathematics” is in its
entirety an invitation (exhortation) for theoretical reﬂection on the manners
in whi MJSS students comprehend and handle the sign systems involved
in teaing and learning mathematics. e foregoing is oﬀered as an
answer to the enormous cumulous of data collected by empirical studies on
the read-writing of mathematics symbols that have been undertaken over
the past decades and that, inter alia, have conﬁrmed the diﬃculties reported
by resear of the 80s and 90s. It is worth mentioning that some of these
studies have as well advanced our theoretical knowledge concerning the
origin and nature of such difficulties.
Also in view of the theme of the Handbook section entitled “Democratic
Access to Mathematics Learning,” and with more of a practical than
theoretical vision in mind, in this apter eﬀorts were made to refresh
thought on the role played by digital tenologies, precisely in that
democratic access to mathematics knowledge. is author opted to reﬂect
on the possible inﬂuence, in this sense, of tenological innovations on both
the oﬃcial mathematics curriculum and MJSS classroom practices. e
reason for this was that the role of tenology learning environments as a
gateway to powerful mathematical ideas had already been broaed in the
second edition of this Handbook. In this version, the author has pointed out

the importance of incorporating into teaing new developments (su as
three-dimensional versions of Dynamic Geometry or intelligent support
that accompany the microworlds) with associated resear that make it
possible to understand the magnitude of the didactic potential of su
developments and the feasibility of generalizing their usage. e objective
of this is to reduce the discrepancy that presently exists between the
ﬁndings of intensive resear that for decades has pointed to the didactic
virtues of digital learning environments in mathematics and their minimal
inﬂuence over the curriculum, and the use of su environments in
mathematics classes (Artigue, 2007).
A forecast was also made, namely that the availability of interactive
materials (new and old) on the Cloud and on mobile devices will wield a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence over the social aspects of building mathematics
knowledge, both due to the new possibilities of interaction and
collaboration among communities of students and teaers, and to the
facilities that su availabilities will proﬀer for self-study. It is noteworthy
to mention that the foregoing forecast has to do with the role that digital
tenologies (in their most modern versions) may have in lifelong
mathematics learning.
ough the study of particular problems related to the two aspects dealt
with (tenological innovation-mathematics curriculum and tenological
innovation-mathematics practices) has not been raised here, emphasis has
indeed been placed on the need to orient a portion of resear eﬀorts
toward aspects that aim to close the gap between research and practice.

Notes
1. e mathematical texts considered here are made up of a set of heterogeneous signs. e signs
that are usually considered as speciﬁc to mathematics are only part of the signs used in these
texts, together with the signs of natural language, ﬁgures, and diagrams, as well as signs from
technology environments (See Filloy, Rojano, & Puig, 2008, Chapter 8).
2. is British project was funded by the Social Science Resear Council and undertaken by a
resear team at the Chelsea College (University of London). It was fully reported in Hart (1981).
One of the main features of the CSMS mathematics outcomes was “an unexpectedly high
incidence of certain wrong answers whi suggested the presence of misconceptions leading to
inappropriate strategies.” (Booth, 1984, Preface).
3. Peirce (1931–1958) introduces the interpretant term as follows: “A sign […] addresses somebody,
that is, creates in the mind of that person an equivalent sign, or perhaps a more developed sign.
at sign whi it creates I call the interpretant of the ﬁrst sign. e sign stands for something,
its object.” (Peirce, 1931–1958, Vol. 2.228, p. 135).
4. An icon (also called likeness and semblance) is a sign that denotes its object by virtue of a
quality whi is shared by them but whi the icon has irrespectively of the object. e icon (for
instance, a portrait or a diagram) resembles or imitates its object. An index is a sign that denotes
its object by virtue of an actual connection involving them, one that Peirce also calls a real
relation in virtue of its being irrespective of interpretation. A symbol is a sign that denotes its
object solely by virtue of the fact that it will be interpreted to do so. e symbol consists in a
natural or conventional or logical rule, norm, or habit, a habit that las (or has shed)
dependence on the symbolic sign’s having a resemblance or real connection to the denoted
object. us, a symbol denotes by virtue of its interpretant. Its sign-action (semiosis) is ruled by a
habit, a more or less systematic set of associations that ensures its interpretation (Peirce, 1868).

References
Arcavi, A. (1994). Symbol sense: Informal sense-making in formal mathematics. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 
14(3), 
24–35. 
Retrieved 
from http://flm-journal.org/index.php?
do=show&lang=en&showMenu=14%2C3.
Artigue, M. (2002). Learning mathematics in a CAS environment. e genesis of a reﬂection about
instrumentation and the dialectics between technical and conceptual work. International Journal
of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7, 245–274. doi:10.1023/A:1022103903080
Artigue, M. (2007). L’impact curricular des tenologies sur l’éducation mathématique [e
curricular impact of tenology on mathematics education]. Paper presented at the XII CIAEM
Conference, 
erétaro, 
Mexico. 
Retrieved 
from www.centroedumatematica.com/ciaem/?
q=es/node/237.
Bartolini, M., & Marioi, A. (2008). Semiotic mediation in the mathematics classroom: Artifacts and
signs aer a Vygotskian perspective. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in
mathematics education (2nd ed., pp.746–783). New York: Routledge.
Booth, L. (1984). Algebra: Children’s strategies and errors. Windsor, Berkshire: NFER-NELSON.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Coing, R. (Eds.) (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and
school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Drouhard, J. P. (1992). Les écritures symboliques de l’algèbre élémentaire [e symbolic writings of
elementary algebra]. Doctoral dissertation, Université Paris 7. Retrieved from http://tel.archives-
ouvertes.fr/tel-00925358.
Filloy, E. (1993). Tendencias cognitivas y procesos de abstracción en el aprendizaje del algebra y de la
geometría [Cognitive tendencies and processes of abstraction in the learning of algebra and
ge om et ry]. Enseñanza 
de 
las 
Ciencias 
11(2), 
160–166. 
Retrieved 
from
http://ddd.uab.cat/record/18?ln=carecord/14?ln=ca.
Filloy, E. & Rojano, T. (1989). Solving equations: e transition from arithmetic to algebra. For the
Learning of Mathematics, 9(2), 19–25. Retrieved from http://flm-journal.org/index.php?
do=show&lang=en&showMenu=9%2C2.
Filloy, E., Rojano, T., & Puig, L. (2008). Educational algebra. A theoretical and empirical approa.
New York: Springer.

Filloy, E., Rojano, T., & Solares, A. (2010). Problems dealing with unknown quantities and two
different levels of representing unknowns. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 41 (1),
52–80. Retrieved from www.nctm.org/publications/article.aspx?id=26190.
Freudenthal, H. (1983). e algebraic language. In H. Freudenthal, Didactical phenomenology of
mathematical structures (pp. 461–490). Dordrecht: Reidel. doi:10.1007/0–306–47235-X_16
Gravemeijer, K. (1994). Developing realistic mathematics education. Utret, e Netherlands:
Freudenthal Institute.
Gravemeijer, K. (2004). Local instruction theories as means of support for teaers in reform
mathematics 
education. Mathematical 
inking 
and 
Learning, 
6 
(2), 
105–128.
doi:10.1207/s15327833mtl0602_3
Griﬃn, S. (2004). Building number sense with Number Worlds: A mathematics program for young
ildren. Early 
Childhood 
Resear 
arterly, 
19 
(1), 
173–180. 
Retrieved 
from
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0885200604000146.
Hart, K. (1981). Children’s understanding of mathematics: 11–16. London: John Murray
Ho, M. (2007). Structure sense in high sool algebra. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.
Ho, M., & Dreyfus, T. (2006). Structure sense versus manipulation skills: An unexpected result. In J.
Novotná, H. Moraová, M. Krátká, & N. Stehlíková (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Conference of
the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education, 3, 305–312. Prague,
Czech Republic: PME.
Ho, M., & Dreyfus, T. (2010). Developing Katy’s algebraic structure sense. Proceedings of CERME
6, 
January 
28–February 
1, 
2009, 
Lyon 
France 
© 
INRP 
2010. 
Retrieved 
from
www.inrp.fr/editions/cerme6.
Hoﬀmann, M.H.G, Lenhard, J., & Seeger, F. (Eds.) (2005). Activity and sign. Grounding mathematics
education. New York: Springer.
Hoopes, J. (Ed.) (1991). Peirce on signs. Writings on semiotics by Charles Sanders Peirce. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press.
Horton, R. M., & Leonard, W. H. (2005). Mathematical modeling in science: Using spreadsheets to
create mathematical models and address scientific inquiry. The Science Teacher, 72(5), 40–45.
Kennewell, S. (2009). Reﬂections on the interactive whiteboard phenomenon: A synthesis of resear

from 
the 
UK. 
Portugal: 
Observatório 
dos 
Recursos 
Educativos. 
Retrieved 
from
www.ore.org.pt/filesobservatorio/pdf/KENNEWELL.pdf.
Kieran, C. (1981). Concepts associated with the equality symbol. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 12, 317–26. doi:10.1007/BF00311062
Kieran, C. (2007). Resear on the learning and teaing of sool algebra at the middle, secondary,
and college level: Building meaning for symbols and their manipulation. In F. Lester (Ed.) Second
handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 707–762). Charloe, NC:
Information Age Publishing.
Kirshner, D. (1987). Linguistic analysis of symbolic elementary algebra. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of British Columbia.
Kirshner, D. (1989). The visual syntax of algebra. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 20,
274–287. Retrieved from www.nctm.org/publications/article.aspx?id=38660.
Küemann, D. (1981). Algebra. In K. Hart (Ed.) Children’s understanding of mathematics 11–16
(pp. 102–119). London: Murray.
Lagrange, J-B (2003). Learning teniques and concepts using CAS: A practical and theoretical
reﬂection. In J. T. Fey (Ed.) Computer algebra systems in secondary sool mathematics
education (pp. 269–283). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Linevski, L. & Liveneh, D (1999). Structure sense: e relationship between algebraic and
numerical contexts. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 40 (2), 173–196. Retrieved from
www.jstor.org/stable/3483083.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for sool
mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Noss, R., Hoyles, C., Mavrikis, M., Geraniou, E., Gutierrez-Santos, S., & Pearce, D. (2009). Broadening
the sense of “dynamic”: A microworld to support students’ mathematical generalization. In
Special Issue of ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics Education, Transforming
mathematics education through the use of dynamic mathematics tenologies, 41(4), 493–503.
doi:10.1007/s11858–009–0182–8
Oe, M. (2005). Mathematics, sign and activity. In M.H.G. Hoﬀmann, J. Lenhard, & F. Seeger (Eds.),
Activity and sign. Grounding mathematics education (pp. 9–22). New York: Springer.
Peirce, C. S. (1868). On a new list of categories. Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and

Sciences 7, 287–298.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–1958). Collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce. C. Hartshorne & P. Weiss, Eds.
(Vols. 1–6) and A. Burks, Ed. (Vols. 7–8). Cambridge, MA: e Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.
Presmeg, N. (2005). Metaphor and metonym in processes of semiosis in mathematics education. In
M.H.G. Hoﬀmann, J. Lenhard, & F. Seeger (Eds.) (2005). Activity and sign. Grounding
mathematics education (pp. 105–115). New York: Springer.
Puig, L. (2003). Signos, textos y sistemas matemáticos de signos [Signs, texts and mathematical sign
systems]. In E. Filloy (Ed.) Matemática Educativa: Aspectos de la investigación actual (pp. 174–
186). México: Fondo de Cultura Económica/Cinvestav.
aliﬁcations and Curriculum Authority (2007). Mathematics. Programme for key state 3 and
aainment 
targets 
(p. 
145). 
Retrieved 
from
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130123124929/http://media.education.gov.uk/assets/f
Radford, L. (2000). Signs and meanings in students’ emerging algebraic thinking: A semiotic
analysis. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 42, 237–268. doi:10.1023/A:1017530828058
Radford, L., Subring, G., & Seeger, F. (Eds.) (2008). Semiotics in mathematics education.
Rotterdam/Taipei: Sense Publishers.
Rojano, T. (2008). Mathematics learning in the middle sool/junior secondary sool: Student
access to powerful mathematical ideas. In L. English (Ed.) Handbook of International Resear in
Mathematics Education (2nd ed., pp. 136–153). New York: Routledge.
Rojano, T. (2014). El futuro de las tecnologías digitales en la educación matemática: Prospectiva a
treinta años de investigación intensiva en el campo. [e future of digital tenologies in
mathematics education: A prospective after 30 years of intensive research in the field]. Educación
Matemática, número especial: 25 años [special issue: 25 years], 11–30. Retrieved from
www.revista-educacion-matematica.com/volumen-25/numero-e/11-30.
Rojano, T., & Abreu, J-L (2012). Dialogues with Prometheus: Intelligent support for teaing
mathematics. In C. Kynigos, J-E Clayson, & N. Yiannoutso (Eds.) Proceedings of the
Constructionism 2012 Conference (pp. 544–548). Athens, Greece.
Rojano, T., Filloy, E., & Puig, L (2014). Intertextuality and sense production in the learning of
algebraic 
methods. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 87(3), 389–407. Retrieved from

http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10649-014-9561-3.
Rojano, T., & García-Campos, M (2014). Intelligent dialogues with tertiary education pupils.
Working with parameterized modeling activities. In P. Liljedahl & C. Nicol (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 38th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education, 6,
210. July 15–20, Vancouver: Simon Fraser University/British Columbia University.
Royal Society/JMC (1997). Teaing and learning algebra pre-19. Report of a Royal Society/Joint
Mathematical Council Working Group (pp. 3–4). London: Royal Society.
Soenfeld, A. (1988). When good teaing leads to bad results: e disasters of well taught
mathematics classes. Educational Psychologist, 23, 145–166. doi:10.1207/s15326985ep2302_5
Secretaría de Educación Pública (SEP). (2006). Reforma de la educación secundaria. Fundamentación
curricular. Matemáticas [Reform of secondary sool education. Curricular foundations.
Mathematics].
Sierpinska, A. (1995). Mathematics: “In context,” “pure,” or “with applications”? For the Learning of
Mathematics, 
15(1), 
2–15. 
Retrieved 
from http://flm-journal.org/index.php?
do=show&lang=en&showMenu=15%2C1.
Streeﬂand, L. (Ed.) (1991). Fractions in realistic mathematics education. A paradigm of
developmental research. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Sutherland, R. (2007). Teaching for learning mathematics. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Sutherland, R., & Rojano, T. (2012). Tenology and curricula in mathematics education. In S.
Lerman (Ed.) Encyclopedia of mathematics education. New York: Springer.
Trigueros, M., Lozano, M., Sandoval, I., Lage, A., Jini, E., García, H., & Tovilla, E. (2006).
Developing resources for teaing and learning mathematics with digital tenologies in
Enciclomedia, a national project. In C. Hoyles, J. B. Lagrange, L. H. Son, & N. Sinclair (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 17th Study Conference of the International Commission on Mathematical
Instruction (pp. 556–563). Hanoi Institute of Technology and Didirem Université Paris 7.
Troue, L. (2004). Managing the complexity of human/maine interactions in computerized
learning environments: Guiding students’ process through instrumental orestrations.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9, 281–307. doi:10.1007/s10758–
004–3468–5
Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M. (2003). e didactical use of models in realistic mathematics

education: An example from a longitudinal trajectory on percentage. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 54 (1), pp. 9–35. doi:10.1023/B:EDUC.0000005212.03219.dc

8 Mathematical Structure, Proof, and
Definition in Advanced Mathematical
Thinking
Joanna Mamona-Downs and Martin L. N.Downs
University of Patras, Greece

Introduction
As mathematical thought matures, it is oen convenient to map the
advance by referring to transitional stages. ese can be quite minor and
local, for instance when hierarical levels of understanding for a concept
are identiﬁed in a relatively stable mathematical context, or can be more
far-reaing when the concepts themselves are in ﬂux and diﬀerent
deﬁnitions are craed accordingly to the state reaed in a mathematical
theory. Transitional stages can be gradual or abrupt. An institutional ange
tends to accelerate the sophistication in how mathematics is treated, and
this is especially pressing when one considers the diﬀerence between the
aracter of mathematics taught at high sool and that taught at the
tertiary level. (In the United States, this institutional ange might be best
reﬂected when a student enters the program of senior study at university.)
Many students ﬁnd this transition diﬃcult, ﬁnding the style of the
presentation of mathematics at university very diﬀerent to what they were
accustomed before (see for example De Guzmán, Hodgson, Robert, &
Villani, 1998). It is natural to question whether the institutional ange by
itself is responsible in creating these diﬃculties. Students are abruptly faced
with the apparent detaed aracter of formalization and new standards
set for argumentation that are largely foreign to the sool experience. Is
there a way to direct students’ learning of mathematical ideas in a
“continuous” manner avoiding su “ruptures”? Some educators claim that,
indeed, there is a way. For example, Rasmussen, Zandieh, King, & Teppo
(2005) advocate the construction of “advancing mathematical activity … to
think about the transition from informal to more formal mathematical
reasoning” (p. 71). From another study, Marrongelle & Rasmussen (2008), it
is clear that this approa is regarded to be more or less universal in
application, suggesting it has the potential to instruct mathematics as a
“continuum.” From this stance, there cannot be a tight aracterization for

the term Advanced Mathematical inking, a topic espoused by many
mathematics educators considering the special needs to cope with tertiary
level mathematics.
Even though guided reinvention or rediscovery (we shall not make a
distinction here) is a legitimate tactic in teaing mathematics on occasion,
it is questionable whether this tactic is feasible, or even desirable, to apply
on a grand scale. At the university level, many deﬁned mathematical
objects gain conceptual weight only aer determining a coherent set of
properties that those objects possess in common. Concerns in progressing
mathematical theory are dominant, aﬀecting the way in whi presentation
is styled. From this perspective, mathematics develops by recognizing
structural aﬀordances, and the institutional ange can be regarded as being
useful in stressing that a new mindset is now in place. e educator’s role
then is to study how students cope with the resultant new codes of practice
and to suggest means of support for students to fulfill them.
Mathematical theories partially covered at high sool then re-treated at
the tertiary level are of particular interest when studying transitional issues.
e most evident example is Calculus as presented at sool and a ﬁrst
course on Real Analysis as taught at university. Many students are
ﬂabbergasted by the contrast between the two; bringing out an axiomatic
system for the real numbers allows proofs of properties that before were
largely taken for granted. Also, in some countries, certain basic notions of
linear algebra are introduced in higher streams of secondary sool; the
topics typically covered are vector spaces, independence or dependence of a
set of vectors, and solving systems of linear equations. A comparison study
in Selinski (2012) contrasts sool and university students’ performance on
su topics. What is reported is a diﬀerence in students’ disposition,
“particularly towards new mathematical experiences” (p. 403). To be more
speciﬁc, the undergraduates were able to give examples of linear spaces
beyond real vector spaces whereas the sool students could not. In one

way this is not surprising from experiential grounds, but still fitting a theory
on objects of diﬀering type strongly suggests that an axiomatic system has
been appropriated. If a aracterization of “advanced mathematics” is
desired, working according to a set of axioms is one of the most convincing
candidates. In David Tall’s aracterization of “ree Worlds of
Mathematics,” the third world deals with the nature of mathematics based
on axiomatic systems; in Tall (2004), it is stated: “is I have called the
‘formal-axiomatic world’ or ‘formal world’, for short. It turns previous
experiences on their heads, working not with familiar objects of experience,
but with axioms that are carefully formulated to deﬁne mathematical
structures in terms of speciﬁed properties. Other properties are then
deduced by formal proof to build a sequence of theorems” (pp. 30–31).
From this perspective, then, it becomes crucial to scrutinize the aracter
and role of “mathematical structure,” and this will form a major topic of
this chapter.
In discussing mathematical structure, it is evident that diﬀering agendas
can be pursued. Our particular approa will be rather coarse: we aim to
seek out facets of structure that underlie the formal-axiomatic world. But
we will be interested also in aspects of structure supporting mathematical
thought from a more naturalistic or instrumental platforms, representing at
large the usual practices found at sool. Hence we envisage that by
discerning two broad “types” of structure teaers will be more equipped in
explaining to their students what is at issue in the transition to university
study.
In suggesting a “world” representing “advanced mathematics” there
should be an appreciation of what types of activities would be promoted. In
this respect, there is a significant shift in how questions are posed. Instead of
tasks with the command “ﬁnd” (or the like), most now have the command
“show” or “prove.” Instead of an answer, the output is an appropriate
argument respecting the laws of logic and the standards and conventions

set in the working tenical language. In practical terms, though, the real
crux lies in the processes of drawing out the structure linking the premises
and the proposed inference. Also, in an environment driven by axiomatic
systems, the motivation behind forming deﬁnitions tends to be traceable in
their potential in furthering mathematical theory. Because of the prominent
role played by equivalent statements in advanced mathematics, there are
many cases where the status of proof and deﬁnition can be interanged.
is means that an exhaustive discussion on proof cannot be made without
an accompanying discussion on definition.
is apter then considers three related themes—namely mathematical
structure, proof and deﬁnitions—all taken from an educational viewpoint.
As the literature on the aracter and role of structure is rather diverse, we
devote two sections to the subject. e ﬁrst represents our own outlook
according to our particular purposes; the second aempts to give a broader
account of the diﬀerent ways that other researers have approaed the
issue of structure, but by necessity the discourse is selective. Next is a
section concerning proof, succeeded by one on deﬁnitions. For these two
sections we have a dual aim: to give a sample of the lines that recent
educational literature has taken on proof and deﬁnition, and then to discuss
the extent the studies referred to reveal thinking in terms of structure. As
many of the studies mentioned do not have an explicit agenda on the topic
of structure, the second aim is aieved at a rather aributive level only. In
the concluding section, a lile is said on mathematical theory building vis-
à-vis structure and on the practical educational beneﬁts in taking a
structural perspective.

On Structure in Mathematics
From philosophical, psyological, and educational sources it is seen that
there are many slants taken on the aracter of structure in mathematics.
Given this, it is in place to explain the role of structure vis-à-vis this
particular apter. Indeed, as the apter deals with topics concerning proof
and deﬁnitions, the pertinence to structure might not be so immediate and
needs some explanation.
In this, we start with a simple example. In Riart (1996) there is an
anecdote about an occasion when the author asked his young son this
succession of questions: How many prongs are there on his fork? What is
the number of spaces between the prongs? On imaging a fork with any
number of prongs how many spaces are there? e ild immediately
answered ea question correctly. e author later relates this incident to
structure, or structure sense, and indeed as a basic exemplar. e fact that
the ild was able to answer a question on a property of some imaginary
object was taken as evidence of this. e author did not pursue the
encounter further at the time, though. Let us propose a hypothetical follow-
up. First we might ask the ild why the number of spaces is one less than
the number of the prongs. Possibly the ild would answer in a way
indicating that the answer simply comes from an assumption from the
experienced case of four prongs, or else give reasoning embracing all the
cases. e laer would suggest structural apprehension more than the
former. e ild may explain that ea space “goes” with the prong to its
immediate le, so the prong to the extreme right is not associated to a
space. e idea of a one-to-one correspondence then underlies the
explanation. Now we stray beyond what one could expect from the ild in
raising the question: If you forget about the spaces and prongs, can you still
retain the argument used outside its original context? Via some
mathematical terminology you can. e prong and space case is an instance

of the following: Suppose that for the ﬁnite set A and the set B with b an
element of B there is a bijection between A and B − {b}, then |A| = |B| − 1.
e motive in going through the example was to illustrate that structure
takes two forms: there is structure that is identiﬁed in the environment that
whi one is working on, and there is structure that is speciﬁed by a
property without being explicit to the circumstances for whi the property
holds. e ﬁrst form is accessible by young students, but the second
depends on appreciation of given abstract deﬁnitions leaning to the
axiomatic aracter of mathematics typically met at the tertiary level.
However, there can be a meeting between the two forms; in particular,
taking speciﬁc instantiations of a structure that has a formal aracter can
help to explain why the structure is discerned. For example, the plane
isometries that preserve a plane ﬁgure are oen called the symmetries of
the ﬁgure and hold the group conditions. e abstract structure of the
deﬁnition of a group then can be used to deﬁne symmetry in other
situations (via group actions).
In talking about these two forms of structure we anowledge that we
are being coarse. Indeed when the ild imagines the situation of a fork
having any number of prongs it could be said that an intermediate shi in
the comprehension of the structure occurs. en we have three stages that
bear some similarities to a hierary on thinking in terms of structure due
to Van Hiele (1986); here descriptive, relational and theoretical levels are
distinguished. But from the vantage of advanced mathematics the main
interest is what lies at the theoretical level, and for this a detailed discussion
of structure at other levels is not a priority.
Even though the mathematics education literature is aware of these two
major forms of structure—one based on perception and observation, the
other on imposing certain conditions and what follows in consequence—
from our reading there is lile that aempts to build a model incorporating
both. is is rather surprising. Both highlight thinking that deals with

organizational aspects in instigating argumentation. Observations oen
come in the form of identifying correspondences, and conditions oen
allude to restrictions put on (formal) functions. In this respect, organizing
argument around aspects of invariance often comes to the fore.
Let us illustrate. We consider the geometric mean and the arithmetic
mean of a ﬁnite set of real numbers. Let n be the number of elements in the
set. e two means have structure imposed on them by their deﬁnitions,
but allow also some informal interpretation. For instance, the arithmetic
mean equals the constant value were you to imagine that all the elements
had the same contribution to the total. Also, note that the two averages
have completely the same structure but applied to two diﬀerent operations;
this is evident as if the word arithmetic is replaced by geometric in the
informal interpretation nothing else is anged (apart from the value of the
total). A standard theorem states if there are at least two diﬀerent numbers
contained in the set then the arithmetic mean is greater to the geometric
mean. One approa in proving the inequality is as following: note that
there must be an element x1 with value greater than the arithmetic mean
and another x2 with value less. Consider their distances from the arithmetic
mean, and take the least; denote it by d. Now we take a “new” set;
elements x1 and x2 are replaced by x1 – d and x2 + d, the others are
unanged. By design, the arithmetic mean is preserved, and it is
guaranteed that an element in the new set, but not in the old, takes the
value of the arithmetic mean. e eﬀect on the geometric mean has to be
determined; the geometric mean increases or decreases depending on the
sign of (x1 – d)(x2 + d) − x1x2. is expression reduces to d[(x1 – x2) – d],
and as (x1 – x2) – d is positive by construction, the geometric mean always
increases. Now recur the action until the resulting set consists of just one
element, the arithmetic mean “repeated” n times. In this case, the arithmetic
mean equals the geometric mean; we have shown that the geometric mean
of the original set is less than that for the ﬁnal set, so the result has been

proved. To summarize, for any set the strategy is to form a (ﬁnite) sequence
of sets (starting with that set) su that the arithmetic mean is preserved,
and the sequence is made in such a way to successively increase the number
of elements having the value of the arithmetic mean until all elements have
it; we have deliberately driven things towards what we know and can
handle. In this, the craing of conditions to avail a construction (i.e. the
sequence of sets), the identiﬁcation and using of relationships, and the
organizing of argumentation around aspects of invariance are very mu in
evidence. Here we note that the usage of the required symbolism is
relatively light; a sense of structure brings eﬃciency in the employment of
notation.
e perspective of structure that we take admits intuitive ideas modeled
into available annels of mathematical expression as well as imposed
deﬁnitional constructions. For both cases, we do not think of structure as an
inﬂexible base for thought, but rather structure supports the making of
constructions that have signiﬁcance in raising mathematical issues and then
how to deal with these issues. Many of the issues would concern
establishing proposed properties, so lean towards the proof tradition. e
emphasis on constructions involves definition making at various levels. Also
we deem factors of presentation important, as these depend on a good
grasp of the workable tenical language for whi its eﬃcacy in turn
depends on structural appreciation.
We contend that a structural outlook can be proﬁtable in analyzing
students’ behavior in proof making/reading, and in designing/handling
deﬁnitions. But a major concern of this apter is to give a résumé account
of the current educational literature on the teaing and learning of topics
that concern proof and deﬁnition at high sool and university levels. In the
relevant sections, what has been said about structure oen takes a
baground role, but we believe that the reader would recognize factors
that are consistent to the structural viewpoint as described above. In this,

the reader may care to consider the extant that the implied structure leans
towards the formal-axiomatic world.

Structure as It Is Discussed in the Literature
We discuss how the mathematics education community treats the notion of
structure in general. Of course the word structure is oen taken casually,
but there is continued interest to feature “structure” prominently in
frameworks or as the main topic of study. We start by stating osen
descriptors of structure from the literature.
e following aracterization is due to Mason, Stephens, & Watson
(2009):
We take mathematical structure to mean the identiﬁcation of general properties whi are
instantiated in particular situations as relationships between elements…. a relationship is some
connection or association between elements or subsets whi have been themselves been
discerned.
(p. 10)
is is very mu in line with the ﬁrst form of structural appreciation
mentioned in the previous section; for example, the appearance of the word
properties (rather than “conditions” or “consequences”) suggests that a
relationship is intuited. Not surprisingly, here mathematical structure is
regarded relevant to all age bands.
As a global description of structure can seem elusive, some expositions of
structure deliberately select topics deemed particularly pertinent to aspects
of structure. For example, in Niss (2006) the themes selected are: “e
formation, nature, and role of mathematical concepts; the need for and role
of mathematical proof; and symbolism and formalism in mathematics” (p.
51). is oice has similarities to our position stated in the previous
section. Concepts and deﬁnitions are intimately related, with an interest in
whi is posited ﬁrst. What qualiﬁes an argument as proof has prompted
long debate between mathematicians, philosophers, and educators, and it is
perhaps best conducted in terms of the role of structure in mathematics.
Finally, the respective roles of symbolism and formalism are discussed,

leading up to the following claim:
Mastery of symbolism and formalism requires students to develop a kind of “controlled
sizophrenia” between intuition (and sense-making) and formalism that allows them to swit
between the two so as to distinguish between interpretation and meaning, on the one hand, and
notation and rules, on the other hand.(Niss, 2006, p. 61)
This is in accordance with our presentation of the proof concerning arithmetic and geometric
means given earlier.
We move on to another deﬁnition. It is taken from Novotná & Ho
(2008):
e term algebraic structure is usually used in abstract algebra and may be understood to
consist of a set closed under one or more operations, satisfying some axioms.
(p. 94)
is involves a specialized form of structure, but is consistent to many
mathematicians’ ﬁrst interpretation of the word. In this context, structure
prompts working from given conditions that leans more towards the
syntactic rather than the semantic; also the focus predominately stays at the
fundamentals. However, “Axioms result from necessity, not from some
arbitrary decree, and this reason is oen misunderstood” (Artmann, 1988, p.
23). Conception still has its role if it is agreed that it embraces the building
up of insight (cf. Tall & Vinner, 1981). In this respect, mathematicians are
interested to convey aspects of structure especially in drawing out issues or
programs, even though they might not explicitly use the word. Below is an
extract from an introductory chapter from a textbook on Group Theory:
eﬀect a division of the original classiﬁcation problem into two parts: (i) ﬁnd ﬁnite simple groups
of all possible types (the ‘building blos’ of ﬁnite group theory), (ii) solve the extension problem
(that is, find how the building blocks fit together).
(Rose, 1978, p. 9)
is extract is interesting as it has a component of analogical expression
lying outside the tenical language. From a formal viewpoint this

component is superﬂuous and without meaning. Nonetheless, the informal
statements seem to stress a structural understanding and voice a long-term
aim in terms of insight. is exempliﬁes informal language acting as a kind
of meta-commentary on what is done on the formal level. is is an
important factor in breaking the negative image many students harbor that
university-level mathematics is just a meaningless manipulation of
symbolism.
Novotná and Ho (2008) introduce the terms structure sense and
algebraic structure. Structure sense seems to represent a source of
evaluation of what structural bases yield cognitively over what is merely
referential to the particular mathematical ﬁeld considered, here abstract
algebra. us there is a distinction made between working from the axioms
and sense making in the formal environment. From our perspective, this
distinction is not made; the term structure sense is regarded as redundant
because the word structure encompasses sense making anyway.
e deﬁnition of structure in Novotná and Ho (2008) was speciﬁc to a
particular mathematical domain. is suggests that it might be useful to
draw up lists of arenas in mathematics and its learning and teaing that
are particularly relevant to structure. e following list is due to Zalman
Usiskin.
e ﬁrst mathematical structures that I think of are the obvious ones: the structures of algebra,
namely groups, rings, vector spaces, ﬁelds, etc. en there are categories, whi might be thought
of as structures of structures. But even the objects within these structures might be viewed as
structures. For instance, a matrix is a structure of data; a network is another type of structure of
data; a relation is a third type of structure.
en there are the logical structures. What follows from what? What can you prove given
such and such?
But there are also historical structures. This development led to that development which led to
a third development, etc. ese structures are not as rigorous as the structures of algebra or of
logical structures, but there is a sense to them that can make them quite important for extracting
meaning from a concept.
ere are also algorithmic structures. Algorithms are embedded in other algorithms, lead to

more algorithms.
ere are interest structures—something reminds you of something else; that reminds you of
more.
ere are also pedagogical structures, namely sequences and networks of activities that we put
together for the purpose of a student’s learning a particular bit of mathematics.
So we might say that there are formal structures and informal structures. We study
relationships among formal structures by looking for morphisms and other functions that might
relate them. We study informal structures by looking for commonalities.
(personal communication, January 2014)
is list casts a picture of remarkable variety in the role of structure and
suggests various diﬀerent perspectives: for example, structure as a part of
mathematics, structure as a part of understanding mathematics, structure as
triggering connections within mathematics, structure as playing a role in
teaing. e last item arguably is closest in representing the “mean”
viewpoint of educators interested in incorporating aspects of structure in
their studies, without necessarily invoking the notion of a morphism.
In aracterizing a notion that seems rather intangible, one legitimate
approa is to summon up situations where the notion is deemed relevant
and then draw out similarities in the various situations that can help in
forming a aracterization. Hence it is important to have lists like one
drawn out by Usiskin. But in the end the sheer diversity found makes it
diﬃcult to extract commonalities. Because of this, educators are mainly
interested in forming more direct general frameworks. A natural
consideration here is that structural awareness promotes thinking in terms
of “mathematical objects” and in how they interact. Cognitively, models of
“objectiﬁcation” su as Action Process Object Sema (APOS) (e.g.
Corill, et al., 1996) can be useful for studying students’ understanding of
foundational concepts. Also the position taken that the status of a
mathematical object is cemented when it is acted on highlights structural
aﬀordances. However, these models may be not so eﬃcient for the
appropriation of objects that rise whilst considering mathematical activities

su as problem solving and designing constructions. In talking about
objects, it should not be forgoen that mathematicians also use the word
entity. Some educators take the two words as synonymous (e.g. Font,
Godino & Gallardo, 2013), but elsewhere entity has a broader meaning. For
example, in Prasada, Ferenz, and Haskell (2002) we ﬁnd: “Object construals
require thinking of the structure as being non-arbitrary, whereas substance
construals require thinking of the structure as being arbitrary” (p. 141). is
suggests that there are diﬀerent levels of concreteness in structure. An
entity is unspeciﬁed whereas an object is at least partially determined. So,
an existential proof deals with an entity rather an object. is point is
important to make as basing mathematics from an axiomatic approa can
involve instances of inconsistency, i.e., cases where an axiomatic system
cannot be fulﬁlled by any object, but before an inconsistency is established
it is sensible to talk about potential entities.
inking in terms of objects invites analysis of “inner” structure and, by
operations applied to an object, invites consideration of larger structures
that contain the object. Hence an object can be thought of as being “placed”
within a mathematical system, where the system can be thought of as the
arena constraining the structure (Riart, 1996). A system typically contains
various types of objects, and for ea type subobjects and superobjects can
be speciﬁed in relation to any particular object. e structure is explored by
revealing correspondences between the various families of objects
concerned (e.g., Mamona-Downs & Downs, 2004).
However this picture is not really quite complete. ere is always a drive
to create new objects related to the old to enhance the scope of the
structure. An example is the notion of equivalence and equivalent relations.
Equivalence plays a crucial part of structural thinking because it determines
whi objects are thought to lie naturally in the same body or class. is
determination is made on abstract structural grounds. In Hamdan (2006),
students are asked to make meaningful connections between some notions

that are pertinent to the idea of equivalent relation; partition, equivalence
classes, and the fiber structure of a function.
Also it is limiting to think that structure is delineated by a mathematical
system. One role of structure is to extract method or tenique from a
particular argument or mathematical situation in readiness for instantiation
elsewhere. is issue is sometimes referred to as the transfer problem (e.g.,
Lobato & Siebert, 2002). Related to this, the same problem posed in various
mathematical topics can bring out common structural understanding
between them (Kondratieva, 2011). Also there are functional devices that
mathematically determine whether two objects share common structure,
like isomorphisms, homomorphisms, and other “morphisms.” An account of
the history of mathematics structure vis-à-vis isomorphism can be found in
Timmermans (2012). Informal forms of isomorphism are sometimes
discussed in the mathematics education literature (e.g., Greer & Harel,
1998), and there are several studies extant on student’s understanding of
formal isomorphism, for example Weber and Alco (2004) for group
isomorphism and Ebert, Ebert, and Klin (2004) for graph isomorphism.
Our current focus is on mathematical objects; in the previous section we
talked about constructions. It could be argued that the notion of a
mathematical construction is inherently dependent on realizing objects. For
example, in the argument we gave showing that the arithmetic mean is
greater or equal to the geometric mean, a process is made whi when
ﬁnished represents a ﬁnite sequence of sets; the recognition of the sequence
means that an object has been realized. e process underlying the object is
deliberately designed to determine the inequality, so the process/object acts
as a construction. Stressing the object component helps in forming the
original strategy.
As we have seen, the play and relativity concerning mathematical objects
is highly intricate; not mu of this is caught at the sool level. e role of
structure is to yield an overall coherent view of the system considered; as

put by Dreyfus and Eisenberg (1996):
there is a central core of concepts and relationships that, once grasped and integrated, allow one
to organize the entire topic and conceive its unity. It can be observed that once a student gets to
this stage, the amount of knowledge involved seems to collapse; examples that were completely
disjoint now turn out to be essentially identical.
(p. 267)

On Proof
ere is mu latitude in interpreting the aracter of proof. One factor in
this is whether mathematics primarily concerns the aainment of results, or
proposes potential consequences from the givens and then asks for
veriﬁcation. e laer ﬁts beer to the proof “culture.” Further, from a
perspective in building up and presenting mathematical theory, it is
convenient to simply state a likely consequence as if it were no longer
provisional. Hence typically the command “prove” occurs far more oen
than “prove or disprove” in exercises found in mathematics textbooks. In
this respect, it is convenient to employ two diﬀerent words to serve a
distinction; these words are proposition and statement. Here the word
statement is not taken as in its usual usage in logic, but a shortening for
authoritative statement, i.e., a “true” statement for whi its truth was
established in the past. A proposition can be refuted, but a statement is
assumed to be true. For a proposition, an argument is made to decide its
status (i.e., true or false). For a statement, the argument does not deal with
determining a ﬁnal state, but acts as a annel for veriﬁcation and
articulation. For many students this can be diﬃcult to swallow; it is bad
enough to impose a proposition that they did not have any part in forming,
but then further to suggest a priori that the proposition is true, as in the case
of a statement, might well seem excessive. A format is made: state the
premises, state an inference, and only aer demonstrate the inference.
Unsurprisingly, some educators advocate a aracterization of proof
avoiding su formaing. Su a aracterization oen involves the
making of a conjecture and then giving an argument to resolve its status.
For example, Pedemonte (2007) focuses on the “cognitive unity” between
the reasoning in building up a conjecture and in the construction of an allied
“proof”; in many cases a “proof” can seem more natural if the content
maer of the relevant theorem was indeed ﬁrst raised in the form of a

conjecture. However, the format is too pervasive for educators to try to
sidestep completely as it constitutes a major part of how mathematics is
documented at the research level.
From now on mostly we will discuss proof in the context of
demonstrating statements. As the statement is assumed to be true, the onus
is on ﬁnding a suitable and eﬃcient argument. e center of aention is on
the argument itself. is situation can make students uneasy and uncertain
about what argumentation qualiﬁes as proof. ere are educational studies
dealing with this issue; one tactic employed is to distribute a list of given
arguments where the items diﬀer in the degree of validity and
completeness, and ask students for their opinion to the status of ea item
vis-à-vis proof. For example, Weber (2010) found that senior
undergraduates do not regard empirical work as proof, but most accepted
diagrammatic argumentation, and are readily swayed by familiar form than
content. Also they tended not to e seemingly deductive argumentation
carefully, and even if an error is recognized sometimes its ramiﬁcations on
the basic structure are not appreciated or considered.
e part that proof takes in modeling physical or “real-like” situations
can be confusing for students. In Martinez & Brizuela (2009) there is a
summary of a framework due to Chevallard (1989). According to this the
main stages of modeling are (1) Identiﬁcation of Variables and Parameters,
(2) Establishing Relations between Variables and Parameters, and (3)
Working the Model to Establish New Relationships. Also there is a
distinction made between the intra-mathematical context and the extra-
mathematical context. Extra-mathematical modeling concerns determining
a mathematical system to accommodate the structure implicit in the
context. For example, the classic problem of tiling the essboard by 2 × 1
tiles with two opposite corner squares removed is readily reasoned through
as having no solution by imagining that for ea tile one of its squares is
marked, the other not. But the argument has perceptual aspects, so it cannot

strictly be considered as a proof; the argument, though, can be modeled into
the environment of a Cartesian product and only in that environment a
proof is available (Mamona-Downs & Downs, 2011). In general, modeling
from the phenomenal world can involve mathematical proof but the
processes in casting the model itself lie beyond what mathematical
expression can allow, so modeling and proof are two separate types of
accomplishment.
Since a statement given to students typically is assumed established, they
can ask about their need to prove it. As the mathematics becomes more
abstract, though, the givens and an ensuing statement can easily become
detaed from ea other cognitively. To state, for instance, that “a
compact set in a metric space is equivalent to a set satisfying the condition
that any open cover of the set has a reﬁnement to a ﬁnite cover” can be
disorienting and seem arbitrary. (Even if it’s true, so what?) e proof has
an explanatory role why su strange looking connections occur and what
signiﬁcance they have beyond veriﬁcation. ere is a well-circulated
anecdote about Pierre Deligne who on the completion of an involved proof
on the blaboard made a plea to his audience: “I would be grateful if
anyone who has understood this demonstration would explain it to me.” A
proof oen can seem utilitarian rather than carrying any real sense of
purpose. Recently there has been an interest in the literature about the
“purposes” of proof; one that ﬁgures prominently is to make the premise,
consequence, and proof appear as a single cognitive unit (cf., Barnard, 1998).
Another rests on the simple observation that some proofs can be parsed for
general teniques that can be extracted from the argumentation
supporting the proof. is topic of course is hardly new to mathematic
education; an inﬂuential study by de Villiers with the title: “e role and
function of proof in mathematics” was published in 1990. But a paper by a
mathematician, Rav (1999), talking about the possible role that proof has in
raising insight, connections, and generalization as well as tenique

extraction gave the area new momentum (e.g., Hanna & Barbeau, 2008).
e message is that the total knowledge of mathematics accrues from proof
itself as mu as it does from the statements that are validated. A “good”
proof is not simply judged from its explanatory power but also from the
tools that it provides; hence there are inﬂuences towards meaning in
abstraction and increased functionality at the same time. Creating tools
involves reorganization of the existing speciﬁc structure in a form that can
be applied elsewhere. Students are rarely informed about su purposes in
the course of instruction; however, this omission could be regarded as a
secondary concern in the face of the diﬃculties they display with proof in
the first instance.
ere is yet a further reason why students do not feel comfortable with
proof. e whole mathematical glossary can seem to be prearranged in
order to facilitate proof (Downs & Mamona-Downs, 2005). An impression
can be le that a vacuous intellectual game is being played. To defuse this,
a sense of building mathematical theory must be distilled (cf., Balaeﬀ,
2010), and in particular how deﬁnitions are decided on in order to base the
rest of the work. The role of definitions will be discussed in the next section.
Keeping a sense of theoretical development can help students, provided
they are capable of thinking in the formal language. Oen they do not have
this facility (urston, 1995), and this la can be debilitating especially at
the fundamental stages (cf., Moore, 1994).
We continue by discussing diﬃculties in the actual practice in forming
and reading proof. First, students have to fathom what a task is asking for.
Typically, there are two separate parts, one seing out the conditions and
the other a consequence. Both have to be understood, and because of the
formal language used it can be allenging just to comprehend what is
being proposed. A part of the allenge lies in “unraveling” the logical form
of statements (Selden, McKee & Selden, 2010). From a study of
mathematicians’ practice concerning proof (Wilkerson-Jerde & Wilensky,

2011), mathematicians tend to “deconstruct” the ideas implicit in a
statement to identify its subcomponents. If students do not do this, they are
impeded in conceiving a meaningful mathematical issue that would
motivate their future thinking. A second diﬃculty is due to many students
harboring an image of proof as a sequence of deductive steps geing from
“A” to “B”; this leaves them to have the impression that logic automatically
drives the direction of a proof. is is not helpful, especially in initializing a
proof: logical considerations are at play when constructing a proof but logic
on its own cannot support points of strategy. ere is an important
problem-solving element in undertaking proof (Mamona-Downs & Downs,
2013). However, the current way that problem solving is taught tends to
avoid seings that are overtly theoretical. It is not surprising, then, that
there are reports that courses in problem solving do not transfer well to
other courses (Yusof & Tall, 1999).
From our perspective of proof, rules of predicate logic must be explicitly
respected. But students can ﬁnd logical aspects in the construction of a
proof diﬃcult, and can accept argumentation that is glaringly faulty. e
problem is mainly due to the la of a sense of meaning in the working
language and of structural awareness. It is diﬃcult for a student to
understand what counts as an implication, as oen what is involved in
passing from one line to the next in an argument is far more than what can
be justiﬁed from a single deductive step. Also an implication can take
diﬀerent logical forms; see Durand-Guerrier (2003). e appreciation and
handling of multiple quantiﬁers are especially troublesome; see for example
Pinto (1996). Indirect proof often confounds student understanding. Proof by
contradiction is particularly taxing on the cognition; you have to argue
“positively” on a proposition expected to be false. Leron (1985) suggests
that some cases of proof by contradiction can be replaced by a constructive
procedure; he states that this has an extra advantage in terms of proof
purposes as mentioned above. However, proof by contradiction is a tactic

too pervasive in “advanced” mathematics to bypass. In Antonini and
Marioi (2006), a closer analysis of the logic that supports proof by
contradiction is made together with the resultant demands on students’
comprehension.
Oen in taling a task it is essential to identify a “means of entry”
stimulating a line in argumentation, and this is equally true for tasks in a
proof format as it is for those that are not. Su means of entry emerge
through observations of relationships, perhaps realized aer some
exploratory work. Students have to be persistent in trying out various ideas,
something that demands commitment. Aer the initial breakthrough,
provisional further stages in the process of proving likely would be
forthcoming. For example, according to Raman, Sandefur, Birky, Campbell,
& Somers (2009) a student starts with identifying key ideas that initialize
thinking about the emerging proof, then develops tenical handles to
allow coherent writing and ﬁnally reformulates this to aieve a perceived
standard form. Alco (2010) discusses the modes of thinking that students
need to be successful provers from a mathematician’s point of view; these
are termed instantiation, structural thinking, creative thinking, and critical
thinking. For teaing purposes, the opinion was that instructors should
place more stress on the structural component, but all four should be
present and coordinated.
Even if a student aains a good relational and instrumental
understanding of a proof, she/he still might have problems in writing down
the proof in what is regarded as an acceptable form. Two main diﬃculties
are ﬁrst, “translating” ideas into an established mathematical glossary, and,
second, deciding what parts of a proof can be safely missed out (e.g., when
the term “it is clear that” is sanctioned). Su presentational concerns can
inﬂuence how students think about proof in general. Puing emphasis on
presentation suggests that the role of a proof is not just about verifying the
statement, but also about verifying its own grounds of argumentation. Also

a presentation can seem to resemble a documentary artifact. But producing
su an artifact presumably would involve an act of mediated restructuring.
ere are some papers extant on how lecturers present proof in their
courses, but lile about the processes in reﬁning argument to a
presentational style. For example, Mills (2011) reports on lecturers’
expectations in how students should react whilst a proof is being presented;
sometimes students are required to provide factual information, sometimes
to contribute to the forming of key ideas. Weber (2012) interviewed
mathematicians about how they presented proofs at class; one result was
that the interviewees used superﬁcial methods to assess students’
understanding of a proof, perhaps taking the ﬁnal form of the presentation
too much as a model.
We end this section by saying a lile about proof reading. e reading of
a proof can be done at various levels, from parsing the proof to a thorough
reading. For parsing, we agree with a statement made by Polya (1954): “The
advanced reader who skips parts that appear to him too elementary may
miss more than the less advanced reader who skips parts that appear to him
too complex” (p. xi). However, from now we restrict our aention to
comprehensive readings. Evidently it is diﬃcult to study directly students’
thinking processing whilst reading proof, as there is not a concrete “output,”
but there are indirect methods to measure the level of comprehension.
Weinberg and Wiesner (2011) report that students’ reading is constrained
by the “closed structure” found in textbooks and the sense of authority that
they cast. In Weber and Mejia-Ramos (2011) mathematicians are
interviewed about their habits and practice in reading proofs, including
some points of didactical signiﬁcance; line-by-line reading is distinguished
from a reading identifying and relating the overaring methods in a proof.
e laer is conjectured to involve the formation of “structural-intuitive
evidence” where a mental appraisal is available to e the plausibility of
the formal argument. Mejia-Ramos, Fuller, Weber, Rhoads, & Samkoﬀ,

(2012) give a model of the components in proof reading, but it is rather
vague in its implementation. Any structural consideration involved in the
original forming of the proof should be recoverable but not necessarily on
reading merely at the literal level. e resear area of proof reading really
is still at its infancy, especially in how reading impacts students’ ability in
processing the production of proof.

On Conceptualization and Definitions
In an inﬂuential paper, Tall and Vinner (1981) introduce the notions of
concept image and concept deﬁnition. Here the concept image consists of
“the total cognitive structure that is associated with the concept, whi
includes all the mental pictures and associated properties and processes
ideally,” whereas the concept deﬁnition is taken as “a form of words used
to specify that concept” (p. 152). e concept deﬁnition once interiorized by
learners is held as a speciﬁc part of the concept image. In contrast, in Davis
and Vinner (1986), the term concept image is distinguished from the formal
deﬁnition, and the term concept deﬁnition is not mentioned. e ﬁrst of
these two papers refers to insight drawn from the deﬁnition itself as well as
initial intuitions that precede its formation. e second is more concerned
with how the initial intuitions arise in the ﬁrst place, and how instruction
has a role in garnering them; from this perspective, “seemingly unavoidable
misconceptual stages” appear. For both there seems to be an assumption
that the deﬁnition has already been decided on by some form of authority.
More recently there is a tendency to portray simultaneous development on
“deﬁnition construction processes” and “concept formation processes”
(Ouvrier-Buﬀet, 2006). Hence we have a situation where design directed
towards instrumental understanding and design directed towards relational
understanding meet; a growing appreciation of underlying structure is
important in this wedding.
ere are numerous educational studies reporting that some students can
recapture by themselves a form of the formal deﬁnition through guided
reinvention. Some deal with fundamental deﬁnitions, some deal with
adapting known deﬁnitions in new domains, others with cementing past
knowledge previously held only at an intuitive level. e last can bring in
surprises to students; for example, several papers take the position that (–
8)1/3 should be regarded as undeﬁned in the context of the sool

curriculum (e.g., Woo & Yim, 2008).
Typical inﬂuences in su student-centered recovery of established
definitions are Realistic Mathematics Education (Gravemeijer, 1999); the use
of metaphor (Lakoﬀ & Nunez, 2000); the production, retrieval, and analysis
of examples; and adapting conditions to cope with unexpected
contingencies and ange in the conceptual focus, rather in the spirit of
Lakatos (1976). A good exemplar of this recent trend is given in Zandieh
and Rasmussen (2010), where students are requested to give deﬁnitions of
planar triangles and then to adapt these for the sphere. From the data
collected, the authors propose a framework with four strands: situational,
referential, general, and formal activity. e situational and referential
activities tend to deal with existing aspects of the concept image; the
general and formal tend to expand it to more unfamiliar territory.
Currently there is a surge in the amount of resear devoted to students’
ability to exemplify eﬀectively, or what students can make out of examples
that they already have at hand. We recognize that exempliﬁcation is
important in many situations especially in the context of conjectures, but
here we are only interested in its signiﬁcance vis-à-vis deﬁnition.
Traditionally, central formal deﬁnitions are presented without mu
commentary at the lecture hall, but can be followed by giving examples in
order to orient the student. Dahlberg and Housman (1997) conducted a
study where an unfamiliar deﬁnition is given, and it was shown that the
students who were generating their own examples were the beer in
garnering primal conceptual input. is suggests that students’ generation
of examples is important in initializing the concept image aer the
deﬁnition is stated. For reform-oriented instruction, examples precede the
deﬁnition. Students are allenged to extract the essential structure
common in the examples to construct the (desired) deﬁnition. e riness
and reliability of the sources of the examples (student-generated or
otherwise) depends on the strength of the existing concept image. Some

educators talk about the importance for a student to build up an (individual
or collective) “example space” for a particular mathematical topic where
the form of the deﬁnitions made is inﬂuenced by theoretical considerations;
an inﬂuential work in this area is Watson and Mason (2005). Curley and
Meehan (2010) designed a frame that gave opportunities for students to
form a wide net of examples for various topics in Real Analysis; it was not
clear whether the activity encouraged accurate portrayals of the relevant
concept deﬁnitions, but the exercise helped students to appreciate some
aspects of the mathematical ﬁeld beer. Other authors report that example
use is more conducive to some mathematical ﬁelds than others (e.g.,
Zaslavsky & Shir, 2005). is is not surprising; for example, when the
theory is ﬂowing smoothly in dealing with a succession of linked
mathematical issues (as in a ﬁrst course in complex analysis) the deﬁnitions
formed are made in order to serve the theoretical drive, and examples tend
to be demoted to the status of illustration and application.
Edwards and Ward (2004) state that students have diﬃculties in
understanding the very nature of mathematical deﬁnitions, and “should
have experiences that focus on the use of mathematical deﬁnitions and
experiences in the process of deﬁning” (p. 422). e same authors caution,
though, that activities designed for generating deﬁnitions can reduce to
“games that are won if the student can guess what the teaer is thinking”
(Edward & Ward, 2008, p. 230). e question “Are students truly motivated
when asked to participate in deﬁning activities?” is an authentic concern.
Related to this, the processes in forming deﬁnitions can be described in
terms of phenomenology; here, a major component is “intention” where the
intention is expounded from intuitive sources, and the deﬁnition is either
organized to meet the intention or is scrutinized in terms of how well it
represents the intention or explains why and how the original intention
must be compromised (e.g., Asghari, 2004).
At sool, deﬁnitions can be descriptive, admit perceptual factors, and

allow hidden assumptions. Students enter university and face a completely
diﬀerent climate. We illustrate this. e most natural deﬁnition for a
quadrilateral includes “crossed quadrilaterals,” but most students do not
want to regard a crossed quadrilateral as a quadrilateral. In ﬁeldwork
conducted by De Villiers (1998), some students tried to sum up the interior
angles of the four vertices of a crossed quadrilateral, but from their working
through they were geing the same total as goen from “ordinary
quadrilaterals”; so it seemed that their aempt in distinguishing the two
was failing. e usual image of what is an interior angle is disturbed when
you apply it to a precise deﬁnition for a crossed quadrilateral. e point
here is that the students knew that they needed a further condition in
distinguishing crossed quadrilaterals, but they failed to readjust a deﬁnition
aspect, whi ensured that the condition was applied consistently to both
ordinary and crossed quadrilaterals. In introducing the condition, the
students were working maturely, but not so when they took interior angles
perceptually against the usual convention (i.e., taking angles consistently
anti-clockwise).
Sometimes the role of a deﬁnition is weak cognitively; the deﬁnition is
just there for mathematical endorsement. For example, a (real) sequence is
deﬁned as a function of the natural numbers into the reals; what is really
conveyed is an (inﬁnite but “countable”) ordered list of real numbers. is
informal reading even invites a special symbolism; instead of the standard
formaing of function, i.e., f: N → R and f(n) for the value of f at n ∈ N, we
typically write down (an) for the sequence and an to denote the value of the
nth term. e adapted form accentuates the idea of “position” in the
ordering of the terms (Vollrath, 1994). Form in general is an important
theme vis-à-vis deﬁnition; to illustrate, there is no real diﬀerence between
sequences and series, but the theory from the “series” perspective proves to
be very distinct with far-going ramiﬁcations. (Students can have diﬃculty
in accepting partial sums, so the identiﬁcation of a series as a sequence

would not be realized, see Martínez-Planell, Gonzalez, DiCristina, &
Acevedo, 2012.) Also, although the presentation of a formal deﬁnition tends
to be stated in its most utilitarian form, the deﬁnition can be reformulated
to stress other purposes. For example, let us consider limits of a function in
the Reals. An alternative version to the usual statement of the deﬁnition is
as follows: f has limit l at x iﬀ for every interval centered at l there is an
interval centered at x for whi, except possibly at x itself, f maps into that
interval. Su a reading might be more conducive in extending the
definition to other systems (Mamona-Downs, 2014).
Another way the relativity of deﬁnitions crops up is in the context of
(logically) equivalent deﬁnitions. Here a deﬁnitional statement implies
another statement, and conversely this second statement implies the ﬁrst.
en you can regard any one of the two to be the deﬁnition and the other
as a consequence; any result goen from either is validated for both. is
allows switing of perspectives that is completely mathematically
controlled. Equivalent deﬁnitions can be eﬀected by adapting the existing
conditions in the same system, or can be more radical in equating the roles
of two sets of properties taken from two diﬀerent systems. (e many
forms of the completeness property of the reals illustrate both cases; see
Bergé, 2008). In Parameswaran (2010), some mathematicians expressed that
“equivalent reformulations of definitions enrich understanding.” Preferences
from a set of equivalent deﬁnitions on epistemic, cognitive, and
instructional grounds are examined in Wilhelmi, Godino, and Lacasta
(2007). e paper refers to problem-solving teniques aﬀorded by the
various oices of deﬁnition available and discusses evoked meanings from
operative and discursive viewpoints as well as whether they are partial or
holistic in aracter. Of course, students may create more than one
deﬁnition based on contrasting aspects of their concept image, especially
when working in groups. A natural question to ask them is whether the
deﬁnitions are diﬀerent cognitively, and if they are equivalent; the study in

Leikin and Winicki-Landman (2000) follows this direction.
In our discussion it is clear that deﬁnitions carry diﬀering role and status.
In Ouvrier-Buﬀet (2011) a typology of deﬁnitions due to Lakatos is
described. ree types are distinguished: naïve deﬁnitions, zero-deﬁnitions,
and proof-generated deﬁnitions. Naïve deﬁnitions are to specify and name,
and they do not evolve; a zero-deﬁnition is one that is designed to respect
original conceptual bases, a proof-generated deﬁnition either rises from
“monster barring” activities or when the conceptual base is compromised
by a need to prove a desired theorem. In other words, we “tinker” the
deﬁnition in order for the theorem to be provable, an approa suggesting
that one is responding to structural considerations.
In general, the topic of deﬁnitions and deﬁnition making is central to
structural thinking; we lay down the “laws” that our working must adhere
to in an arena that has to be speciﬁed. Also, deﬁning has a design aspect in
making su laws workable and in harmony with the original intent; this
can lead to very interesting aspects in modeling. ere are many types of
deﬁnitions, depending on their envisaged purpose, giving mu scope for
educational resear on the student response. Students’ understanding of
equivalent deﬁnitions is particularly important to study, as it exposes
diﬀerent bases of structure with diﬀering working potential; see e.g.,
Mamona-Downs and Megalou (2013).

Epilogue
is apter has a narrower scope than the corresponding apters in the
two previous editions of the Handbook, and takes a rather diﬀerent form.
All three versions, though, highlight the role of structure in Advanced
Mathematical inking. e present work, though, is more directed to
themes explicitly concerning proof and deﬁnition, and in consequence
topics su as aﬀect, a wider vision of explaining and reasoning, and the
current state of established educational theories are not emphasized as
before. We contend that the most vibrant areas in Advanced Mathematical
inking resear today concern guided reinvention of proof and
conceptually based deﬁnitions, the need for students to read given proofs in
a proactive manner, and the need for students to experience the interplay
(or even interange) between deﬁnitions and what is proved. In this light,
it is heartening that many educators now are communicating with working
mathematicians, throwing light on mathematicians’ beliefs and practice in
their teaching.
Even in the proof/deﬁnition perspective that we adopt there are
omissions. For example, we do not discuss the diﬀerence between the
material that the instructor presents and the activities that students are
asked to perform in their assignments. Some tasks put to students would
indeed involve forming a proof of a statement beyond those presented in
class, but others would be to test basic understanding, to give exercise in
procedures and algorithms, and to apply established statements/theorems
(for which a proof may be required, or may not). Some educators claim that
the activities given to students in the typical traditional tertiary-level class
lean too mu on procedural work and on memory of bookwork. Of
course, one would like students to be active in creating mathematics that is
new to them, but a lot of practice and cultivating a retentive memory are
also beneﬁcial in su an accumulative discipline as mathematics. is leads

to another theme not directly taled in this apter: even though there is
some reference to positioning within a mathematical theory, the forming of
theories in mathematics is not dealt with as a separate topic. eory
making could be regarded as being complementary to proof and deﬁnition
in completing a whole vista of the role of structure in mathematics. For
example, a metric space naturally leads to the notion of an open set;
working with open sets one soon obtains a reformation (concerning proof)
that is independent of the original conditions of a metric space. is is
accommodated in a more general deﬁnition of open sets that motivates the
notion of topological spaces where the original conceptual base of
“distance” is now redundant. It can be a allenge for an educator to
undertake a study on students’ apprehension of mathematical theory as it
unfolds; for successful students the current knowledge must be malleable,
with its content ﬁltered for local usage as well as for deciding what to
retain on the long term. It can be diﬃcult to deliver an introduction of what
a course is about because mu of the language needed has to be developed
over the course. ere are manifold ways to nuance the presentation of the
theory, but perhaps it is unrealistic to treat a whole theory through student
activities as espoused by advocates of reinvention. However, when the
instructor dictates the direction of the material, there is a danger that the
student ﬁnishes a course without appreciating the whole “tissue” of what
has been aieved. ere are very few expositions of mathematical theory
building in the literature; one that has been well circulated is due to
Chevallard (1998), in whi “theory” is one component out of four in a
“mathematical organization.” e notion of a mathematical organization
stresses the diﬀerent oices in the material that covers a course. In
contrast, in tertiary-level mathematics the sense of developing a single
theory is oen strong enough to carry it through the entire course. But are
students conscious of it? The topic of students’ appreciation of mathematical
theory should have more attention than it presently has.

We continue with some reﬂections more geared to actual teaing
practices. It is one thing to ponder the importance of structure in
mathematics in a rather detaed fashion; it is another to translate this into
practical suggestions of pedagogical value. In this regard, we revisit the
contention that the present problem solving agenda is inadequate to cope
with many theoretical seings in mathematics; su claims have
contributed to recent expressions of doubt about the viability of regarding
problem solving as an autonomous topic (e.g., Sweller, Clark & Kirsner,
2010). We consider that what is currently understood by the term problem
solving needs enriment from a structural standpoint. In this one central
factor would be an investigation of how constructions are conceived of and
employed; this done, one could consider the resultant adaptations needed
on the established mainstays in the theory of problem solving su as
heuristics and control. Constructions are interesting in that they can merge
deﬁnitional concerns with those in developing tools for the furtherance of
argumentation. Another factor to keep in mind is that the presentation of a
proof tends to repress the processes in designing those constructions on
whi the proof depends. is has prompted some researers to advocate
a proof presentation that lays out its content in a top-to-boom fashion
(e.g., Leron, 1983). e ﬁeld remains under-researed, however. It is
important to study how well undergraduates are equipped to make their
own constructions, and how to support them in this type of activity.
We end up by returning to the theme of guided reinvention. is is a
possible strategy to ease the transition from the mathematics learned at
high sool to that at university. e two types of structure (observational
and formal) that we mention at the start of the apter would blend to a
degree. But we have also pointed to its infeasibility as a general
instructional practice. When learning tertiary-level mathematics, the rate
that new ideas are introduced and the anges in how mathematical
knowledge is documented necessitate a new mode of processing from

given material; from this point of view it is a luxury to prompt students to
produce ideas new to them but established in theory, and in the long run it
can go against the general enculturation in how ideas evolve and
intertwine. We think that guided reinvention is yielding some interesting
results, but in the end it has to be tailored within some larger model of
scaffolding (i.e., first give support, then fade it out).

References
Alco, L. (2010). Mathematicians’ perspectives on teaing and learning of proof. Resear in
Collegiate Mathematics Education, CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education, 16, 63–91.
Antonini, S., & Marioi, M. A. (2006). Abduction and the explanation of anomalies: e case of
proof by contradiction. Proceedings of the CERME, 6, 322–331. Lyon, France.
Artmann, B. (1988). e concept of number: From quartenions to monads and topological ﬁelds .
New York/Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Asghari, H. A. (2004). Organizing with a focus on deﬁning. A phenomenographic approa. In A. B.
Fuglestad, (Ed.) Proceedings of the 28th PME Conference, 2, 63–70. Bergen, Norway.
Balaeﬀ, N. (2010). Bridging knowing and proving in mathematics: A didactical perspective. In G.
Hanna, H. N. Jahnke, & H. Pulte (Eds.) Explanation and proof in mathematics. Philosophical and
educational Perspectives (pp. 115–137). New York: Springer.
Barnard, T. (1998). Compressed units of mathematical thought. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,
17(4), 401–404.
Bergé, A. (2008). e completeness property of the set of real numbers in the transition from calculus
to analysis. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 67(3), 217–235.
Chevallard, Y. (1989). Le passage de l’arithmétique á l’algébrique dans l’ enseignement des
mathématiques au college. Petit X, 19, 43–72.
Chevallard, Y. (1998). Analyses des practiques enseignantes et didactique des mathematics :
l’approche anthropologique. Actes de l’ École d’été de la Rochelle, 19(2), 91–118.
Corill, J., Dubinsky, E., Niols, D., Swingendorf, K., omas, K., & Vidakovic, D. (1996).
Understanding the limit concept: Beginning with a coordinated process seme. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 15(2), 167–192.
Curley, N., & Meehan, M. (2010). Example generation exercises in an introductory analysis course.
MSOR Connections, 10(1), 49–51.
Dahlberg, R. P., & Housman, D. L. (1997). Facilitating learning events through example generation.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 33(3), 283–299.
Davis, R. B., & Vinner, S. (1986). e notion of limit: Some seemingly unavoidable misconception
stages. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 5(3), 281–303.

De Guzmán, M., Hodgson, B. R., Robert, A., & Villani, V. (1998). Diﬃculties in the passage from
secondary to tertiary education. In G. Fiser and U. Rehmann (Eds.), Proceedings of the
International Congress of Mathematicians, (Vol 3., pp. 747–762). Berlin: Documenta
Mathematica.
De Villiers, M. (1998). An alternative approa to proof in Dynamic Geometry. In R. Lehrer & D.
Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environments for developing understanding of geometry and
space (pp. 369–393). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Downs, M., & Mamona-Downs, J. (2005). e proof language as a regulator of rigor in proof, and its
effect on student behavior. Proceedings of CERME, 4, 1748–1757. Sant Feliu de Guixols, Spain.
Dreyfus, T., & Eisenberg, T. (1996). On different facets of mathematical thinking. In R. J. Sternberg &
T. Ben-Zeev (Eds.). e nature of mathematical thinking (pp. 253–284). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Durand-Guerrier, V. (2003). Whi notion of implication is the right one? From logical
considerations to a didactic perspective. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 53(1), 5–34.
Ebert, C., Ebert, G., & Klin, M. (2004). From the principle of bijection to the isomorphism of
structures: an analysis of some teaing paradigms in discrete mathematics. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 36(5), 172–183.
Edwards, B. S., & Ward, M. B. (2004). Surprises from mathematics education resear: Student
(mis)use of mathematical definitions. The American Mathematical Monthly, 111(5), 411–424.
Edwards, B. S., & Ward, M. B. (2008). e role of mathematical deﬁnitions in mathematics and in
undergraduate mathematics courses. In M. P. Carlson & C. Rasmussen (Eds.), Making the
connection; Resear and Teaing in Undergraduate Mathematics Education  (pp. 223–232).
Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Font, V., Godino, J. D., & Gallardo, J. (2013). e emergence of objects from mathematical practices.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(1), 97–124.
Gravemeijer, K. (1999). How emergent models may foster the constitution of formal mathematics.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 1(2), 155–177.
Greer, B., & Harel, G. (1998). e role of isomorphisms in mathematical cognition. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 17(1), 5–24.
Hamdan, M. (2006). Equivalent structures on sets: Equivalence classes, partitions and ﬁber structures

of functions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 62(2), 127–147.
Hanna, G., & Barbeau E. (2008). Proofs as bearers of Mathematical Knowledge. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 40(3), 345–353.
Kondratieva, M. (2011). e promise of interconnecting problems for enriing students’ experiences
in mathematics. The Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, 8(1&2), 355–382.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations: e logic of mathematical discovery . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, G., & Nunez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from. New York: Basic Books.
Leikin, R., & Winii-Landman, G. (2000). On equivalent and non-equivalent deﬁnitions II. For the
Learning of Mathematics, 20(2), 24–29.
Leron, U. (1983). Structuring mathematical proofs. e American Mathematical Monthly, 90 (3),
174–184.
Leron, U. (1985). A direct approa to indirect proofs. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 16(3),
321–325.
Lobato, J., & Siebert, D. (2002). antitative reasoning in a reconceived view of transfer. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 21(1), 87–116.
Mamona-Downs, J. (2014). Reconciling two non-equivalent deﬁnitions for the limit of two-variable
real functions. Talk presented at the MAA Joint Mathematics Meeting, Baltimore, MD.
Mamona-Downs, J., & Downs, M. (2004). Realization of teniques in problem solving: e
construction of bijections for enumeration Tasks. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 56 (2&3),
235–253.
Mamona-Downs, J., & Downs, M. (2011). Proof: A game for pedants? Proceedings of CERME, 7, 213–
223, Rzeszów, Poland.
Mamona-Downs, J., & Downs, M. (2013). Problem solving and its elements in forming proof. The
Mathematics Enthusiast, 10(1), 137–162.
Mamona-Downs, J., & Megalou, F. (2013) Students’ understanding of limiting behavior at a point
for functions from R2 to R. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 32(1) 53–68.
Marrongelle, K., & Rasmussen, C. (2008). Meeting new teaing allenges: Teaing strategies that
mediate between all lecture and all student discovery. In M. Carlson, & C. Rasmussen (Eds.),
Making the connection: Resear and teaing in undergraduate mathematics education (pp.

167–178). Washington, DC: The Mathematical Association of America.
Martinez, M. V., & Brizuela, B. M. (2009). Modelling and proof in high sool. In M. Tzekaki, M.
Kaldrimidou, & H. Sakonidis (Eds.) Proceedings of the 33rd PME Conference, 4, 113–120.
Thessaloniki, Greece.
Martínez-Planell, R., Gonzalez, A. C., DiCristina, G., & Acevedo, V. (2012). Students’ conceptions of
infinite series. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 81(2), 235–249.
Mason, J., Stephens, M., & Watson, A. (2009). Appreciating mathematical structure for all.
Mathematics Education Research Journal, 21(2), 10–32.
Mejia-Ramos, J. P., Fuller, E., Weber, K., Rhoads, K., & Samkoﬀ, A. (2012). An assessment model for
proof comprehension in undergraduate mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 79(1),
3–18.
Mills, M. (2011). Mathematicians’ pedagogical thoughts and practices in proof presentation. In S.
Brown, S. Larsen, K. Marrongelle, & M. Oehrtman (Eds.) Proceedings of the 14th Conference for
Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 4, 167–172. Portland, Oregon.
Moore, R. C. (1994). Making the transition to formal proof. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
27(3), 249–266.
Niss, M. (2006). e structure of mathematics and its inﬂuence on the learning process. In J. Maasz
& W. Sloeglmann (Eds.), New Mathematics Education Resear and Practice (pp. 51–62).
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Novotná, J., & Ho, M. (2008). How structure sense for algebraic expressions or equations is related
to structure sense for abstract algebra. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 20(2), 93–104.
Ouvrier-Buﬀet, C. (2006). Exploring mathematical deﬁnition construction processes. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 63(3), 259–282.
Ouvrier-Buﬀet, C. (2011). A mathematical experience involving deﬁning processes: In-action
definitions and zero-definitions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 76(2), 165–182.
Parameswaran, R. (2010). Expert mathematicians’ approa to understanding deﬁnitions. The
Mathematics Educator, 20(1), 43–51.
Pedemonte, B. (2007). How can the relationship between argumentation and proof be analysed?
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 66(1), 23–41.
Pinto, M.M.F. (1996). Students use of quantiﬁers. Paper presented to the Advanced Mathematical

inking Working Group at the Twentieth Conference of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education, Valencia, Spain.
Polya, G. (1954). Mathematics and plausible reasoning. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Prasada, S., Ferenz, K., & Haskell, T. (2002). Conceiving of entities as objects and as stuﬀ. Cognition,
83(2), 141–165.
Raman, M., Sandefur, J., Birky, G., Campbell, C., & Somers, K. (2009). “Is that a proof?”: Using video
to tea and learn how to prove at university level. In F.-L. Lin, F.-J. Hsieh, G. Hanna & M. de
Villiers (Eds.), Proceedings of the ICMI Study 19 Conference: Proof and Proving in Mathematics
Education, 2, 154–159. Taipei, Taiwan.
Rasmussen, C., Zandieh, M., King, K., & Teppo, A. (2005). Advancing mathematical activity: A
practice-oriented view of Advanced Mathematical inking. Mathematical inking and
Learning, 7(1), 51–73.
Rav, Y. (1999). Why do we prove theorems? Philosophia Mathematica, 7(1), 5–41.
Riart, C. (1996). Structuralism and mathematical thinking. In R. J. Sternberg & T. Ben-Zeev (Eds.),
The nature of mathematical thinking (pp. 285–300). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Rose, J. S. (1978). a course on group theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Selden, A., McKee, K., & Selden, J. (2010). Aﬀect, behavioural semas and the proving process.
International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 41(2), 199–215.
Selinski, N. E. (2012). Examining students’ mathematical transition between secondary sool and
university: working with vectors and linear independence. In S. Brown, S. Larsen, K. Marrongelle
& M. Oehrtman (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Resear in Undergraduate
Mathematics Education, 1, 403–416. Portland, Oregon.
Sweller, J., Clark, R., & Kirsner, P. (2010). Teaing general problem-solving skills is not a
substitute for, or a viable addition to, teaing mathematics. Notices of the AMS, 57(10), 1303–
1304.
Tall, D. (2004). Introducing three worlds of mathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics, 23(3),
29–33.
Tall, D., & Vinner, S. (1981). Concept image and concept deﬁnition in mathematics with particular
reference to limits and continuity. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 12(2), 151–169.
urston, W. P. (1995). On proof and progress in mathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics,

15(1), 29–37.
Timmermans, B. (2012). Prehistory of the concept of mathematical structure: Isomorphism between
group theory, crystallography and philosophy. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 34(3), 41–54.
Van Hiele, P. (1986). Structure and insight. A theory of mathematics education. Orlando, FL:
Academic University Press.
Vollrath, H. J. (1994). Reﬂection on mathematical concepts as starting points for didactical thinking.
In R. Biehler, W. Solz, R. Strasser, & B. Winkelmann (Eds.), Didactics of mathematics as a
scientific discipline (pp. 61–72). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Watson, A., & Mason, J. (2005). Mathematics as a constructive activity: learners generating examples.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Weber, K. (2010). Mathematics majors’ perceptions of conviction, validity, and proof. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 12(4), 306–336.
Weber, K. (2012). Mathematicians’ perspectives on their pedagogical practice with respect to proof.
International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 43(4), 463–482.
Weber, K., & Alco, L. (2004). Semantic and syntactic proof productions. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 56(2–3), 209–234.
Weber, K., & Mejia-Ramos, J. P. (2011). Why and how mathematicians read proofs: An exploratory
study. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 76(3), 329–344.
Weinberg, A., & Wiesner, E. (2011). Understanding mathematics textbooks through reader-oriented
theory. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 76(1), 49–63.
Wilhelmi, M. R., Godino, J. D., & Lacasta, E. (2007). Didactic eﬀectiveness of mathematical
deﬁnitions. e case of the absolute value. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics
Education, 27(2), 3–9.
Wilkerson-Jerde, M. H., & Wilensky, U. (2011). How do mathematicians learn math?: Resources and
acts for constructing and understanding mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
78(1), 21–43.
Woo, J., & Yim, J. (2008). Revisiting 0.999… and (–8)1/3 in sool mathematics from the perspective
of the algebraic permanence principle. For the Learning of Mathematics, 28(2), 11–16.
Yusof, Y. M., & Tall, D. (1999). Changing aitudes to university mathematics through problem
solving. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 37(1), 67–82.

Zandieh, M., & Rasmussen, C. (2010). Deﬁning as a mathematical activity: A framework for
aracterizing progress from informal to more formal ways of reasoning. e Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 29(2), 57–75.
Zaslavsky, O., & Shir, K. (2005). Students’ conceptions of a mathematical deﬁnition. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 36(4), 317–346.

9 Reform as an Issue for Mathematics
Education Research
Thinking About Change, Communication,
and Cooperation
Michael N. Fried and Miriam Amit
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Mathematics education research is a theoretical and practical enterprise. But
even in its most theoretical form, it aims ultimately to bring about anges
for the beer in what we tea, how we tea, and what we hope learners
will learn. In this way, mathematics education resear, whether theoretical
or practical, is never far from the eﬀort to reform mathematics teaing
and learning. How fruitful actual reforms will be depends not only on the
quality of the particular proposals we make but also on how well we
understand the nature and processes of reform. While some of these
processes are completely general, others are connected speciﬁcally with
mathematics education and are distinct enough to warrant giving the
investigation of reform in mathematics education a permanent place in the
overall program of mathematics education research.
But how should su an investigation proceed? What kind of thing is its
object? e wide range of eﬀorts referred to as reform movements makes
even the basic question of what reform is not easy to answer, and it may be
that only an intimation of a deﬁnition is possible at all. Whatever else it
may be, however, a reform movement is a phenomenon that necessarily
takes in the whole complex of students, teaers, researers, parents, and

politicians; it is motivated by societal, scientiﬁc, and tenological needs, as
well as by resear in mathematics and general education—and it is
inescapably a phenomenon connected with values. e phenomenon of
reform, since it is so close, as we said, to the core of mathematics education,
must, for this reason, be at least as complex as mathematics education itself.
e general thesis behind this apter, then, is that resear into reform
must reﬂect this complexity. It must take into account the social and
historical nature of reform, its local and global aspects, its response to
anging tenologies and anging interests in mathematics and science—
and it must avoid reducing reform to any one of these. Su an inquiry,
naturally, must be of a diﬀerent kind than other more usual forms of
educational research—more reflective, more retrospective, more holistic.
Our discussion begins with one of the main undercurrents of the apter,
namely that resear is intertwined with reform as one of its motives,
components and results. From there, we continue with the question of
“reform researers” and their methodologies. e two sections are
intimately connected since the methodology of resear on reform is
conditioned by the necessity of resear being itself part of the reform
process: models for su self-referential resear exist in mathematics
education, but it may be that these have their clearest application in reform
movement resear. Moreover, since, as we have said, reform resear
must be reflective, the sometimes uneasy relationship between research and
practice must itself be a maer the researer on reform must both
confront and study.
Following this discussion, we set out two central directions for reform
resear. e ﬁrst, whi we place under the general heading
“communication,” concerns the complexity of reform in its most literal
sense, namely, its embracing of diﬀerent populations representing diﬀerent
interests, areas of expertise, and needs—a diversity providing fertile ground
for cooperation and mutual enriment, but also for misunderstanding and

tension. e second direction concerns the problem at the heart of reform
phenomena, the problem of ange. Reform has everything to do with
ange: researers on reform must consider how reform eﬀects ange
and especially the response to ange. e laer is particularly important
since recent reforms have been conceived with an eye to the rapid anges
in society, knowledge, and tenology. At another level, the response to
ange includes also a la of response or resistance to ange; one aspect
of this that we will highlight is ange that is not ange, the mere
appearance of change that we call pseudo-change.
As some ﬁnal words, we will reiterate a point lying beneath the surface
throughout our apter, namely that reform resear must be ever
cognizant of the place of values in processes of reform. is is so for the
simple reason that the researer, in wishing to bring about a ange and
needing to explain and justify a ange, must give ﬁrm aention to the
deﬁnition of ends. But deﬁning ends means deﬁning desirable ends; it is for
this reason, at boom, that reform researers must be completely
cognizant of the question of values. estions of content, in this regard, can
never be completely value-neutral, keeping in mind that even “usefulness”
is a value! So, deﬁning ends must take place in a wide forum involving the
views not only of other mathematics education researers but also of
mathematicians, scientists, philosophers, and historians. is, together with
the general complexity of reform, suggests that reform resear may in fact
involve a cooperative eﬀort among these diﬀerent intellectual disciplines
rather than a narrow subspecialty of mathematics education resear. e
chapter ends, therefore, with a call for such cooperation.
Before beginning, we ought to say a word about what is not included in
this apter—for properly treating the subject of reform and how it should
ﬁgure in mathematics education resear requires a monograph (at least!),
and so in a apter as short as this one we have to remain silent about
material that otherwise would be criminal to leave out. First, we give only

limited detail about speciﬁc reform movements in the past. is is
particularly lamentable since the study of reform must be to a greater
extent than other forms of mathematics education resear a historical
enterprise; indeed, one is likely to gain more by the long perspective of
time than the critical examination (not always disinterested) of modern
developments. at said, we can refer the reader to a longer version of this
apter that contains mu of the missing historical detail, namely, Amit
and Fried (2008), as well as older works su as Howson, Keitel, and
Kilpatri (1981) and Griﬃths and Howson (1979), whi contain broad
overviews of past reforms. Finally—and this we say truly with a heavy
heart—lile aention is given to the many questions connected to social
justice, including immigrant and low-income populations. We justify this
move on the grounds that these many questions are very close to those
asked by the extensive resear being done speciﬁcally on social justice in
mathematics education. e large collection of papers in Atweh, Graven,
Secada, and Valero (2011) is a source we can recommend.

Research as a Component and Result of Reform
As we stated at the outset, even when it is being most theoretical, the
ultimate end of mathematics education resear must be the improvement
of mathematics education, so that almost all mathematics education
resear in this sense could be connected with the reform of mathematics
education. Certainly this is true of eﬀorts directed towards curriculum
design and development, learning materials, and learning environments.
Moreover, the role constructivist theories occupy in the National Council of
Teaers of Mathematics Standards (NCTM, 1989, 2000), for example, show
how basic resear can be a component of a reform in mathematics
education. Basic resear cannot determine the values towards whi a
reform strives (see Amit & Fried, 2008), but it is plain that reform would be
empty without resear. In the more recent reforms, at least, the inﬂuence
of resear has been weighty indeed. e curious fact is that the inﬂuence
has tended to be mutual, that is, not only has resear shaped reform, but
reform has also shaped resear! is is clear when one considers that the
period in whi a genuine community of researers in mathematics
education began to crystallize was precisely the period of major reform in
the 1950s and 1960s (see Kilpatri, 1992, pp. 23–29). And this was true not
only of the resear community in the United States, but also in Europe.
One need only look at the development of the Commission Internationale
pour l’Etude et Amélioration de l’Enseignment des Mathématiques
(CIEAEM), whi, beginning in 1950, simultaneously became a nucleus of
reform, as its name promised, and, under the leadership of Gaengo, an
active forum for resear aiming to bring together “epistemologists,
logicians, psychologists, mathematicians, pedagogues” (Félix, 1998, p. 18).
A telling example of how reform aﬀects resear was the National
Longitudinal Study of Mathematical Abilities (NLSMA) set up in 1961 to
assess the eﬀorts of the Sool Mathematics Study Group (SMSG). e

NLSMA, for all its faults and despite its questionable value as an instrument
of assessment for the “new math,” was truly a consequence of the “new
math” reform and did have a tremendous inﬂuence on the course of
educational research. About this, Kilpatrick (1992 says:
[e NLSMA] brought together psyologists and mathematicians to develop instruments for
assessing reasoning ability, the ability to apply mathematics in nonroutine contexts, and
aitudes toward various facets of mathematics—instruments that were used in both subsidiary
and ensuing resear studies. It developed and reﬁned new teniques for analyzing the multiple
eﬀects of complex treatments on nonrandomly osen groups. And it trained quite a few
researchers in mathematics education.
(p. 29)
In this connection, it is worth noting that some of the basic themes
developed later by the NLSMA were already beginning to take form in
1959, only a year aer the SMSG itself was founded. On a recommendation
from the Advisory Committee, Begle set up an ad hoc committee consisting
of three distinguished psyologists who “outline a plan for some needed
resear [regarding psyological problems relevant to the teaing of
mathematics]. SMSG was particularly interested in evaluating the
eﬀectiveness of its new mathematics programs in relation to ildren’s
aitudes, motives, anxieties, and skills” (Wooton, 1965, p. 56–57, 95–96).
e example of the NLSMA is important since it shows that the growth
and development of a resear community during the reform years of the
1950s and 60s was not by ance, but actively encouraged as a natural part
of the reform process.
Su encouragement, of course, is equally aracteristic of the Standards
period in the 1990s and early 2000s, as can be seen in this statement by
Romberg and Collins (2000):
Propelled by the need to educate all of America’s students to levels of aievement in
mathematics and science not thought possible over a decade ago, the allenge of the reform
movement is to create classrooms where all students have the opportunity to understand

mathematical and scientiﬁc ideas. is assertion is based on the belief that there is a direct and
powerful relationship between student understanding and student aievement. In fact, the way
to aieve the high expectations that we have for all students rests on their understanding of
important mathematical and scientiﬁc ideas taught in sool classrooms by professional
teaers. is allenge needs to be addressed directly by researers so that real ange in the
teaing and learning of mathematics and science occurs in the next decade. A sustained
resear program, conducted collaboratively with sool personnel in sool classrooms, needs to
be carried out.
(pp. 82–82)
e statement shows clearly how reform sets an agenda for action,
informed by resear as well as the social importance of mathematics
education, and in doing so it simultaneously sets an agenda for resear
itself, thus illustrating and reinforcing the idea that the reform movement
and the resear community mutually inﬂuence and shape one another.
How this mutual dependence between resear and reform may also bring
in political and social considerations is an area necessary to investigate in
itself. But we need now to move on to consider “reform resear,” its
aracteristics and its place in the general community of researers and
educators. For, to date, there is no explicit subﬁeld of resear in
mathematics education called “reform resear,” and it is the main purpose
of this apter to give a sket of some aspects of what su resear ought
to be.

“Reform Researchers” and Their Methodologies
Even in the brief description just given, one can see how a community of
researers can crystallize in times of reform. It is one of the laudable
aspects of the resear community in general that it is, truly, a community;
it is not so specialized that researers in the diﬀerent branes of
mathematics education resear cannot ﬁnd common ground and a
common language. Reform researers must be members of this same
community, however, their relationship to it is unique because of the nature
of the inquiry to whi they are dedicated. is is for the simple reason that
reform movements, whether by design or necessity, take in almost all
aspects of mathematics education. ey take in content, and thus,
curriculum development; they take in means, and thus, teaing methods,
learning environments, and tenology; they take in societal needs, and
thus, national priorities and economic development, as well as social justice
and empowerment. Connected with all of these, moreover, is an
unavoidable concern with values, for as one writer put it, all education is
“value saturated” (Egan, 2005, p. 39). But what distinguishes a reform from
other aempts at improving education is the necessity of seeing all these
aspects as an integrated whole. One can say then that the reform process
aims at a systemic improvement of education; that is, it takes as its object
not curriculum or teaing style or learning environments individually, but
an entire matrix combining content, means, social needs, and values with
the populations of students, teachers, researchers, parents, and politicians.
To make a biological analogy, the reform process is directed towards the
ecology of education (see Goodlad, 1987). e ecological viewpoint of the
living world takes into account physiology, genetics, emistry, and so on
insofar as these contribute to making the living world a single complex
system; the reform process is similarly directed towards a single complex
system. e resear community, as we have seen, is an essential part of

that system, deﬁning it and being deﬁned by it. us, just as the human
beings who study ecological systems are simultaneously part of su
systems, researers of reform are, in the same way, part of the object they
study. is can be said, to some degree, also about other branes of
resear in mathematics education, but there is a diﬀerence. In most kinds
of educational resear, the eﬀect of researers must be taken into account
only because the ideal situation in whi researers have no eﬀect on their
subject, in whi they are unseen, unheard, and unfelt observers, can never
be fully realized. In reform resear, by contrast, the researer is essential
part of the object of resear. Moreover, because researers are no less
part of the general resear community than any other kinds of researers,
they are as mu deﬁning and being deﬁned by reform, the very thing they
are studying. ese considerations have immediate implications for the
question of methodology.
Traditional resear methodology, based on the methodological ideal in
the natural sciences, aims to keep researers apart from the phenomena
being studied, both with respect to the researers’ physical presence and to
their values and particular worldview; the methodology of reform resear,
by contrast, must conceive of the researer as taking part in the process of
reform and possessing deﬁnite values and goals. In some sense, the way
reform researers are themselves entangled in their subject is parallel to
the position of the sociologist or historian, and, indeed, the study of reform
is in some degree the study of an historical process. Interestingly enough,
historiography too, like educational resear, at one time aimed to be
“simply a science, no less and no more” (Bury, 1956, p. 223), and, like
educational resear, eventually came to accept, for the most part, a view
such as this of the historian E. H. Carr (1967):
Human beings are not only the most complex and variable of natural entities, but they have to
be studied by other human beings, not be independent observers of another species … e
sociologist, the economist, or the historian needs to penetrate into forms of human behaviour in

whi the will is active, to ascertain why the human beings who are the object of his study will
to act as they did. is sets up a relation, whi is peculiar to history and the social sciences,
between the observer and what is observed. e point of view of the historian enters irrevocable
into every observation which he makes; history is shot through and through with relativity.
(p. 70)
e lesson of this is that reform resear must give an account of a process
from an insider’s point of view; therefore, it must, like the historian’s
account, be reﬂective and even introspective. e methodology that ﬂows
from this alone is something similar to what Howson et al. (1981, p. 195)
call an “oﬃcial biography” or the “rigorous journal.” e most well-known
examples, although they were not necessarily intended to be rigorous
assessments of a reform (as Wooton (1965, p. vii) makes a point of saying),
were certainly Wooton’s 1965 account of the Sool Mathematics Study
Group (SMSG) (Wooton, 1965), and waites’ 1972 account of the British
response to the allenge of Sputnik, the Sool Mathematics Project
(SMP). In principle, however, there is no reason why su “oﬃcial
biographies” could not be rigorous examinations in the way biographies’
historical ﬁgures can also be a work of rigorous solarship. It may well be,
in fact, that a wrien quasi-historical account is the best way to take sto
of the reform movement’s accomplishments and reﬂect on the rightness of
the goals it set for itself and the values it assumed. An account su as this
can be factual and, at the same time, be reﬂective in a way tomes of
statistics can never be. In this connection, it is telling that in a recent volume
edited by Senk and ompson (2003) on the progress of the Standards-
Based Reform movement the ﬁrst and last parts are decidedly historical in
character.
But reform researers are not only insiders, they are active insiders; an
account is not enough, rather, it must bring researers and the other
players in the reform process into the circle of deﬁning and being deﬁned
by the reform. e methodology of reform resear must, therefore,

answer both the need to be reflective and the need to be active.
ere are some existing models for this kind of resear. One that comes
quily to mind is action resear or participatory resear. Carr and
Kemmis (1986) describe action research as follows:
Action resear is simply a form of self-reﬂective enquiry undertaken by participants in social
situations in order to improve the rationality and justice of their own practices, their
understanding of these practices, and the situations in which the practices are carried out.
(p. 162)
Even from this short description, it is plain that action resear contains
many of the elements that we have described as desiderata for reform
resear: it is reﬂexive, that is, there is no clear division between the
researer and the researed; it considers ends and values; and it is
directed towards action (e.g. Di, 1999; Ellio, 1978). Moreover, action
resear also employs su means as journal writing, whi are themselves
consistent with the methodological modes for reform resear that we have
already mentioned. As Ellio (1978) describes, “In explaining ‘what is going
on’ action resear tells a ‘story’ about the event by relating it to a context
of mutually interdependent contingencies, i.e. events whi ‘hang together’
because they depend on each other for their occurrence” (p. 356).
An important aspect of action resear is its cyclical 
or iterative
aracter. It alternates between action and reﬂection. Moreover, cycles are
contained in cycles: “Larger cycles span whole phases of a resear
program” (Di, 1999, p. 3). ese wider cycles continually broaden and
deepen the teaers’ and all other participants’ understanding, and can also
broaden the range of participation, including “professional” researers
whose own ﬁeld of action goes beyond the individual classroom. is is
important, for it answers two apparent weaknesses of action resear as a
model for reform resear methodology, namely, 1) that the participants
may not possess the appropriate theoretical baground to reﬂect deeply

enough on their practice; 2) that action resear seems to be local in nature
(a single classroom, a single sool) whereas reform is very broad in scope
and must see the classroom in a very broad context. e fact that there is
cycling at all means that the theoretical baground whi the
“professional” researer supposedly possesses is not a ﬁxed body of
knowledge, but knowledge continually being reviewed and revised in the
cycling process, and that the “professional” researer and teaer-
researer alike, therefore, must view themselves as learners and partners
in learning. Moreover, this partnership in learning, whi ideally should be
ever expanding (see Di, 1999, p. 4), aﬀords the researer the broad view
appropriate to the phenomenon of reform.
e cyclical aracter of action resear and its focus on practice is
shared also by the Japanese Lesson Study, popularized in the West by
Stigler and Hiebert’s well-known book, e Teaing Gap  (Stigler &
Hiebert, 1999). With some variations, the Lesson Study consists of four
stages: 1) an investigation (involving examination of content and speciﬁc
teaing goals); 2) the lesson planning; 3) the “resear lesson” in whi the
lesson is carried out and data on its relative success or failure are collected;
4) reﬂection and improvement (Lewis, Perry, & Hurd, 2009; see also
Shimizo, 1999). What is signiﬁcant is that this cycle of practice and
reﬂection is done collaboratively–and this can occur not only at the local
level of a sool but also at higher levels. For this reason, the Lesson Study
has great ability to create a working community of teaers and
researers, as stressed by Gunnarsdóir and Pálsdóir (2011) in their work
on the Lesson Study in Iceland. It also has the ability to engage researers
and practitioners directly in the aempt to implement and, most important
for us, to understand a reform (Perry & Lewis, 2009, give particular
aention to this aspect of the Lesson Study approa): it is, like all
participatory approaes, a means of reform as well as a means of
examining reform in a continuous, iterative fashion.

Needless to say, the approaes for reform resear methodology given
here are consistent with general contemporary trends in mathematics
education. For example, in describing “Some Shis in Emphasis in
Educational Resear in Mathematics and Science” Kelly and Lesh, (2000, p.
37, Table 2.1) note, among other shis: less emphasis on “researer
remoteness or stances of ‘objectivity’” and more emphasis on “researer
engagement, participant-observer roles”; less emphasis on “researer as
expert: the judge of the eﬀectiveness of knowledge transmission using
prescripted measures” and more emphasis on “researer as coconstructor
of knowledge: a learner-listener who values the perspective of the
researer subject, who practices self-reﬂexivity”; less emphasis on “simple
cause-and-eﬀect or correlational models” and more emphasis on
“complexity theory; systems thinking; organic and evolutionary models of
learning and system ange.” Underlying these trends is the general
understanding that resear must be aracterized by a diversity of
methodologies. It is evident, thus, that if general educational resear is
marked by a diversity of methodologies, the same must be true, a fortiori
for reform resear whose complex object demands many views to arrive
at some sense of the whole. us, diﬀerent methodologies su as those
contained in the historiographical and action resear models, presented
earlier, must be brought together as complementary parts of a whole
reform research effort.
But now we must turn to two main areas that reform resear must keep
within its sight. ese are, as we said, communication, and the problem of
change, the response to change, and “pseudo-change.”

Communication
In the aempt to describe the situation of reform researer, we adopted
the metaphor of ecology. at metaphor served to emphasize the
fundamental fact that reform occurs at the level of an entire community of
interested parties and agents of ange, “policy makers” and “policy
agents” (Niss, 2014), and researers of all types. us, in the student-
teaer-researer-parent-politician complex, reform researers have a
central role in building an intellectual foundation for the reform and in
communicating the principles of the reform to all those aﬀected by it, as
well as investigating breakdowns of communication. e lack of
communication between researers and the public and between
researers and mathematics teaers (and here, as we will see, researers
include mathematicians as well as mathematics educators) can truly
threaten the success of reform. How far that can happen was made clear in
an eloquent way by Usiskin (1999–2000) and again by Baista (1999).
Baista, in particular, implied that this la of communication is more than
the absence of communication, but almost active noncommunication
(mostly on the part of the public towards the resear community): “Too
oen the educational programs and methods used in sools are formulated
—by practitioners, administrators, laypeople, politicians, and professors of
education—with a total disregard for scientiﬁc resear” (Baista, 1999, p.
431, emphasis added). One must ask, however, whether the resear
community itself has done enough to foster an atmosphere of
communication.
Whatever the case, it is clear that the problem of communication is
critical and requires understanding to solve. For reform researers,
therefore, this problem of communication must be a central concern,
especially in one of its special forms: the problem of theory and practice.
Indeed, the degree to whi theory is put into practice is a reﬂection of the

mutual comprehension of researers and teaers. Obviously, it is in the
language of practice that the public, as well as teaers and students, will
come to know reform.
ere are four main annels through whi resear communicates to
teaers and to the public: 1) journals; 2) teaer-training courses; 3)
textbooks and other learning materials; 4) popular media. Teaer training
is by far the most direct and in some ways the ideal annel for
communication. In the context of general educational reform, Kennedy
(2005) tells us that teaers indicated professional training to be the most
signiﬁcant source of their own educational ange (p. 217). Even here,
though, communication should not be taken for granted. As Kennedy (2005)
goes on to point out:
sources of knowledge outside the classroom, su as professional development programs and
institutional policies, can have very strong and powerful inﬂuences on practice, even though
they oen don’t. eir inﬂuences are uneven, either because they are transient or because they
are inconsistently and unevenly communicated to teachers.
(p. 224)
But if professional training is potentially the most powerful annel by
whi resear can rea teaers, the annel via textbooks and other
learning material is the most common. Moreover, textbooks are probably
the most immediate determinants of practice. e process by whi
textbooks are produced and adopted also provides a good example of the
diﬃculties of communication, and, hence, ought to be among the foci of
reform research.
Ginsburg, Klein, and Starkey (1998) have examined the process of
textbook production and dissemination in the United States, highlighting
the complicated dynamics existing among researers, government and
professional groups, publishers, and teaers. It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the ﬁrst
thread in this complex web of relationships, but the role of government is
as good a place as any to start. Ginsburg et al. (1998) explain that many

states “require publishers to receive oﬃcial approval before their textbooks
may be oﬀered for sale” (p. 432). e approval criteria used at the time by
many state governments relies heavily on the NCTM Standards (NCTM,
1989) and are informed by the resear community. e extent to whi
ideas from resear have inﬂuenced su approval can be seen in the 1992
version of the California Framework (California Department of Education,
1992) discussed in some detail by Ginsburg, et al. (1998) :
Drawing on its interpretation of constructivism, the California Framework requires what some in
the state have seen as a radical approa to the creation of textbooks. e Framework decrees
that, to be adopted by sools in California, curriculum materials must stress meaningful
learning, the construction of knowledge, independent thinking, and extended investigations and
explorations; and the Framework requires publishers to downplay rote learning, memorization,
and the passive absorption of knowledge.
(p. 433)
Editorial staﬀs of publishers accommodate the state criteria by studying the
Standards, by reading NCTM journals su as Teaing Children
Mathematics, and by aending professional conferences. Moreover, “e
editorial staﬀ are oen former teaers and other individuals with a sincere
interest in helping ildren learn” (Ginsburg et al. (1998), p. 434). In this
connection, it is important to point out that the role of the editorial staﬀ in
producing a textbook goes beyond being a mere forum where books are
accepted or rejected; the editorial staﬀ and, for that maer, the marketing
staﬀ have great inﬂuence not only on the ﬁnal form of a textbook but also
on its content.
With government approbation and encouragement of reform eﬀorts on
the one hand, and an earnest willingness of publishers to produce
acceptable material on the other, the circumstances seem perfect for a
smooth working relationship between researers, teaers, and the public
and a real opportunity for constructive communication. Unfortunately,
governments must consider voters and publishers, sales. is would remain

only a hypothetical issue if there were complete unanimity in support for
the general direction and speciﬁc details of the reform, but this is never the
case. ere are those who object to ange in principle, that what is
traditional is best a priori. ere are those who simply do not understand
the reform at hand, and there those who do understand it but reject the
values it promotes. Some of these objections are rational and some are not,
but they all can contribute to a heated atmosphere that the popular press is
ever willing to report and that politician and publisher alike cannot ignore.
e brunt of these pressures and counterpressures is largely borne by the
publisher, and “e result,” writes Ginsburg et al. (1998, p. 437) “is a
complex series of compromises. Given the goal of maximizing sales (and
proﬁts), publishers naturally wish to have their textbook cake and eat it too.
To some extent, publishers try to satisfy all sides in the controversy.” So,
instead of producing textbooks with a clear strategy and clear outlook,
publishers tend to produce textbooks rife with mixed messages.
e help su textbooks can provide in informing teaers’ classroom
practice is moot, and the damage they may cause in the hands of teaers
who have qualms about the merits of reform can be great. One must never
forget that textbooks must be used, and the way they are used depends on
the readiness and understanding of the user. Again as Ginsburg et al. (1998)
puts it:
But consider the extent to whi the resear-oriented textbook pages make demands on
teaers. ese pages do not oﬀer a cookbook for teaing; they are not “teaer-proof.” Just the
opposite is true: the constructivist approa depends on the intelligence of the teaer, who must
construct an understanding of the ild’s learning in order to foster it. To use these pages,
teaers must think in a ﬂexible manner, responding to the needs and unique constructions of
individual ildren. Textbook pages are merely a resource; they can set direction but cannot
guarantee what teachers will do.
(pp. 440–441)
So, communication between researers and teaers through the annel

of textbooks can break down ﬁrst at the stage where the textbook is
produced and then—partly because of the way the textbook is ﬁnally
produced—at the stage where the textbook is actually used in the
classroom. e problem is compounded by the ability of textbooks to
appear to satisfy reform recommendations and of teaers to appear to use
them with understanding and in the right spirit—an ability that mirrors that
uncanny ability of people to appear as if they are engaged in genuine
dialogue though no one is genuinely listening or genuinely trying to
communicate ideas.
e failure to communicate through the annel of textbooks may be
inherent in the nature of textbooks themselves. We have spoken about the
obstacles to producing a textbook that reﬂects clearly and consistently what
resear has found out about learning and teaing mathematics. However,
the mere fact that teaers and students are meant to be a final destination
for textbooks and that, ideally, a textbook aims to be inclusive and
authoritative, means that as a annel of communication textbooks are
essentially one-way: researers, writers, and editorial staﬀs stand on one
end, disseminating reform ideas to teaers and students who stand on the
other. But for theory and practice to meet, communication must be two-
way and continuous. As Lesh and Lovis, 2000, say, “In mathematics and
science education, the ﬂow of information between researers, and
practitioners is not the kind of one-way process that is suggested by su
terms as information dissemination. Instead, to be eﬀective, the ﬂow of
information usually must be cyclic, iterative, and interactive” (p. 54).
However, at present it is diﬃcult to see what kind of published learning
material could bring about this sort of two-way and continuous
communication. Yet, it is imperative to try and ﬁnd su material. e
theoretical and practical problems with textbooks, thus, suggest that reform
researers must redeﬁne their own role in communicating ideas about
teaing and learning and, at the same time, explore new means of

communication—and, both these ends, of course, require a deep look at the
problem of communication itself.
A diﬀerent kind of failure of communication from that between
researers and teaers is a communication gap within the resear
community itself, namely, between academic mathematicians and academic
mathematics educators. Since the 1990s, the relationship between these two
communities has been a roy one (see Amit & Fried, 2008, for a
description of the earlier prominence of mathematicians in mathematics
education and mathematics education reform). Gerald Goldin (2002) used
terms su as “asm,” “gulf,” and “divide” to describe the strained
relations between the two communities and identiﬁed fundamental
diﬀerences in their outlooks going beyond mere predilection (see also
Cuoco, 2003). is tension between university mathematics education
researers and university mathematicians means, then, that when one
speaks about the “academic resear community” one must be wary about
treating the academic community as one uniﬁed group: one must ask not
only whether the university dominates but also which part.
e potential for this tension to have a detrimental eﬀect on reform
eﬀorts can be seen in the atmosphere surrounding the validation commiee
of the Common Core State Standards. Many of the figures on the validation
commiee were educational or mathematics educational researers as
well as teaers and educational administrators. Although it is true there
were few mathematicians on the commiee, it must be said that one of the
lead writers of the Mathematics Standards (Common Core State Standards
Initiative, 2012), William McCallum, was a prominent university
mathematician. Nevertheless, another mathematician, James Milgram, who
sat on the original validation commiee, gave testimony for Indiana Senate
Education Panel opposing the Common Core, saying that, “[e Common
Core and Indiana] standards were authored with the help of the
professional 
mathematics 
community 
as 
distinguished 
from 
the

mathematical education community. But—as someone who was at the
middle of overseeing the writing process—my main duty on the CCSSO
[Council for Chief State Sool Oﬃcers] Validation Commiee—it became
clear that the professional math community input to CCSSI was oen
ignored” (Milgram, 2013).
But diﬀerence does not have to lead to tension. at the university does
not speak with a single voice—if it remains within the bounds of cultured
academic debate—may in fact provide an opportunity to deepen our
understanding for what is needed for ange. This potential can be seen in
the series of discussions between mathematicians (including, interestingly
enough, James Milgram) and mathematics educators that led the document,
“Reaing for Common Ground in K–12 Mathematics Education” (Ball et
al. (2005)); that document outlined “fundamental premises” shared by both
groups and speciﬁc “areas of agreement” on the improvement of
mathematics education. Jeremy Kilpatri, who was also a participant in
these discussions—and who also sat on the Common Core State Standards
validation commiee—makes it clear, however, that cooperation does not
always come with fireworks:
My experience with the Common Ground Commiee, whose work was funded by the National
Science Foundation and Texas Instruments., was similar to an experience I had had some three
decades earlier with Morris Kline, one of the most outspoken critics of the new math in U.S.
sools. When you have a conversation with people who have expressed strong views about a
topic like sool mathematics, and you get them away from microphones and reporters—or in
today’s world, away from tweets and blogs—they moderate their language substantially. You
discover that there are many areas of mutual agreement that might not have surfaced
previously. Consequently, I strongly believe that mathematicians and mathematics educators
already occupy considerable common ground.
(Kilpatrick, 2014, p. 342)
How to provide the conditions allowing the potential for cooperation to
overcome the potential for tension between the disciplines of mathematics
and mathematics education is hardly self-evident and needs to be studied

(Fried & Dreyfus, 2014). Mathematical training or mathematics educational
training alone cannot be suﬃcient, but both are necessary; knowledge of
the values and aims of both together, perhaps, with a modicum of conﬂict
management, are essential ingredients to progress on this front.

Change, the Response to Change, and Pseudo-
Change
e most obvious set of questions with whi reform resear must be
concerned is that set of questions related to ange: for reform is all about
ange; a reform movement is both an agent of ange and a response to
ange. As an agent of ange, it must be ever cognizant of students,
teaers, researers, parents, and politicians as a single complex. As a
response to ange, it must take into account not only the state of
mathematical knowledge and of research in mathematics education but also
of society and its needs. us, these two aspects of ange organize that
matrix of factors whi, as we said earlier, aracterize the object of
reform.
e basic questions one would think to ask about reform as an agent of
ange are questions su as: How can ange be eﬀected? Is ange truly
being eﬀected? When and how can one judge the results of ange? Given
the complex picture of reform that we have been developing until now—in
whi the distinction between researer and practitioner, between mover
and moved, is blurred, and in whi there is mu interaction and mutual
inﬂuence among all those involved in reform—these questions, simple and
obvious though they may seem, must be put somewhat diﬀerently. e
basic question in this light ought to be: How do teaers and researers
learn and change while at the very same time be facilitators of change?
e question can be asked equally, and more tellingly, in a negative
form: What happens when the cycle of learning and doing is broken? is
would be a trivial question if the breaking of that cycle meant the
unambiguous cessation of the reform eﬀort, but that is rarely the case. Most
oen the resulting failure of reform is, rather, a kind of pseudo-ange or
“pseudo-reform”: materials are produced that seem to conform to reform
recommendations but, in truth, embody the very practices the reform aims

to amend (see Ginsburg, et al. (1998), pp. 434, 438). Teaers use reform
material in class, perhaps even aend in-service courses and programs on
reform principles, yet oen persist teaing in a way completely against the
spirit of the reform (as Robert B. Davis used to say “ey’ve got the words,
but not the music”)—oen because of aievement-oriented administrators
who also appear to accept reform ideas! Pseudo-reform is the expression of
the failure to ange and also a barrier to further ange; it is, thus, exactly
the negation of the process of anging and being anged that signiﬁes
healthy reform. Making pseudo-reform an object for reﬂection within the
cycle of learning and doing, accordingly, can at once invigorate and
safeguard that cycle.
We might remark in passing that the phenomenon of pseudo-reform is
probably also behind the curious fact that writers on one reform or another
oen refer to the problem of drills and memorization as if these were
advocated by the previous generation of reformers. Of course, the truth is
that hardly anyone who has thought at all deeply about education ever
completely advocated drills and memorization. is applies not only to
modern thinkers, but also thinkers as far ba as Milton and Montaigne—
and even Plato, who, for example, teases his companion Phaedrus for
merely memorizing without truly understanding a tract on love. Even the
Jesuits, who used to say Repetitio mater studiorum est [!], did not think that
memorization was the only mother of studies. e problem seems to be
that it is all too easy (and sometimes all too convenient!) to mistake the
non-reform practices—drilling and memorizing—hidden under the guise of
reform for the reform itself! Understanding pseudo-reform and learning to
recognize it is thus essential not only for the success of a present reform, but
also for the fair evaluation of past reforms.
e next question (What is the proper pace of reform?) bridges the two
aspects of ange and reform. Clearly, it can be taken as a question about
implementation, and therefore a question about reform as an agent of

ange. For example, one of the important aracteristics of curriculum
development projects, whi are usually connected with reform
movements, is that they set for themselves a deﬁnite period of time to
accomplish their goals (Griﬃths & Howson, 1979, pp. 145–146). Prescribing
the amount of time for a project seems to go against the view of reform in
whi methods and strategies are continually being redeﬁned (that is,
always being emergent); it appears problematic in the way that seing a
deﬁnite time for an open and free dialogue is. Yet, whether it is for a
dialogue or a reform project, a speciﬁed time period is certainly a practical
necessity. So the reform researer must surely ask how to balance this
practical need of deﬁning a sedule for reform with the ﬂexibility needed
for methods and strategies to be truly emergent.
The question of pace also brings us directly to questions related to reform
as a response to ange. is is particularly true with regards to recent
reform movements su as Standards-based reform. ese movements
have been conditioned by the assumption that the world is rapidly changing
and that mathematics education must ange with it. ough this may be a
slight oversimpliﬁcation, we can say that there are three, not uerly
distinct, ways relevant to mathematics education in whi the world is
understood to be anging: 1) in the state of mathematical knowledge and
knowledge in mathematics education; 2) in the demands of society and
economy; 3) in the means available for communication, production, and
scientiﬁc inquiry. ese require a corresponding educational response as to
content, ends, and means.
e anging state of mathematical and scientiﬁc knowledge was
obviously behind the “modernization” motive of the “new-math” reform.
e anges that this implied for mathematics education had to do largely
with the selection of mathematical topics and the mode in whi the
selected topics should be presented. In any time of reform, however, the
way the reform responds to the ange in mathematical knowledge is

deeply connected with the way mathematical knowledge grows.
Now, the growth of mathematical knowledge is a rather complex
process involving both a cumulative body of knowledge—specific
mathematical theorems, objects, concepts, and procedures—and shiing
views as to what is important in mathematics, what should be considered
rigorous, and even what is a proper mathematical object (what Elkana has
called images of knowledge; see, for example, Corry, 1989; Davis & Hersh,
1981, Elkana, 1981). Leo Corry (1989) describes the distinction as follows:
e body of knowledge includes theories, “facts,” methods, and open problems. e images of
knowledge serve as guiding principles, or selectors; they pose and resolve questions that arise
from the body of knowledge, but are not part of and cannot be seled within the body of
knowledge itself. For example, the images of knowledge help to resolve su questions as the
following: Which of the open problems of the discipline most urgently demands attention?
(p. 411)
While it is oen diﬃcult to separate the body from the images of
mathematical knowledge, the way reform responds to ange here must, in
general, take both these aspects of mathematical ange into account. How
images of knowledge may play a part can be seen, for example, in
diminished importance of classical geometry during the “new math”
reform. at reordering of mathematical priorities was partly the result of a
view of mathematics in whi logico-algebraic structure was taken to be
the true heart of the subject. With that, Dieudonné could say, “the whole
course [of plane Euclidean geometry] might, I think be taled in two or
three hours—one of them being occupied by the descriptions of the axiom
system, one by its useful consequences and possibly a third one by a few
mildly interesting exercises” (in Howson et al., 1981, p. 102). A diﬀerent
image of mathematical knowledge played a part in determining the
mathematical content of the standards-based reform. About that, Kilpatri
(1997) pointed out, “A large part of the standards-based reform is built of
the view that mathematics itself has become more computational and less

formal” (p. 957). For the reform researer, then, it is important to maintain
a ﬁrm awareness that during a period of reform teaers and students may
have to accustom themselves not only to new topics but also to new ways
of thinking about the general aracter of mathematics. at said, because
t h e body of mathematical knowledge is cumulative and that new
knowledge rarely contradicts the old, the sool mathematics program
tends to have a relatively stable core. Researers, teaers and students
have some base from whi they can build the new ways of thinking
entailed by reform.
e nonlinear anges in the images of knowledge share the aracter of
and are partly dependent on equally nonlinear anges in the conditions
and demands of society and the economy. is has always been true to
some extent, but today the rate of these societal and economic anges is,
perhaps, unprecedented. e implications for education are clear. As Hass
(1964) noted already 50 years ago, “ange is so rapid in our innovating,
industrial society, that today’s education is unsuited for tomorrow’s world
and is as outmoded as the Model-T for the world of 20 years from
tomorrow—the world whose leaders are now in the classrooms of
America” (p. 143, emphasis added). Changing demands of the economy, in
particular, were among the central preoccupations of the NCTM Standards
(NCTM, 1989, 2000) and justiﬁed seing the goal of encouraging of
“mathematically literate workers”:
e economic status quo in whi factory employees work the same jobs to produce the same
goods in the same manner for decades is a throwba to our industrial-age past. Today,
economic survival and growth are dependent on new factories established to produce complex
products and services with very short market cycles. It is a literal reality that before the ﬁrst
products are sold, new replacements are being designed for an ever-anging market….
Traditional notions of basic mathematical competence have been outstripped by ever-higher
expectations of the skills and knowledge of workers; new methods of production demand a
tenologically competent work force. e U.S. Congressional Oﬃce of Tenology Assessment
(1988) claims that employees must be prepared to understand the complexities and tenologies
of communication, to ask questions, to assimilate unfamiliar information, and to work

cooperatively in teams. Businesses no longer seek workers with strong bas, clever hands, and
“shopkeeper” arithmetic skills.
(NCTM, 1989, p. 3)
at the same economic concern is still at work today can be seen, for
example, in Dan Ben-David’s response to Israel’s poor performance on the
PISA examinations:
A country in perpetual danger since its birth cannot allow itself to whither economically or
tenologically and it will continue to be required to develop abilities that do not exist in other
countries. A small economy that needs to withstand existential pressures in su a hostile
neighborhood must understand that its economic future depends on tenological, scientiﬁc and
medical innovation. In this kind of a reality it is not too diﬃcult to understand the future
implications of providing its top pupils with an educational toolbox of poorer quality than that
provided by 24 or the 25 Western countries with whom Israel must compete in the global
marketplace.
(Ben-David, 2011, p. 334)
Unlike the anges in mathematical knowledge, it is unclear that in these
rapid-nonlinear anges there is any stable core of content on whi a
reform curriculum can be built. Obviously, for reform to respond by
continually anging the curriculum is neither feasible nor desirable. But
what is the right response to su anges? What kind of strategy should
curriculum designers adopt to answer these constantly anging economic
demands? e overall direction of the recent reforms has been to stress a
curriculum that makes the student ﬂexible and adaptable rather than
“learned.” Accordingly, the curriculum does not aim to provide speciﬁc
content but the conditions for learning and doing mathematics. us, in the
original Standards the NCTM set as one of the social goals of education
“lifelong learning” whereby “Problem solving—whi includes the ways in
whi problems are represented, the meanings of the language of
mathematics, and the ways in whi one conjectures and reasons—must be
central to sooling so that students can explore, create, accommodate to

anged conditions, and actively create new knowledge over the course of
their lives” (NCTM, 1989, p. 4). In other words, the very general notions
stressed by the Standards—problem solving, mathematical reasoning,
communication—embody the ideal of a mathematically educated person as
one capable of learning mathematics, that is, one who has a well-based
potential for acquiring and using speciﬁc mathematical content. is is why
the 1989 Standards summarized the NCTM’s outlook with the expression
“mathematical power.” It is worth pointing out in this connection that
power and potential share the same Latin root: posse, “to be able” or
“capable.”
is emphasis on potential to learn mathematical content is seen also in
reform ideas that are keenly interested in maintaining a connection with
concrete mathematical content. For example, one has the Danish
competencies approa, KOM, (Niss & Højgaard, 2011). Niss describes its
core as follows:
Possessing mathematical competence—i.e. mastering mathematics—is an individual’s capability
and readiness to act appropriately, and in a knowledge-based manner, in situations and contexts
in which mathematics actually plays or potentially could play a role.
A mathematical competency is a distinct major constituent in mathematical competence. e
KOM Project identiﬁes eight su mathematical competencies: Mathematical thinking;
Mathematical 
problem 
handling; 
Mathematical 
modelling; 
Mathematical 
reasoning;
Representing 
mathematically; 
Handling 
mathematical 
symbolism 
and 
formalism;
Communicating mathematically; Dealing with (physical) aids and tools for mathematical
activity.
(Niss, 2014, p. 270)
To some extent this can also be seen in the notion of Habits of Mind
developed by June Mark, Al Cuoco, and Paul Goldenberg (see Goldenberg,
2014), whi has been adopted by the Common Core State Standards.
Indeed, the connection between competencies and “habits of mind” is made
explicitly in this statement from the California Orange County department
of education site:

e introductions to both the English language arts and mathematics CCSS [Common Core
State Standards] include descriptions of 21st Century Competencies. ese cognitive and
psyological aptitudes are described in the English language arts standards as “Capacities” and
in the mathematics standards as “Practices.”. ese are referred to as “Habits of Mind” whi
operate in tandem with the academic content in the standards.
(OCDE, 2011)
Making modes of thinking, rather than speciﬁc objects of thought, the
focus of the mathematics program may well be the answer to the problem
of providing relatively stable curricula able to respond to the unstable ever-
anging demands of society and the economy. It is certainly an answer
very mu in line with a rationalist tradition that, since Descartes at least,
gives method precedence over substance—a tradition in whi general
education in modern democracies is deeply entrenched (see Brann, 1979, pp.
129–149). But that same tradition is fraught with diﬃculties. us, while we
may tentatively accept the general approa of reform programs leaning in
this direction, what the right educational response to our rapidly anging
society must remain a question and subject of inquiry for reform research.
e problem of anging means available for communication,
production, and scientiﬁc inquiry, is, of course, the problem of tenology.
In some respects, the diﬃculties for reform arising from the pace of
tenological ange are the same as those just discussed, as are the
approaes open to reform to solve those diﬃculties. However, a few more
words are in order.
Although there are those who think that the use of graphing calculators
and computers can dull mathematical thinking (e.g., Neal Koblitz, 1996), it is
fair to say that most see tenology as an unavoidable and welcome aspect
of the modern world (see Wong, 2003 for an overview of the issues
connected with curriculum). Roitman (1997) lists four questions that she
reasonably takes to be the relevant questions concerning any use of
technology in the classroom:

What mathematics is reflected in the use of technology?
What eﬀorts are made to ensure that the mathematics is signiﬁcant
and correct?
How does the use of tenology engage students in realistic and
worthwhile mathematical activities?
How does the use of tenology elicit the use or enable deeper
understanding of mathematics that it is important to know and be able
to do? (p. 7)
Roitman’s four questions are no less pertinent today and are still addressed
in one form or another in the vast and ever-growing literature on
tenology in mathematics education: Jim Kaput, who was a leading ﬁgure
and pioneer among this group of researers, addressed many of these
questions directly or in connection with his development of SimCalc. But
here reform resear risks stepping out of its bailiwi, for the proper
consideration of Roitman’s questions really demands precisely the kind of
independent resear eﬀort that Kaput and others like him have pursued. It
is clear, though, that the degree to whi expectations of a tenology-
oriented reform are fulﬁlled is proportional to the seriousness with whi
these questions are asked—and for this reform resear does have a role in
providing and developing models whereby these crucial questions are
continually asked and continually at work informing the cycling process of
practice and reﬂection. Just providing computers or graphing calculators in
the sools is obviously not enough, as has been recently pointed out
trenantly in a general context by Larry Cuban (2006). In fact, because
computers are physical objects one can point at—and oen very aractive
ones—merely supplying su tenology without teaers and researers
reﬂecting on their wise use can easily become a variety of pseudo-reform:
the technology becomes visible but ineffectual.

Concluding Thoughts: Content, Values, and
Cooperation
What we have just said about reform resear and tenology seems to
suggest that reform resear is concerned only that questions of content are
asked, how they are asked, and when they are asked, rather than with the
questions themselves. is is consistent with some of the other things we
have said about reform resear, for example, its overriding concern with
the existence, manner, and extent of communication. But is reform resear
really only concerned with the “meanics” of reform—only that there be
communication, but not what is being communicated, only that there be
questions, but not with the substance of the questions? Su a view would
be a distortion and deﬁnitely not consistent with one other point that we
emphasized about reform research, namely, that it be active.
We argued that the active involvement of reform resear in reform
followed from the very nature of reform in that its object is a complex-
interacting system of which researchers are themselves an integral part. The
reform researer is not only studying and monitoring the ﬂow of
information within that system ab extra, as it were, but is exanging ideas
with teaers, students, parents, and other researers, inﬂuencing them
and being inﬂuenced by them, wating ange occur and being anged.
e reform researer will, therefore, of necessity be continuously engaged
in a dialogue concerned with the content and the values of the reform.
A metaphor that helps clarify the peculiar position reform researers
occupy in this dialogue is that of moderators for discussions among experts.
In su discussions, moderators are not expected to have all the expertise of
the participants, but they are expected to be able to listen well and ask
guiding questions, and this, in turn, demands an intelligent grasp of the
content of the discussion. More than this, however, moderators must have
an acute awareness of the general picture arising out of the discussion, since

it is the responsibility of the moderator, not so mu that the discussion
rea this or that speciﬁc conclusion, but that discussion keeps its general
subject and general goals in sight. In short, the moderator must continually
coordinate the substance and ends of the discussion.
Where the discussion corresponds to the reform movement, the necessity
of su a coordination eﬀort is completely evident. For—as should be clear
from our considerations of the motives for reform—reform needs to be
viewed not as a mere corrective, but as a concrete expression of a total
vision of mathematics education. Moreover, this total vision is one arising
out of the eﬀorts and thoughts of all those involved in the reform eﬀort,
and of others too. By the laer, we have in mind (besides those involved in
ﬁelds of study and action concerned speciﬁcally with mathematics
education) also philosophers, anthropologists, sociologists, and historians, to
name a few.
is is all the more true in light of what was said earlier about images of
knowledge: our very understanding of mathematics and of the ends of
mathematics education is as mu determined by culture and society as by
logic and objective mental activity. us, the point of view of the historian
or the anthropologist should be of immense help in deﬁning the values
behind the seemingly detaed mathematics of the classroom. Mathematics
education, in this regard, must never be provincial. Reform resear, in
particular, must see itself fostering a sense of openness and of cooperation
among those concerned with a wide range of human activity.
In what we have said, we have really set out only the most basic
requirements of reform resear and only a very general picture of the
reform researer. For the laer especially we have had to rely on
numerous metaphors: the researer as ecologist, as complex-system
analyst, as discussion moderator. e need of su metaphors is a sign that
in speaking about reform resear we are speaking about something
genuinely new, something still laing deﬁnition, still laing precision. We

should like to see this new ﬁeld rea the same level of clarity aained by
other areas of educational resear. e only way this can be aieved is if
researers—guided by these general metaphors and released from all other
paradigms of educational resear—will go out into the ﬁeld, allow
themselves to become immersed in actual reform eﬀorts, and, yet, maintain
enough self-possession to soberly document what they ﬁnd. We believe this
represents a worthy allenge: it may, in fact, become emblematic for other
future challenges for educational research.

References
Amit, M., & Fried, M. N. (2008). The complexities of change: aspects of reform and reform research in
mathematics education. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of International Resear in Mathematics
Education (2nd Ed., pp. 385–414). New York: Routledge.
Atweh, B., Graven, M., Secada, W., & Valero, P. (Eds.) (2011). Mapping equity and quality in
mathematics education. Dordrecht: Springer
Ball, D. L., Ferrini-Mundy, J., Kilpatri, J., Milgram, J. R., Smid, W., & Saar, R. (2005). Reaing
for common ground in K–12 mathematics education. Notices of the American Mathematical
Society, 52(9), 1055–1058.
Baista, M. T. (1999). e mathematical miseducation of America’s youth. e Phi Delta Kappan,
80(6), 424–433.
Ben-David, D. (2011). Israel’s educational aievements: Updated international comparisons. In D.
Ben-David (Ed.), State of the nation report: Society, economy and policy in Israel 2010.
Jerusalem: Taub Center of Social Policy Studies in Israel.
Brann, E.T.H. (1979). Paradoxes of education in a republic. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bury, J. B. (1956). History as a science. In F. Stern (Ed.), e varieties of history  (pp. 209–223). New
York: Meridian Books.
California Department of Education (1992). Mathematics framework for California public sools:
Kindergarten through grade twelve. Sacramento, CA: California Department of Education.
Carr, E. H. (1967). What is history? Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.
Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical. Education, knowledge and action resear. Lewes,
UK: Falmer.
Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2012). Mathematics standards. Retrieved from
www.corestandards.org/Math (accessed August 20, 2013).
Corry, L. (1989). Linearity and reﬂexivity in the growth of mathematical knowledge. Science in
Context, 3, 409–440.
Cuban, L. (2006). e laptop revolution has no clothes. Education Week 26(8), 29. Retrieved from
www.edweek.org/ (accessed August 20, 2013).
Cuoco, A. (2003). Teaing mathematics in the United States. Notices of the American Mathematics

Society, 50(7), 777–787.
Davis, p. J., & Hersh, R. (1981). The Mathematical Experience. Boston: Birkhäuser.
Di, B. (1999). Sources of Rigour in Action Resear: Addressing the Issues of Trustworthiness and
Credibility. A paper presented at the Association for alitative Resear Conference “Issues of
rigour in qualitative research” at the Duxton Hotel, Melbourne, Victoria, 6–10 July 1999.
Egan, K. (2005). Students’ development in theory and practice: e doubtful role of resear.
Harvard Education Review, 75(1), 25–41.
Elliott, J. (1978). What is action-research in schools? Journal of Curriculum Studies, 10, 355–357.
Elkana, Y. (1981). A programmatic aempt at an anthropology of knowledge. In E. Mendelson & Y.
Elkana (Eds.), Sociology of the Sciences: Vol. 5. Sciences and Cultures (pp. 1–76). Dordret:
Reidel.
Félix, L. (1998). Essai sur l’histoire de la CIEAEM. In T. Bernet & F. Jaquet (Eds.), La CIEAEM au
travers de ses 50 premières rencontres: Matériaux pur l’histoire de la Commission. Neuâtel,
Switzerland.
Fried, M. N., & Dreyfus, T. (Eds.) (2014). Mathematics and mathematics education: Searing for
common ground. New York: Springer.
Ginsburg, H. P., Klein, A., & Starkey, P. (1998). e development of ildren’s mathematical
thinking: Connecting research with practice. In I. Sigel & A. Renninger (Eds.), Handbook of Child
Psyology, 5th Ed.: Vol. 4. Child Psyology and Practice  (pp. 401–476). New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Goldenberg, P. (2014). “Mathematical Literacy”: An Inadequate Metaphor. In M. N. Fried & T.
Dreyfus, (Eds.), Mathematics and Mathematics Education: Searing for Common Ground (pp.
139–156). New York: Springer.
Goldin, G. A. (2002). Connecting understandings from mathematics and mathematics education
resear. In A. D. Coburn & E. Nardi (Eds.), PME26: Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference 1 (pp. 161–166). Norwich, UK: University of East Anglia.
Goodlad, J. I. (1987). Towards a healthy ecosystem. In e Ecology of Sool Renewal: 86th
Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, Part I (pp. 210–221). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Griﬃths, H. B., & Howson, A. G. (1979). Mathematics, society and curricula. London: Cambridge

University Press.
Gunnarsdóir, G. H., & Pálsdóir, G. (2011). Lesson Study in teaer education: A tool to establish a
learning community. In M. Pytlak, E. Swoboda, & T. Rowland (Eds.), CERME7 Proceedings of
the Seventh Congress of the European Society for Resear in Mathematics Education. Rzeszow,
Poland. Retrieved from www.cerme7.univ.rzeszow.pl (accessed August 20, 2013.
Hass, C. G. (1964). Who should plan the curriculum? In A. Crow & L. D. Crow (Eds.), Vital Issues in
American Education (pp. 143–148). New York/Toronto/London: Bantam Books.
Howson, G., Keitel, K., & Kilpatri, J. (1981). Curriculum development in mathematics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kelly, A. E., & Lesh, R. (2000). Trends and shis in resear methods. In A. Kelly, & R. Lesh (Eds.)
Handbook of Resear Design in Mathematics & Science Education (pp. 35–44). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kennedy, M. (2005). Inside teaing: How classroom life undermines reform. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kilpatri, J. (1992). History of resear in mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook
of Research on Mathematics Teaching and Learning (pp. 3–37). New York: Macmillan Publishing
Company.
Kilpatrick, J. (1997). Confronting reform. American Mathematical Monthly, 104, 955–962.
Kilpatri, J. (2014). We must cultivate our common ground. In M. N. Fried & T. Dreyfus, (Eds.),
Mathematics and Mathematics Education: Searing for Common Ground (pp. 337–343). New
York: Springer.
Koblitz, N. (1996). e case against computers in K–13 math education (kindergarten through
calculus). The Mathematical Intelligencer, 18, 9–16.
Lesh, R., & Lovis, B. (2000). Resear agendas: Identifying priority problems and developing useful
theoretical perspectives. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of Resear Design in
Mathematics & Science Education (pp. 45–72). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lewis, C. C., Perry, R. R., & Hurd, J. (2009). Improving mathematics instruction through lesson
study: A theoretical model and North American case. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 12, 285–304.
Milgram, J. (2013). Testimony to the Indiana Senate Education Commiee. Retrieved from

http://hoosiersagainstcommoncore.com/james-milgram-testimony-to-the-indiana-senate-
committee/ (accessed August, 28, 2013).
NCTM (National Council of Teaers of Mathematics). (1989). Curriculum and evaluation
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
NCTM (National Council of Teaers of Mathematics). (2000). Principles and standards for sool
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. Retrieved from http://standards.nctm.org (accessed August 20,
2013).
Niss, M. (2014). Mathematics and mathematics education policy. In M. N. Fried & T. Dreyfus (Eds.),
Mathematics and Mathematics Education: Searing for Common Ground (pp. 261–275). New
York: Springer.
Niss, M., & Højgaard, T. (Eds.) (2011). Competencies and mathematical learning. Ideas and
inspiration for the development of mathematics teaing and learning in Denmark. IMFUFA-
text number 485. Roskilde, Denmark: Roskilde University.
OCDE (Orange County Department of Education). (2011). Common Core State Standards for
California. Retrieved from www.ocde.us/CommonCoreCA/Pages/default.aspx (accessed May 22,
2014).
Perry, R. R. & Lewis, C. C. (2009).What is successful adaptation of Lesson Study in the U.S.? Journal
of Educational Change, 10(4), 365–391.
Roitman, 
J. 
(1997). 
A 
mathematician 
looks 
at 
the 
standards. 
Retrieved 
from
www.stolaf.edu/other/extend/Expectations/nise.html (accessed August 20, 2013).
Romberg, T. A. & Collins, A. (2000). e impact of standards-based reform on methods of resear
in sools. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.) Handbook of Resear Design in Mathematics & Science
Education (pp. 73–86). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Senk, S. L. & Thompson, D. R. (Eds.) (2003). Standards-based sool mathematics curricula: What are
they? What do students learn? Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shimizu, Y. (1999). Aspects of mathematics teaer education in Japan: Focusing on teaers’ roles.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 2(1), 107–116.
Stigler, J. W. & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap. New York: The Free Press.
Thwaites, B. (1972). SMP: The first ten years. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Usiskin, Z. (1999–2000). Educating the public about sool mathematics. UCSMP Newsleer (26,

Winter), 4–12.
Wong, N. Y. (2003). e inﬂuence of tenology on the mathematics curriculum. In A. J. Bishop, M.
A. Clements, C. Keitel, J. Kilpatri & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.), Second international handbook of
mathematics education (pp. 271–321). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wooton, W. (1965). SMSG: The making of a curriculum. New Haven/London: Yale University Press.

10 Prospective Mathematics Teachers’
Learning and Knowledge for Teaching
João Pedro da Ponte
Universidade de Lisboa
Olive Chapman
University of Calgary

Introduction
What is the nature of current resear on the education of prospective
elementary and secondary sool teaers of mathematics? In Ponte and
Chapman (2008) we addressed this question based on a review of studies
published in 1998 to 2005. In this apter we build on this work by
extending the review from 2006 to 2013. We begin with a brief sket of
the landscape of teaer education that provides an organizing image for
the relations among the main topics and the related issues addressed in the
apter. We then present and discuss studies that provide insights into these
various topics, whi include: the nature of prospective teaers’
mathematics knowledge; knowledge of mathematics teaing; professional
identity; learning approaes to support development of, or growth in, this
knowledge; and teaer education program elements. We end with a
reﬂection on the nature of this domain of resear, and on the opportunities
and constraints it oﬀers for moving the ﬁeld of mathematics teaer
education forward.
Landscape of Prospective Teacher Education
Prospective mathematics teaer education is a complex process with many
interacting elements. Figure 10.1 represents this complexity as a landscape
of key elements, with the development of the prospective teaers’
knowledge of mathematics and mathematics teaing located in the center
of it. While these two elements are oen considered independently, they
are represented as inherently interconnected. ey are perhaps the key
focus in mathematics teaer education. ey are also shown to be situated
in the development of prospective teaers’ identity, whi includes factors
su as values, beliefs, habits, norms, dispositions, and in general, ways of

being a teaer. Identity ultimately develops in reference to the group
identity of the teaers’ professional community, whi includes the
preceding three elements, thus establishing its importance. Finally, Figure
10.1 shows several factors interacting with this group of inner elements in
the landscape that impact the nature of prospective teaer education
programs. These include:
Prospective teaers’ aracteristics, for example, their beliefs,
aitudes, knowledge, conceptions, and skills prior to entering the
program.
Program instructors’ and other participants’ aracteristics, for
example, their beliefs, aitudes, knowledge, conceptions, and personal
features. (Other participants include cooperating teaers and students
involved in the prospective teachers’ field experiences.)
Program elements su as teaing approaes, purposes, and
objectives; curriculum and materials: assessment instruments and
procedures; and the overall organization and pedagogical features of
the program (e.g., ways of working/learning emphasized, personal
relationships between prospective teaers and other participants,
access to resources, and use of Information and Communication
Technology).
Sociocultural features of the society, including the roles and values
promoted by ministries of education, sool administrators, parents,
media, and the general public.
Organization of the educational system, including ways of accessing
teaer education and entering the profession, certiﬁcation, contracts,
career features, and curriculum organization.
Resear, for example, its emphases, values, priorities, ways of
disseminating results and relationships with the ﬁeld of practice (Ponte
& Chapman 2008, p. 226).

Figure 10.1 Landscape of prospective mathematics teacher education (Ponte & Chapman, 2008, p.
226).
While this landscape highlights the complex structure of prospective
teaer education, underlying it are issues that still further add to this
complexity. For example, there are many contradictions and conﬂicts
bearing on the mission of prospective teaer education to transform the
identity of prospective teaers from that of student to that of teaer and
preparing them to assume their professional roles. ere are many ways of
being a teaer, and the teaer’s identity is a multifaceted notion. ere
are also conﬂicting visions of the mathematics curriculum and between
what is considered important for prospective teaers to learn and what
they actually learn. In addition, there are conﬂicting visions between
university and sool contexts, and among the perspectives of the direct
participants in the teaer education process and other interested
stakeholders. Resear also adds a layer of complexity to understanding
teaer education: studies place diﬀerent emphases on many aspects of the

mathematics curriculum and oen derive conﬂicting recommendations
regarding prospective teaers’ learning and appropriate learning
opportunities.
Focus of Chapter
e comprehensive view of prospective teaer education presented in
Figure 10.1 oﬀers many possibilities for framing a paper about this ﬁeld.
However, given that this apter is an update of the review in Ponte and
Chapman (2008), we decided to focus on the same three central elements of
the landscape: knowledge of mathematics, knowledge of mathematics
teaing, and teaers’ professional identity (Figure 10.1). We also address
teaer education program elements that are connected to other elements
of Figure 10.1 and recently have gained more prominence in research.
Our intent is to highlight examples of studies on prospective
mathematics teaers’ knowledge, learning, and identity and program
features over the period 2006–2013 as a way of understanding current
trends in resear to establish meaningful and eﬀective prospective teaer
education. We oﬀer brief descriptions only of the aims and ﬁndings of these
studies, whi enables us to include a broader range of examples. We
organize our discussion of these studies in ﬁve sections following this
introduction: “Prospective Teaers’ 
Knowledge 
of 
Mathematics,”
“Prospective Teaers’ Knowledge of Mathematics Teaing,” and
“Prospective Teaer’s Identity.” Ea of these sections focuses on the ways
the knowledge is conceptualized and developed. e following section,
“Teaer Education Seings, Activities, and Tools,” highlights innovative
features that have become signiﬁcant in teaer education in the last few
years. Finally, in “Concluding Reﬂections” we oﬀer a reﬂective summary of
prospective mathematics teaers’ learning and discusses general issues

concerning the state of research on their knowledge and development.

Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge of Mathematics
ere is general consensus that teaers need to hold sound content
knowledge as this aﬀects both what they tea and how they tea it. It is,
therefore, no surprise that teaers’ knowledge of mathematics continues to
be a central theme in resear on prospective mathematics teaer
education. While some studies have begun to investigate ways to measure
mathematical knowledge for teaing, the prominent focus is still the
nature of prospective teaers’ knowledge from a qualitative resear
perspective. is section addresses these studies of prospective teaers’
learning with aention to the perspectives of mathematical knowledge
considered, issues identiﬁed with this knowledge, and how its development
has been facilitated in mathematics education courses.
Perspectives of Knowledge of Mathematics
Teaers who do not have a strong knowledge of mathematics are likely to
be limited in their professional competence, but having su knowledge
does not guarantee that one will be an eﬀective mathematics teaer.
Whereas quality teaing is directly related to subject maer knowledge,
the nature of this knowledge is a critical factor in this relationship. Ma
(1999) argued that, to be eﬀective, teaers need a profound understanding
of fundamental mathematics. is understanding must be deep, broad, and
thorough, and it must go beyond being able to compute correctly. is
perspective underlies the scope of mathematics recommended for teaing.
For example, the National Council of Teaers of Mathematics (NCTM)
described it as: “e content and discourse of mathematics, including
mathematical concepts and procedures and the connections among them;
multiple representations of mathematical concepts and procedures; ways to

reason mathematically, solve problems, and communicate mathematics
eﬀectively at diﬀerent levels of formality” (NCTM, 1991, p. 132). Similarly,
Kilpatrick, Swafford, and Findell (2001) described it as:
Knowledge of mathematical facts, concepts, procedures, and the relationships among them;
knowledge of the ways that mathematical ideas can be represented; and the knowledge of
mathematics as a discipline—in particular, how mathematical knowledge is produced, the nature
of discourse in mathematics, and the norms and standards of evidence that guide argument and
proof.
(p. 371)
Table 10.1 Examples of perspectives of teachers’ mathematics knowledge studied.
Topic
Dimension
Studies
Whole numbers
Whole/rational
numbers
Rational numbers
Ratio and proportion
Equations
Functions
Reasoning
Reasoning
Reasoning
Concepts/procedures
Concepts/procedures/representations
Language/communication
Concepts/problem solving
Concepts/reasoning
Representations/reasoning
Representations
Representations/definitions
Lo, Grant, & Flowers, 2008
Seaman & Szydlik, 2007
Son & Crespo, 2009
Bartell, Webel, Bowen, &
Dyson, 2013
Lo & Luo, 2012
Tobias, 2013
Pitta-Pantazi & Christou, 2011
Prediger, 2010
Caglayan, 2013
Davis, 2009
Steele, Hillen, & Smith, 2013
In addition to the issue of describing this knowledge, studies have begun
to deal with the issue of measuring it for practicing teaers. For example,
Hill, Blunk, et al. (2008) compared results of a testing instrument to assess
the “mathematical knowledge for teaing” with those of a quantitative
observational instrument to measure the “mathematical quality of
instruction” and found a strong positive association. Krauss et al. (2008)
constructed tests to measure the “pedagogical content knowledge” and the
“content knowledge” of secondary mathematics teaers to investigate
whether these categories of knowledge can be distinguished empirically,
and whether the mean level of knowledge and the degree of connectedness

between them depend on mathematical expertise. Findings showed that the
secondary mathematics teaers with in-depth mathematical training
outscored other teaers on both knowledge categories and exhibited a
higher degree of cognitive connectedness between the two knowledge
categories. More recently, Beswi, Callingham, and Watson (2012) used an
instrument designed to measure multiple facets of middle sool
mathematics teaer knowledge. ey found that teaer knowledge can
be conceived of as a unidimensional construct with four increasing
hierarical 
levels: Personal 
Numeracy, 
Pedagogical 
Awareness,
Pedagogical Content Knowledge Emergence , and Pedagogical Content
Knowledge Consolidation.
Table 10.1 presents studies that cover some of the dimensions of the
perspectives of mathematics knowledge for teaing that we have
discussed. In particular, they suggest a trend of viewing prospective
teaers’ mathematics knowledge in terms of particular concepts,
procedures, representations, and reasoning processes associated with the
sool curriculum. ey tou on a wide variety of curriculum topics. In the
next section we elaborate on the sample of studies in Table 10.1.
Issues With Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge of
Mathematics
A common theme of studies on prospective teaers’ mathematics
knowledge is that it has serious issues that teaer education programs
ought to address. Llinares and Krainer (2006) and Ponte and Chapman
(2006) referenced studies over a 30-year period that identiﬁed several issues
with teaers’ knowledge in relation to what is considered to be adequate
to tea mathematics. ese issues include misconceptions for diﬀerent
topics of sool mathematics, su as numbers and number theory;

geometry; measurement; ratio and proportion; algebra, functions, and
calculus; probability and statistics; set theory; logic and proof; problem
posing; and problem solving. Our previous ﬁndings (Ponte & Chapman,
2008) and the current review of studies continue to reﬂect this trend of
identifying limitations with, or raising concerns about, prospective teaers’
mathematics knowledge. Table 10.2 provides examples of these issues
based on our previous findings.
One area of mathematics that received signiﬁcant aention by
researers in the last eight years is rational numbers. Studies continue to
address prospective teaers’ knowledge of rational numbers in diﬀerent
ways. For example, Tobias (2013) examined how prospective elementary
teaers developed an understanding of language use for deﬁning the
whole and found that even when important mathematical ideas were
appropriated (su as fractions depending on a whole or group, deﬁning an
“of what,” and knowing what the denominator represents) some
participants still had diﬃculty in distinguishing among the terms “of a,” “of
one,” “of the,” and “of ea.” Son and Crespo (2009) studied prospective
teaers’ reasoning and response to a student’s nontraditional strategy in
fraction division and found that some participants solved tasks using
numerical fractions as “indicated division” as well as the commutative
property whereas other used fractions in “a general form” and used
algebraic methods. ey also found that participants with a deeper
understanding of the mathematical basis regarding fractions of this
student’s strategy tended to think that students learn by explaining and
justifying their ideas to ea other. In a diﬀerent cultural context, Lo and
Luo (2012) studied the knowledge of fraction division of Taiwanese
prospective elementary teaers and found that most participants had
developed a secure knowledge of this operation but tasks of representing
fraction division through word problems and diagrams proved to be
challenging even for proficient prospective teachers.

Table 10.2 Examples of issues with prospective teachers’ knowledge of mathematics.
•    Procedural aaments that inhibit development of a deeper
understanding of concepts related to the multiplicative structure of
whole numbers
•    Inﬂuence of primitive, behavioral models for multiplication and
division
•    Adequate procedural knowledge but inadequate conceptual
knowledge of division and sparse connections between the two
•  Inability to establish connections among diﬀerent representations of
a concept (rational numbers, functions)
•  Difficulties in the language of fractions, functions and equations
•  Distorted definitions and images of rational numbers
•    La of ability to connect real-world situations and symbolic
computations
•  Lack of sensitivity to the different meanings of variables
•   Diﬃculty in processing geometrical information and la of basic
geometrical knowledge, skills and analytical thinking ability
•  Inadequate logical reasoning
•  Diﬃculty in making reasoned conjectures and in using deﬁnitions
and properties to justify assertions
Some studies also indicate the importance of algebraic thinking and
proof as a resear focus. For example, Stephens (2006) examined the
awareness of equivalence and relational thinking depicted by prospective
elementary teaers, ﬁnding that most participants demonstrated an
awareness of relational thinking in noticing opportunities oﬀered by the
tasks to engage students and also in tracing su thinking in students’
productions. However, many were not aware of elementary students’
misconceptions about the meaning of the equal sign. In relation to proof,
Stylianides, Stylianides, and Philippou (2007) examined prospective
elementary and secondary mathematics teaers’ knowledge of proof by

mathematical induction and found that participants had diﬃculties
concerning the essence of the base step of induction, the meaning associated
with the inductive step, and the domain of discourse.
A trend in current studies is to draw on the distinction made by Ball,
ames, and Phelps (2005; 2008) between common content knowledge (i.e.,
knowledge associated with recognizing wrong answers, spoing inaccurate
deﬁnitions in textbooks, and using notation correctly) and specialized
content knowledge (i.e., knowledge associated with analyzing errors and
evaluating alternative ideas, giving mathematical explanations, using
mathematical representations, and being explicit about mathematical
language and practice). is distinction stands on the notion that “studying
what teaers know is insuﬃcient to solving the problem of understanding
the knowledge that is needed for teaing. What is missing with all the
focus on teaers is a view of mathematical knowledge in the context of
teaing” (Ball, Lubienski, & Mewborn, 2001, p. 450). is means that there
is an important distinction between knowing how to do mathematics
problems and knowing mathematics in ways that enable its use in teaing.
From this perspective, the sample of studies described suggests that
prospective teaers’ common content knowledge and specialized content
knowledge is likely to be problematic and require ongoing aention in
teacher education.
Development of Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge
of Mathematics for Teaching
Given the concerns about prospective teaers’ mathematics knowledge, it
also is not surprising that the literature has been addressing ways to
enhance it in teaer education. For example, Watson and Mason (2007)
indicated that courses should include features that prompt participants to:

engage in mathematical thinking through working on suitable
mathematics tasks;
reﬂect on the experience of doing mathematics tasks individually or
with others;
analyze task structure, including the purpose and aﬀordances, and
experiment with extending and varying task structure and task
presentation;
allenge approaes dominated by procedures that depend on rote
memorization and mechanical use of algorithms and routines; and
observe and listen to learners, by observing classes or videos and
interacting with learners.
e underlying premise of su suggestions is not simply to provide
prospective teaers with more mathematics, but, more importantly, to
allow them to understand and reconstruct what they know with more
depth and meaning. In particular, they should engage in learning or
relearning the mathematics they will tea consistent with current
curriculum recommendations for mathematics education. e following
studies provide evidence of the nature and the eﬀectiveness of su
suggestions in teacher education courses.
Steele et al. (2013) described teaer learning in a teaing experiment
consisting of a content-focused methods course involving mathematical
knowledge for teaing function. e goal was the development of
mathematical knowledge that built on individual teaers’ prior knowledge
as well as the development of a stronger collective understanding of
function. Course design began with the identiﬁcation of function-related
mathematical tasks, cases, and student work that represented a variety of
types of functions and non-functions. e course was anored by linear
and quadratic relationships most common in secondary mathematics.
Participants, including prospective teaers in the course, showed growth in

their ability to deﬁne function, to provide examples of functions and link
them to the deﬁnition, to make connections between function
representations, and to consider the role of deﬁnitions in mathematics and
the K–12 classroom.
In Lo et al. (2008), prospective teaers participated in a one-semester
course in whi a typical lesson began with a brief introduction of a task,
followed by individual problem solving, small group discourse, and then
whole-class discussion where diﬀerent strategies and justiﬁcations were
presented, clariﬁed, and compared. is cycle may repeat two to three
times during a lesson. Focusing solely on the whole number multiplication
portion of the course (whi consist of four lessons) aer students
previously worked on developing and justifying reasoning strategies for
addition and subtraction, the authors found growth in the participants’
knowledge of this concept. In another study, Crespo and Sinclair (2008)
explored the problem-posing behavior of prospective elementary teaers
in a mathematics methods course framed in a “pedagogy of inquiry” rather
than a “pedagogy of presentation” to give them opportunities to read,
explore, and investigate forms of mathematics teaing that value and
promote students’ sense making and reasoning. e course included
engaging the participants in doing mathematics. Two interventions
designed for the study were integrated within the course’s goals and tasks:
exploration of a mathematical situation as a precursor to mathematical
problem posing and development of aesthetic criteria to judge the
mathematical quality of the problems posed. Results showed that both
interventions led to improved problem posing and mathematically rier
understandings of what makes a problem “good.”
Finally, Prediger (2010) examined students’ perspectives of equations,
equalities, and meanings of the equal sign using an example of concrete
sequence of learning as part of a teaer education course on sool algebra
and its teaing and learning for prospective middle-sool teaers. e

ﬁrst activity in the sequence was the writing of a spontaneous, individual
analysis of a teaing episode. It was followed by a discussion of diﬀerent
suggestions and evaluation of the answers of colleagues. In the second
activity, the learning situation was enried by another teaing episode,
video recorded in a grade 11 calculus course. e approa allowed the
participants to construct didactically sensitive mathematical knowledge for
teaching and developed subjective needs for a deeper analysis.
ese studies illustrate how the features indicated by Watson and Mason
(2007) may be put into practice. ey suggest that a variety of approaes
may lead to positive learning outcomes for prospective teaers. e
studies also suggest a current trend of having prospective teaers probe
more deeply fundamental mathematical ideas from the sool curriculum
linked to the learner’s activity and related mathematical understanding.
Teaers are asked to revisit familiar content and to examine it in ways
unfamiliar to them in order to get to the underlying meanings of the
mathematics concepts and procedures and how they may develop in the
classroom context. A central goal of su studies, then, is considering
approaes for helping prospective teaers to understand deeply the
mathematics they teach.

Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge of Mathematics
Teaching
In addition to content knowledge, teaers need sound pedagogical
knowledge for mathematics. us, the nature and development of
knowledge for teaing mathematics continue to receive aention in
resear on prospective mathematics teaers. In this section, we discuss a
sample of studies we reviewed to highlight what they focused on in terms
of the perspectives and issues of the knowledge and approaes used to
facilitate its development.
Perspectives of Knowledge of Mathematics
Teaching
As with content knowledge, a unique body of knowledge of mathematics
teaing that teaers should hold is not clearly deﬁned. However,
developments in resear on mathematics education since the 1970s
indicate the need for teaers to take into account students’ thinking and
learning processes. ese factors are reﬂected in current theories of the
nature of this knowledge. For example, building on Shulman’s (1986) notion
of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK), Ball and colleagues (Ball et al.,
2008; Hill, Ball, & Silling, 2008) described mathematics knowledge for
teaching in terms of three types of knowledge:
Knowledge of content and students, that is, “content knowledge
intertwined with knowledge of how students think about, know, or
learn this particular content” (Hill, Ball et al., 2008, p. 375). is
includes knowledge associated with teaers having to anticipate
student errors and common misconceptions, interpret students’

incomplete thinking, and predict what students are likely to do with
specific tasks and what they will find interesting or challenging.
Knowledge of content and teaing, that is, knowledge about how to
build on students’ thinking and how to address student errors
eﬀectively. is includes knowledge associated with teaers having
to sequence content for instruction, recognize instructional pros and
cons of diﬃcult representations, and size up mathematical issues in
responding to students’ novel approaches.
Knowledge of curriculum, that is, the familiarity with the full range of
programs, instructional materials, and tools available for teaing
particular concepts at different levels.
Our review of recent studies of prospective mathematics teaers
suggests that there is consistency between these proposed dimensions of
knowledge of mathematics teaing and those that researers have
explored in their studies. Table 10.3 provides speciﬁc examples of this
knowledge as used in su studies. As discussed in the next section, there
are issues with this knowledge for prospective teachers.
Issues With Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge of
Mathematics Teaching
Our previous ﬁndings (Ponte & Chapman, 2008) and current review of
studies continue to reﬂect a trend of issues with prospective teaers’
knowledge of mathematics teaing. Some of the issues raised in studies in
our previous review included holding naive beliefs about teaing and
learning, having diﬃculty in explaining students’ errors, having lile
knowledge of the diﬃculties ildren experienced with word problems and
possible sources of these diﬃculties, focusing only on the correctness of

their students’ answers, being inclined to asking questions that focused on
geing students to an answer, and a having limited capacity to carry out
active sense making with their students. Current studies we reviewed add
to this list as in the following examples.
Using a framework designed to discriminate among tasks according to
their cognitive complexity, Osana et al. (2007) examined the nature of
prospective teaers’ evaluations of elementary mathematics problems.
Findings demonstrated that, overall, the prospective teaers had more
diﬃculty accurately classifying problems considered to represent high
levels of cognitive complexity compared to simpler problems. ose with
strong mathematics knowledge were able to sort the problems more
accurately than those with weaker content knowledge. Morris, Hiebert, and
Spitzer (2009) studied the successes and allenges that prospective
teaers were likely to experience as they unpaed lesson-level
mathematical learning goals (i.e., identify subconcepts and subskills that
feed into target learning goals). Findings indicated that they could identify
mathematical subconcepts of learning goals in supportive contexts but
could not spontaneously apply a strategy of unpaing learning goals to
plan for, or evaluate, teaing and learning. Finally, Karp (2010) analyzed
the experiences of secondary sool prospective teaers during a teaing
methods course oﬀered prior to their student teaing, but involving actual
teaing and reﬂexive analysis of it. Findings indicated that participants
possessed insuﬃcient knowledge of content and students, as seen, for
example, by their diﬃculties with understanding students’ thinking. While
the number of mathematics courses they completed was high, in general,
their ability to listen to their students and to react to what they said was
largely limited by their own mathematical knowledge and conceptions of
mathematics.
Table 10.3 Examples of prospective teachers’ knowledge of mathematics teaching studied.

(Mis)conceptions—fraction
multiplication
Teaching ratio and proportion
Teaching geometry
Providing explanations
Evidence of conceptual understanding
Multiple representations/meanings
Appraising elementary tasks
Using curriculum material/textbooks
Planning and evaluating instruction
Problem-solving instruction
Evaluating students’ achievement
Analyzing mathematics teaching
Isiksal & Cakiroglu, 2011
Ben-Chaim, Keret, & Ilany, 2007
Nason, Chalmers, & Yeh, 2012; Barrantes & Blanco,
2006
Charalambous, Hill, & Ball, 2011
Bartell et al., 2013
Ryken, 2009
Osana, Lacroix, Tucker, & Desrosiers, 2007
Lloyd, 2008; Nicol & Crespo, 2006; Davis, 2009
Morris, Hiebert, & Spitzer, 2009
Karp, 2010
Spitzer, Phelps, Beyers, Johnson, & Sieminski, 2011
Alsawaie & Alghazo, 2010
While, as the preceding studies suggest, there are ongoing concerns about
prospective mathematics teaers’ knowledge, other studies also suggest a
shi to addressing what they know or are able to do, thus moving away
from the deﬁciency perspective to one of understanding their sense making.
For example, Isiksal and Cakiroglu (2011) studied prospective teaers’
knowledge of common conceptions and misconceptions that grade 6–7
students have about multiplication of fractions, the sources of these
misconceptions, and the pedagogical strategies they knew to overcome
these misconceptions. Findings indicated ﬁve types of prospective teaers’
perceptions of ildren’s mistakes: based on algorithms, on inappropriate
intuitions, 
on 
formal 
knowledge 
of 
fraction 
operations, 
on
misunderstanding fraction symbolism, and on misunderstanding the
problem. e participants also suggested three categories of strategies
(based on teaing methods, formal knowledge of fractions, and
psyological constructs) that could be used to overcome these diﬃculties.
In another study, Barrantes and Blanco (2006) examined prospective
primary sool teaers’ conceptions of teaing and learning sool-level
geometry and found that the participants could be distributed in three
groups: those fully convinced by traditional forms of teaing; those
holding traditional inclination with innovative features (the majority); and

those similar to the second group but openly showing a rejection of the
traditional tendencies. e researers’ overall conception is that geometry
should be taught in the same way as other parts of mathematics, except for
geometrical ﬁgures and models that should be handled and manipulated by
students.
Finally, two other studies focused on teaing resources. Nicol and
Crespo (2006) considered how four prospective teaers interpreted and
used textbooks while learning to tea mathematics and found that they
had varied approaes, ranging from adherence, to elaboration, to creation.
Lloyd (2008) focused on one prospective teaer’s interactions with
mathematics curriculum materials from two distinct programs used during
her internship in a kindergarten classroom and found that although she
used ea curriculum in distinct ways, her curriculum use was adaptive in
both cases.
is sample of studies on prospective teaers’ knowledge of
mathematics teaing indicates both limitations and sense making in the
three areas of student, teaing, and curriculum associated with Ball et al.’s
(2008) view of pedagogical content knowledge. ese studies suggest that
teaer education needs to continue to ﬁnd meaningful ways to address
ongoing concerns and to build on the sense making of prospective teaers.
e next section considers some of these ways that have been researed in
the period of our review.
Development of Prospective Teachers’ Knowledge
of Mathematics Teaching
Our previous ﬁndings (Ponte & Chapman, 2008) indicated two themes that
were central to the approaes used in studies on development of
prospective mathematics teaers’ knowledge of teaing: reﬂection and

integrating content and pedagogy. Reﬂection is considered important for
prospective teaers to address their preeducation-program sense of what
teaing methods are good or bad, whi they use to frame their learning.
As Jaworski and Gellert (2003) explained, when prospective teaers enter
initial mathematics teaer education they already have extensive
knowledge about mathematics teaing, but this knowledge is limited
because it is based mainly on their experience as students. e implication,
then, is that it is important for programs to engage prospective teaers in
learning opportunities that enable them to reconstruct their initial
knowledge and understanding of mathematics teaing. is requires
awareness and scrutiny of this prior knowledge. Reﬂection is a key process
for aieving this. However, while this perspective of reﬂection on self was
a focus in studies in our previous review (Ponte & Chapman, 2008), it is less
so in current studies. Instead, there seems to be a shi away from reﬂecting
on initial personal theories and conceptions but an ongoing focus on PCK
that includes integrating content and pedagogy, the second theme in our
previous ﬁndings. is laer theme deals with ways to develop new
understandings of mathematics teaing, whi is evident in many of the
studies in our current review. Table 10.4 summarizes examples of key items
in the interventions studied to promote development of su knowledge of
mathematics teaching.
e following summaries of some of these studies highlight these
interventions and the impact on the prospective teaers’ learning. For
example, Spitzer et al. (2011) studied an intervention to support beginning
prospective elementary teaers in improving their ability to recognize and
evaluate evidence of student aievement in a mathematical lesson. e
intervention included a lesson engaging participants in making claims about
student aievement, considering information that suggested their initial
claims were incorrect, and examining the source of their errors, and a
second lesson using a card-sorting task to further develop their

understanding of the need for alignment between evidence of student
understanding and the learning goal under consideration. Participants were
given seven cards, ea listing a diﬀerent learning goal related to decimal
concepts, and 12 cards, ea providing a sample student response. e
learning goal cards included both conceptual and procedural goals, and the
student response cards included both revealing and nonrevealing evidence.
Participants were asked to mat ea learning goal card with the student
response cards that constituted evidence of aievement of that particular
learning goal. Findings indicated that the participants’ ability to evaluate
evidence improved: for example, they were more likely to rely on student
thinking as evidence and were beer able to recognize when evidence was
not relevant to a learning goal. However, less improvement occurred in
their ability to identify evidence that is not revealing of students’
understanding (e.g., detailed procedural steps).
Focusing on mathematical tasks, Charalambous et al. (2011) studied
whether prospective teaers could learn to provide explanations during
their teaer preparation. If so, what did this learning entail and what
contributed to it? e intervention was a content course, built around ri
problems and aimed at helping participants develop ﬂexible understanding
of important ideas and processes within the realm of number theory and
operations. It also oﬀered them opportunities to practice using
representations, providing explanations, and analyzing others’ thinking.
Findings, based on four prospective teaers, indicated that they all made
progress in learning to provide instructional explanations to varying
degrees.
Some studies explicitly addressed PCK. For example, Nason et al. (2012)
studied anges that occurred to prospective teaers’ knowledge about the
teaing and learning of primary sool geometry and factors that
inﬂuenced those anges. Intervention involved a lesson-plan study of
geometry 
within 
a 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
learning

environment. 
Findings 
indicated 
that 
the 
intervention 
facilitated
considerable growth in the participants’ PCK in terms of organization,
representation, and presentation of content in the lesson plans and the
quality and sequencing of questions. I˙mre and Akkoç (2012) studied the
development of elementary prospective teaers’ PCK of number paerns
in terms of knowledge of students’ understanding and diﬃculties, and
knowledge of paern-speciﬁc strategies and multiple representations to
apply these strategies. e intervention consisted of ﬁeld work during a
practicum in elementary sools (grades 1–8) and weekly on-campus
classes to reflect on their experiences in sools and conduct micro-teaing
activities. Findings indicated improvement of the three participants’
knowledge, including the way they took students’ understanding of and
diﬃculties with paerns into account and used paern-speciﬁc strategies
during the abduction phase in their teaing. Also, Davis (2009) studied the
inﬂuence of reading and planning from two diﬀerently organized
mathematics textbooks on high-sool prospective teaers’ PCK and
content knowledge of exponential functions. On the posest, their PCK
grew based on their use of the textbook that focused more on the places
where students might experience difficulties.
Table 10.4 Examples of key items of approaches for knowledge of mathematics teaching studied.
Structured tasks
Investigative tasks
Video-lesson analysis
Weekly field work and micro-teaching
Lesson plan study
Rich mathematical problems
Classroom artifacts
Textbooks
Spitzer et al., 2011
Ben-Chaim et al., 2007
Alsawaie & Alghazo, 2010
I˙mre & Akkoç, 2012
Nason et al., 2012
Charalambous et al., 2011
Ryken, 2009
Davis, 2009
Finally, classroom artifacts played a role in some studies as in Ryken
(2009) that studied how the act of representing helped prospective
elementary teaers determine diﬀerences in the quality of students’

representations, the problem-solving allenges encountered, and whether
analyzing visual representations enhance pedagogical reasoning. e
participants engaged in two tasks: a mathematics lesson in whi they
represented a ildren’s story mathematically and a master’s project in
whi they used artifacts collected during student teaing to reexamine
their teaing practices. Findings revealed that analyzing representations
helped the prospective teachers rethink their teaching practices.
ese studies suggest that a variety of approaes with positive learning
outcomes could be used to facilitate the development of prospective
teaers’ knowledge of mathematics teaing. e focus is on situations
that are directly related to sool mathematics. ese approaes are
related to two categories that Ball et al. (2008) identiﬁed as PCK: addressing
knowledge of mathematics and learners, and of mathematics and teaing.
us a central goal for su studies is considering approaes that will help
teachers to understand their students and how to engage them deeply in the
mathematics they tea. Ball et al. (2008) suggest a trend similar to the
focus on “content and pedagogy” we identiﬁed in Ponte and Chapman
(2008). However, the apparent decrease in focus on reﬂection on
preprogram knowledge could be a result of an increase on the focus on
student thinking as well as some overlap between studies we have
categorized as dealing with identity discussed next.

Prospective Teachers’ Identity
While the notion of identity has diﬀerent meanings based on diﬀerent
theoretical perspectives, in Ponte and Chapman (2008) we made a case for
prospective teaers’ professional identity being about the professional self
they construct and reconstruct in becoming and being teaers. It includes
their appropriation of the values and norms of the profession, their core
beliefs about teaing and about themselves as teaers, a vision of what it
means to be an “excellent teaer” and of the kind of teaer they want to
be, a sense of self as a learner, and a capacity to reﬂect on experience. is
perspective provides our basis for identifying studies in relation to identity.
In Ponte and Chapman (2008) we indicated that identity was an
underrepresented area of resear on prospective mathematics teaers.
Our current review suggests that there were few studies dealing explicitly
with identity as a main focus. However, many studies continue to partly or
implicitly address related features of identity based on the preceding
deﬁnition of it. In this section, we discuss a sample of su studies to
highlight examples of these features of identity and the development of
them. Table 10.5 summarizes these features and studies we consider.
Features of Prospective Teachers’ Identity
e following summaries of some studies in Table 10.5 highlight these
features of identity in terms of how they are interpreted and related to
prospective mathematics teaers. In Llewellyn (2009), identity is regarded
in terms of gender, control, oice, and conﬁdence within mathematical
discourses. ese discourses are oen gendered, can overlap, and can be
both productive and restrictive while they work to normalize (or not) the
identity of the prospective teaer. Findings for the two prospective

primary sool teaers showed that, despite their similar actual
mathematical aainment, there was a striking diﬀerence between Alex’s
(male) self-positioning as a “mathematics person” and Sam’s (female)
placing outside of the discourse of “mathematics person” through some
unstable conception of conﬁdence. Both sought to be in control of
mathematics.
Table 10.5  Examples of features of prospective teachers’ professional identity studied.
Gender, control, choice, and confidence
Professional goals, values
Oppressive and liberative teaching practices
Efficacy beliefs
Views of a “good teacher”
Mathematical motivation
Mathematical sophistication
Reasoning attitude
Reflection on own teaching
Reflective stance
Llewellyn, 2009
Goos & Benninon, 2008
Yow, 2012
Swars, Smith, Smith, & Hart, 2009
Charalambous, Philippou, & Kyriakides, 2008
Lavy & Shriki, 2008
Newton, 2009
Jansen, 2009
Seaman & Szydlik, 2007
Peretz, 2006
Jansen & Spitzer 2009
Stockero, 2008
In Newton (2009), identity is implied in terms of motivation, deﬁned as
value, self-concept of ability, and anxiety. e study examined prospective
elementary sool teaers’ motivations for working with fractions before
and aer taking a course designed to deepen their understanding of
elementary sool mathematics. At posest, participants’ value (importance
and usefulness of fractions) and self-concept of ability increased while
anxiety decreased, but these changes differed by instructor. In Jansen (2009),
identity is regarded also in terms of motivation, deﬁned to be a motive
(e.g., a wish, intention, or drive) to engage in a speciﬁc activity. It can be
aieved through interactions of multiple values, beliefs, and goals. e
study addressed what motivates prospective elementary teaers to
participate in whole-class discussions during mathematics content courses
for teaers. Results indicated that they were motivated by positive utility

values for participating, to demonstrate competence, or to help others.
Negative utility values for participating were expressed by those who
preferred to learn through actively listening and were likely to report
having a shy personality.
Some studies included beliefs, as in Seaman and Szydlik (2007) where
identity is implied in terms of mathematical sophistication, whi is related
to beliefs about the nature of mathematical behavior. e study examined
prospective teaers’ understandings of basic mathematical tasks to
determine their use or non-use of various indicators of mathematical
sophistication. Participants displayed a set of values and avenues for
learning mathematics that was so impoverished and diﬀerent from that of
the mathematical community, that their aempts to create fundamental
mathematical understandings were oen unsuccessful. In Yow (2012),
identity is regarded in terms of one being an “oppressive” or “liberative”
teaer, and a practice is oppressive or liberative depending on the belief,
motive, or intention behind the action. e study considered how
prospective secondary teaers viewed themselves as oppressive or
liberative mathematics teaers. Findings indicated that they were more
likely to write liberative scenarios about their practice than oppressive ones.
One study that mentioned reﬂection is Jansen and Spitzer (2009), where
identity is implied in terms of reﬂective thinking skills, in particular
prospective teaers’ ability to describe and interpret their own teaing.
e study examined prospective middle sool mathematics teaers’
reﬂective thinking skills to understand how they learned from their own
teaing practice when engaging in a modiﬁed lesson-study experience.
Findings indicated that, when describing their students’ thinking,
participants focused on identifying students’ speciﬁc mathematical
understandings and diﬀerentiating between individual students’ thinking.
Most of them were moving toward reflective thinking.
Collectively, these studies provide important ways of thinking about and

understanding diﬀerent aspects of prospective mathematics teaers’
identity. ey also raise issues with these features of identity: for example,
issues with conﬁdence, anxiety, motivation, values, and mathematical
sophistication. is suggests that teaer education needs to continue to
ﬁnd meaningful ways to facilitate the development of prospective teaers’
professional identity. e next section considers some of these ways that
have been researched in the period of our review.
Development of Prospective Teachers’ Identity
e development of a teaer’s identity is a continuing and dynamic
process aﬀected by multiple inﬂuences beginning before entry into an
education program and with formal teaer education being only one stage
of it. However, based on the studies we reviewed, our focus is on
interventions to facilitate development carried out in the context of teaer
education programs. As we discussed in Ponte and Chapman (2008),
development of identity tends to be a byproduct of teacher education rather
than a targeted outcome. ese programs could include development of
features su as the images, values, and norms of prospective teaers
concerning their professional roles (about students, other teaers, and the
community) and themselves as teaers. ey also could include
development of activities related to ﬁeld experiences, su as observing the
practice of experienced teaers or reﬂecting on one’s own practice as
student teaer. ese possibilities provide a basis for identifying studies
that deal with identity development.
Our previous ﬁndings (Ponte & Chapman, 2008) indicated two themes
that were explicit or implicit in the interventions used in studies on
development 
of 
prospective 
mathematics 
teaers’ 
identity: 
(i)
inquiry/reﬂection of/on practice and (ii) reﬂection on self before, during,

and aer the practicum and other ﬁeld experiences. In both cases, the
development of reﬂective skills is as important as the development of new
knowledge and views. Our ﬁndings of current studies suggest an ongoing
trend of explicit and implicit focus on reﬂection: for example, reﬂection is
implied through group communication, during mathematical activities, and
interaction with others during practicum, and it is explicit in working with a
video case. However, there is less explicit focus of reﬂection on self or
practicum teaing. We illustrate this in the following sample of studies in
whi we identify the features of identity implied and highlight the nature
and impact of the intervention on them.
Goos and Benninon (2008) stands out in our examples as it explicitly
mentions identity in framing the work. e intervention involved a website
established to encourage professional discussion among prospective
teaers outside class times and during the practicum periods, and also to
provide continuing support when they became beginning teaers. e
researers imposed minimal structure on communication, allowing the
participants to use the site in ways that met their needs. e study
investigated how this online community, focused on becoming a teaer of
secondary sool mathematics, emerged and was sustained. Findings
indicated that the emergent design of the community contributed to its
sustainability in allowing the prospective teaers to deﬁne their own
professional goals and values.
Another exception involves explicit focus on reﬂection. In Stoero
(2008), identity is implied in terms of a reﬂective stance. e intervention
involved a middle-sool mathematics methods course with a goal to help
prospective teaers realize that not all students think about mathematics in
the same way and that understanding their thinking is central to the
meaningful development of mathematical ideas. e course used a video-
case curriculum as a major instructional tool to develop the prospective
teaers’ reﬂective stance. e prospective teaers showed anges in

their level of reﬂection, their tendency to ground their analyses in evidence,
and their focus on student thinking.
Some studies included a focus on anging beliefs/image as in these
examples. In Swars et al. (2009), identity is regarded in terms of
pedagogical beliefs, eﬃcacy beliefs, and anxiety. e intervention involved
a two-course mathematics methods sequence and field placements. The first
course on grades PreK–2 presented a paradigm shi in what it means to
know and do mathematics, how ildren learn mathematics with
understanding, and how teaers can support ildren’s problem solving
and construction of understanding. e second course, on grades 3–5,
allowed more time for continued development toward a constructivist
perspective. Across both courses, there were extensive ﬁeld experiences.
e results indicated that anxiety and eﬃcacy beliefs were impacted
positively. In Charalambous et al. (2008), identity is also implied in terms of
beliefs—that is, eﬃcacy beliefs, deﬁned as one’s beliefs about one’s ability
to organize and execute tasks to aieve speciﬁc goals. e intervention
was a ﬁeld-experience course. e prospective teaers’ interaction with
their mentors, university tutors, peers, and pupils impacted their eﬃcacy
beliefs in diverse ways: for example, mentors informed their eﬃcacy beliefs
by modeling teaing and providing feedba and by the latent messages
that their behavior conveyed to them. In addition, in Lavy and Shriki
(2008), identity is regarded in terms of image of the “good teaer,” whi
is associated with the teaer’s personality. e intervention involved
computerized project-based learning in a course that focused on teaing
middle sool and engaged prospective teaers in worthwhile
mathematical tasks, discussions of pedagogical and mathematical issues,
and examination of their beliefs about teaing and learning mathematics.
Before the study, their image of the “good teaer” was a “motherly”
aracter whose main concern was to reduce the fear of mathematics and
encourage students especially when they fail. Aer the study, their image

shied to a ﬁgure that encourages the students to see the beauty of
mathematics.
Finally, in Peretz (2006), identity is implied in terms of reasoning aitude,
that is, improving reasoning includes anging aitudes. e intervention
was a constructivist Teaing–Learning–Space used to get prospective
elementary sool teaers to unpa and reconstruct a deeper and more
ﬂexible understanding of basic mathematical concepts, whi for the most
part they already “know.” e main goals were to encourage prospective
teaers to understand their mathematical “doings” and to promote a
reasoning aitude within them, rather than just teaing them the basic
arithmetical concepts. Findings showed that the approa can help
prospective elementary sool teaers to ange their aitudes towards
reasoning in mathematics.
In Ponte and Chapman (2008) we concluded that the studies we reviewed
at that point suggested that inquiry of one’s own practice could be a
powerful way of constructing knowledge, an intensive activity that may
lead teaers to reﬂect on themselves, to learn about themselves, and to
direct their own development. e current studies contribute less to this
and more to our understanding of diﬀerent features of identity and how
diﬀerent activities are successful in promoting identity development. ey
do imply the importance of reﬂection and inquiry in these activities, but we
still have mu to learn about the conditions at the personal, collective, and
program levels that may foster su activities. We need more studies that
focus more explicitly on mathematical identity to understand meaningful
intervention to facilitate its development.
Teacher Education Settings, Activities, and Tools
e organization of teaer education and its relation to the social and

educational context are important aspects of prospective teaer education.
In this section we identify a new trend that has gained aention in recent
studies. In particular, we discuss institutional elements that shape speciﬁc
aspects of teaer education and program elements that frame learning
activities and contexts with a focus on practicum, lesson study,
video/multimedia cases, and online seings. Whenever possible we strive to
relate these elements to the program study plans, the nature of the
participants’ activity, the relation between mathematics content and
mathematics teaing didactics (PCK), and the relation of program
activities to actual classroom practice and school culture.
General Aspects
Based on data from a survey of 21 countries/regions, Tao, Lerman and
Novotna (2010) indicated that in most cases prospective mathematics
teaer education is carried out at universities. However, economic
constraints seem to have generated a trend to move prospective
mathematics teaer education towards primary and secondary sools.
Everywhere, prospective teaer education is strongly regulated at the
national or local level. ere are two main forms of organization for these
programs: “concurrent preparation,” prevalent for primary teaers, in
whi general education and professional education are provided jointly in
a single program; and “consecutive preparation,” prevalent for secondary
teachers, that establishes two separate periods for both kinds of preparation.
Teaer educators tend to be mathematicians for the mathematics courses,
general educators for the pedagogy courses, and mathematics educators for
the didactic courses. In some cases, mathematics educators assume the
responsibility for courses in didactics, mathematics, and pedagogy. e
emphasis on mathematics content knowledge varies widely, but tends to be

high for secondary teaers and low for primary teaers. In contrast, the
emphasis on didactics and pedagogy tends to be high in most
countries/regions in the survey, although this is more noticeable at
secondary level. In most cases the entry level into teaer education is at
the end of secondary education; however, in three countries (England,
Germany, and Italy) it is aer an initial undergraduate degree. In some
countries a master degree is necessary to become a teacher.
e varieties of prospective teaer education routes, including some in
whi academic teaer education is minimal or nonexistent, and the
diﬀerent emphasis on diﬀerent strands (content, pedagogy, didactics,
teaing practice), show that teaer education is still not completely
established as a professional ﬁeld. is suggests that researers, besides
being concerned with speciﬁc features of prospective teaer education,
also need to aend to su global issues in order to promote more
coherence and quality in the process of preparation of new teaers and its
acceptance by decision makers and the society in general.
Practicum and Lesson Study
e practicum, internship, ﬁeld experience, or student teaing periods in
sools has a long history of being recognized as a key element of teaer
preparation. Tao et al. (2010) indicated that periods of practice in sools
vary from 45 days to two years in most countries/regions in their survey.
is variation in time and organizational features show that the purpose
and role of this element of teaer education is still not well established at
an international level. In some cases it seems that the major aim is to
provide a smooth transition from the status of prospective teaer towards
that of in-service teaer—helping the development of most-needed
survival skills—whereas in other cases, it seems to be regarded as a key

stage of the development of an integrated set of competencies necessary for
eﬀective mathematics teaing. However, regardless of the aim, sool-
based experiences can allow prospective teaers to develop their
professional competence and identity, integrating and developing new
knowledge and aitudes, based on what they learned in university courses
or other formal and informal situations. e way this enhances the quality
of a teaer’s preparation depends on the nature of the experience
provided, especially if it is based on well-structured activities (Wilson,
Floden, & Ferrini-Mundy, 2001). Su activities depend on the
aracteristics of the cooperating sool, the cooperating teaer, and the
articulation between sool activities and university supervision, as
evidenced in some studies.
For example, Peterson and Williams (2008) studied the learning
opportunities provided by the interactions between a prospective teaer
and cooperating teaer, analyzing the core themes that emerged from
their conversations. Whereas one prospective/cooperating teaer pair
focused on controlling student behavior and rarely talked about
mathematics for teaing, another pair focused on students’ active
participation and their understanding of mathematics in the lesson. e
authors suggested su diﬀerent experiences in the practicum can have a
deep eﬀect on prospective teaers’ understanding of mathematics and
mathematics teaing. Another study by Leatham and Peterson (2010)
focused on cooperating teaers’ perceptions of the purpose of student
teaing. From a survey of 45 secondary mathematics cooperating teaers,
they concluded that the most common purposes were interacting with
experienced teaers, having real classroom experiences, and learning
about classroom management while the most common roles for
cooperating teaers were providing opportunities for experience,
modeling, reﬂection, and sharing knowledge. e cooperating teaers saw
themselves as experienced teachers but not as teacher educators.

A general concern is the mismat between the curriculum advocated in
teaer education programs and what prospective teaers oen ﬁnd in
sools, whi can lead to what is learned at the university being
contradicted and dismissed during the practicum experiences. is concern
is implied by Rhoads, Radu, and Weber (2011) who analyzed the
experiences of nine prospective high-sool mathematics teaers in their
practicum. e results indicated that most of the participants supported
reform-oriented teaing and conceptual understanding in mathematics,
but all were paired with cooperating teaers who valued traditional
instruction and procedural understanding. However, some of these
prospective teaers had positive experiences with their cooperating
teaers, valuing constructive critical feedba associated with concrete
recommendations for improvement, freedom to use their own teaing
methods, and a friendly and supportive relationship. In another study,
Philipp et al. (2007) examined the eﬀects of early ﬁeld experiences carried
out in sools and in a laboratory environment, on the mathematics content
knowledge and beliefs of 159 prospective primary-sool teaers enrolled
in the ﬁrst of four mathematics content courses of the program. ey
concluded that the prospective teaers who studied ildren’s
mathematical thinking while learning mathematics improved their
mathematical content knowledge and developed new reﬁned beliefs about
mathematics, teaching, and learning more than those of the other groups.
Another organizational seing that recently has been used in several
studies in the preparation of prospective teaers is lesson study, whi
involves a cyclic process of planning and testing teaing. For example,
Fernandez and Zilliox (2011) designed instructional experiences for
prospective primary and secondary teaers based on features of lesson
study. e 36 secondary participants carried out repeated cycles of
planning, implementing, and revising lessons in a micro-teaing seing
with videotaped lessons while the 48 prospective primary teaers carried

out similar activities in actual sools. Findings indicated that they were
able to expose their beliefs and practices to peers and other participants,
trialing and revising their beliefs and practices, led by the dynamic of the
lesson study cycles. e experiences helped them to understand and
implement reform-oriented teaing practices. Murata and Pothen (2011)
had prospective teaers read about lesson study, wat videos, read
resear-related readings, and do assignments su as looking at data from
teaer interviews and student assessment data, and writing a reﬂection
paper. ey concluded that the participants developed an understanding of
the importance of student learning, enhanced their understanding of the
mathematics content, developed skills for designing and evaluating lessons
and for interacting with the ildren, and learnt how to collaborate with
other teaers. In addition, Ris (2011), working with four prospective
secondary teaers also in a lesson study, suggested that their reﬂection
may be conceptualized in two main categories, one related to speciﬁc
episodes unconnected to future activity, and another connecting reﬂective
episodes into a cyclic progression in whi experimental action supported
the refinement of ideas.
Considering several studies conducted in the frame of lesson study, Potari
(2011) concluded that two factors were most important: (i) the role of
teaer educators as facilitators of prospective teaers’ learning through
diﬀerent degrees of guidance and support, and (ii) the role of group
collaboration providing the opportunity to share ideas, see teaing and
learning in new perspectives, develop a sense of belonging, and develop a
sense for mathematics teaing toward reform-oriented practices. ese
can support the integration of planning, study of curriculum documents and
relevant resear ﬁndings, observation, and reﬂection. e drawbas are
time and organizational effort required.

Video and Multimedia Cases and Online Settings
In the last few years many studies have addressed the potential of
multimedia cases and video clips in prospective teaer education. For
example, Santagata, Zannoni, and Stigler (2007) used unedited videos of
entire lessons to support lesson analysis for prospective secondary
mathematics teaers. e focus was on parts of the lesson and learning
goals, students’ thinking and learning, and possible alternative teaing
strategies. Participants commented on events they found interesting
regarding teaers’ actions and decisions, students’ behavior and learning,
and mathematics content. Findings indicated that they improved
signiﬁcantly, moving from simple descriptions of what they saw on the
video to analyses focused on the observable eﬀects of teaer actions on
student learning. In another study, Alsawaie and Alghazo (2010) explored
the eﬀect of using a methodology of video lesson analysis on the ability of
prospective middle- and high-sool mathematics teaers to analyze
mathematics teaing. e experimental group analyzed 10 video lessons
on their own time throughout the semester, interacting via discussion
forums using the Blaboard online platform. Both the experimental and
the control group wrote a pre- and a postintervention analysis of a video
lesson. Findings indicated that the intervention improved the experimental
group’s ability to analyze mathematics teaing while lile improvement
occurred for the control group.
Regarding multimedia cases, McGraw, Lyn, Koc, Budak, and Brown
(2007) studied their potential as tools in teaer education. ey examined
online and face-to-face discussions that took place within heterogeneous
groups composed of prospective middle and secondary mathematics
teaers as well as in-service mathematics teaers, mathematicians, and
mathematics teaer educators. Aer a ﬁrst activity based on the notion of
task cognitive demand, the participants viewed and discussed a multimedia

case designed by the researers that included video clips and transcripts of
classroom activities, and provided many possibilities for examining
teaing and learning. Findings indicated that most discussions within small
groups tended to focus on issues of task implementation in the classroom.
As the preceding sample of studies suggest, multimedia cases and video
clips can be useful resources in prospective mathematics teaer education,
enabling easy access to ri representations of practice. In these studies,
whereas some researers ose to use video clips that represented
classroom work with very lile editing structure, others designed
sophisticated multimedia materials combining video, single images, and
text, with many interactive features. In general, many kinds of explorations
are possible in both cases. However, a critical issue is how these materials
and explorations are integrated in the main goals and other activities in
teacher education programs.
e use of online seings in prospective teaer education has also
developed recently as evidenced in Alsawaie and Alghazo (2010). In
another study, Llinares and Valls (2007, 2010) examined how participation
and reiﬁcation of ideas about mathematics teaing emerged in the
discussions about mathematics teaing based on the analysis of video
cases. Prospective primary teaers, as part of a mathematics methods
course, participated in two virtual learning environments that integrated
the analysis of video clips, online discussions, and essay writing about key
aspects of mathematics teaing. Findings indicated that the structure of the
learning environments supported their inquiry and knowledge-building
through activities like identifying, interpreting, and designing. Llinares and
Valls (2010) also indicated that relevant aspects to explain the prospective
teaers’ learning included the speciﬁc questions posed in online
discussions, the way in whi the theoretical information was used to frame
and to interpret the events from mathematics teaing, and the
aracteristics of engagement with others participating in the online

discussions. In addition, Fernández, Llinares, and Valls (2012) sought to
characterize prospective mathematics teachers’ development of professional
noticing of students’ mathematical thinking in online contexts. ey
concluded that the online discussions supported this development because
of the role of writing, that is, the ﬁnal wrien text supported the
collaborative activity.
Online environments extend the range of possible forms of work in
prospective teaer education. Most oen they are integrated with face-to-
face activities. e resear carried out so far shows that, by integrating
individual reﬂections and collective online discussions, suitable learning
experiences may be provided to promote the development of prospective
teachers’ professional knowledge and competencies.

Concluding Reflections
e education of prospective teaers who tea mathematics, either as
specialists in the discipline or along with other curriculum subjects,
constitutes one of the main ﬁelds of activity of mathematics educators. In
this apter, we presented examples of recent international resear in this
ﬁeld with special aention to studies carried out in the last eight years in
the domains of the nature and development of prospective mathematics
teaers’ knowledge of mathematics and teaing mathematics and their
identity and the learning contexts involved. In this ﬁnal section we reﬂect
on the trend in research process and findings, and some ongoing issues.
Trends in Research Process
In the last eight years there were important eﬀorts to carry out large-scale
resear projects dealing with prospective teaer education, teaer
knowledge, and teaer quality of instruction, drawing on sophisticated
measuring instruments and large samples of participants. However, similar
to our ﬁndings in Ponte and Chapman (2008), most of the studies we
discussed in this apter are qualitative case studies or small-scale studies
using instruments and processes of data collection su as interviews,
observations, classroom productions, and journal writing of the prospective
teaers, 
researers’ 
ﬁeld 
notes, 
audio, 
and 
video 
recording,
questionnaires, and tests. is suggests that studies of prospective teaer
education continue to privilege small-scale designs and qualitative
teniques. is is understandable given the resources necessary to carry
out large-scale quantitative studies and the potential of qualitative designs
to address issues intimately related to personal meaning, institutional
practices, and traditions. However, speciﬁc aspects of these methods of

some of these studies prompt us to raise several issues.
e fact that many qualitative studies draw on an insider’s perspective
(i.e., the resear-instructor in an intervention) may be regarded as a
positive feature of practitioners (e.g., teaer educators) researing their
own practice. To provide a balanced perspective and to add new
perspectives and questioning power to this ﬁeld, these studies need to be
combined with studies involving an external perspective and meta-studies.
Many qualitative studies have remarkable designs and methodological
quality. However, others are mostly one-oﬀ activities or involve design
problems. For example, there are situations where studies are not designed
as case studies of individuals but ﬁndings are presented as su. For
example, many studies involving an intervention to support prospective
teaers’ learning are based on courses usually taught by the researer. In
some instances, ﬁndings are not reported for all participants in the course,
but only for one to four of them and, in some cases, report varying degrees
of progress in these participants’ learning. ere are also issues of variables
that are not accounted for in these intervention studies, for example, the
dependence of the intervention on the instructor. As one study (Newton,
2009) reported, anges for participants diﬀered by instructors who used
the same intervention. ese situations involving sample size and
confounding variables make it diﬃcult to understand the overall
eﬀectiveness of the interventions involved and to evaluate and compare
strategies. e design of quantitative studies needs also further reﬁnements,
especially regarding consistency of sampling procedures, construct validity,
and accuracy of measurements.
Trends in Findings
In spite of possible limitations noted, the studies discussed in this apter

oﬀer some key insights about teaer learning. For example, studies
continue to show that there are deﬁciencies in prospective teaers’
knowledge of mathematics and mathematics teaing that require special
aention in teaer education. ey also suggest that a variety of
instructional approaes can make a diﬀerence to the quality of this
knowledge, su as building on prospective teaers’ sense making of
mathematics and mathematics learning by involving them in activities that
bear on fundamental mathematical ideas at the sool level and focusing on
the learner’s thinking. Inquiring in one’s practice has proven to be a
powerful way of constructing knowledge about mathematics, about
students, about teaing, and about oneself. Several studies show cases of
success in whi prospective teaers are beginning to develop an identity
and assume practices aligned with current mathematics curriculum
perspectives. e number of studies addressing features of identity suggests
recognition of their importance in promoting and understanding teaer
learning. In addition, several studies show the important possibilities
provided by new tenological media, especially video and online seings,
whereas reminding us of the critical role of teaer educators and the
construction of collaborative seings as a basis for the development of the
teacher education process.
Ongoing Issues
In spite of the success of these studies in facilitating prospective teaers’
learning, as we discussed in Ponte and Chapman (2008), what is asked of
teaer education can be viewed as an impossible task. In a short time, it
must prepare a young (perhaps immature) person to assume a highly
complex professional function that involves conducting mathematical
activity with large groups of students (20 to 40 or more), who oen have

lile interest in mathematics, have serious aﬀective and social needs, and
come from increasingly mixed cultural seings. Further, we ask new
teaers to engage in practices that are compatible with innovative
curriculum orientations but generally are not the established sool
approach.
Given su features of teaing, the teaer education agenda is not to
ﬁnd a universal solution to prospective teaer education. It is likely more
productive to seek local progress. In this respect, resear shows that we
may provide prospective teaers with opportunities that will allow them
to understand, appreciate, and embrace the complexity of their practice as a
basis for ongoing inquiry. Su inquiry may facilitate developing more
holistic, grounded notions of teaing and learning mathematics. While
resear studies suggest strategies that provide some direction for meeting
this allenge, true progress will require a relationship among the teaer
education institution, the sools, and the educational authorities that
provides not only a strong synergy between the work at the university and
the participating sools, but also supports novice teaers in the initial
phase of their career in education. ere are also important issues
concerning the interface of mathematics education with educational policy,
sool administration, and program evaluation that need more aention by
mathematics education researchers.
Although prospective mathematics teaer education has gained beer
understanding of processes by whi one learns how to tea mathematics
and be a professional teaer and is exploring new tenological
environments and tools, many questions still remain in this ﬁeld. As we
learn more, many of these questions may remain diﬃcult to answer
because local conditions vary widely. Prospective teaer education is not a
closed system, but a subsystem that depends on other larger social systems
that also evolve in relation to the larger social anges. Su inherent
incompleteness is a major challenge and source of interest.

References
Alsawaie, O. N., & Alghazo, I. M. (2010). e eﬀect of video-based approa on prospective teaers’
ability to analyze mathematics teaching. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 13 (3), 223–
241.
Ball, D. L., Lubienski, S. T., & Mewborn, D. S. (2001). Resear on teaing mathematics: e
unsolved problems of teaers’ mathematical knowledge. In V. Riardson (Ed), Handbook of
research on teaching (4th ed., pp. 433–456). Washington, DC: AERA.
Ball, D. L, ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2005). Articulating domains of mathematical knowledge of
teaching. Paper presented at the American Education Resear Association Conference,
Montreal, Canada.
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it
special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389–407.
Barrantes, M., & Blanco, L. J. (2006). A study of prospective primary teaers conceptions of teaing
and learning school geometry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 9(5), 411–436.
Bartell, T. G., Webel, C., Bowen, B., & Dyson, N. (2013). Prospective teaer learning: recognizing
evidence of conceptual understanding. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 16(1), 57–79.
Ben-Chaim, D., Keret, Y., & Ilany, B.-S. (2007). Designing and implementing authentic investigative
proportional reasoning tasks: e impact on pre-service mathematics teaers’ content and
pedagogical knowledge and aitudes. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 10 (4–6), 333–
340.
Beswi, K., Callingham, R., & Watson, J. (2012). e nature and development of middle sool
mathematics teachers’ knowledge. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 15(2), 131–157.
Caglayan, G. (2013). Prospective mathematics teaers’ sense making of polynomial multiplication
and factorization modeled with algebra tiles. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 16,
349–378.
Charalambous, C. Y., Hill, H. C., & Ball, D. L. (2011). Prospective teaers’ learning to provide
instructional explanations: how does it look and what might it take? Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 14(6), 441–463.
Charalambous, C. Y., Philippou, G. N., & Kyriakides, L. (2008). Tracing the development of preservice

teaers’ eﬃcacy beliefs in teaing mathematics during ﬁeldwork. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 67, 125–142.
Crespo, S., & Sinclair, N. (2008). What makes a problem mathematically interesting? Inviting
prospective teaers to pose beer problems. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 11 (5),
395–415.
Davis, J. D. (2009). Understanding the inﬂuence of two mathematics textbooks on prospective
secondary teachers’ knowledge. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12, 365–389.
Fernández, C., Llinares, S., & Valls, J. (2012). Learning to notice students’ mathematical thinking
through on-line discussions. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 44 ,
477–459.
Fernandez, M. L., & Zilliox, J. (2011). Investigating approaes to lesson study in prospective
mathematics teaer education. In L. C. Hart, A. Alston & A. Murata (Eds.), Lesson study,
research and practice in mathematics education (pp. 85–102). Dordrecht: Springer.
Goos, M., & Benninon, A. (2008). Developing a communal identity as beginning teaers of
mathematics: Emergence of an online community of practice. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 11, 41–60.
Hill, H., Ball, D. L., & Silling, S. G. (2008). Unpaing pedagogical content knowledge:
Conceptualizing and measuring teaers’ topic-speciﬁc knowledge of students. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 372–400.
Hill, H. C., Blunk, M. L., Charalambous, C. Y., Lewis, J. M., Phelps, G. C., Sleep, D. L. (2008).
Mathematical knowledge for teaing and the mathematical quality of instruction: An
exploratory study. Cognition and Instruction, 26, 430–511.
I˙mre, S. Y., & Akkoç, H. (2012). Investigating the development of prospective mathematics teaers’
pedagogical content knowledge of generalising number paerns through sool practicum.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 15(3), 207–226.
Isiksal, M., & Cakiroglu, E. (2011). e nature of prospective mathematics teaers’ pedagogical
content knowledge: e case of multiplication of fractions. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 14, 3, 213–230.
Jansen, A. (2009) Prospective elementary teaers’ motivation to participate in whole-class
discussions during mathematics content courses for teaers. Educational Studies in

Mathematics, (2009) 71:145–160.
Jansen, A., & Spitzer, S. M. (2009). Prospective middle sool mathematics teaers’ reﬂective
thinking skills: Descriptions of their students’ thinking and interpretations of their teaing.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12(2), 133–151.
Jaworski, B., & Gellert, U. (2003). Educating new mathematics teaers: Integrating theory and
practice, and the roles of practicing teaers. In A. J. Bishop, M. A. Clements, C. Keitel, J.
Kilpatri & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.), Second international handbook of mathematics education (pp.
829–875). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Karp, A. (2010). Analyzing and aempting to overcome prospective teaers’ diﬃculties during
problem-solving instruction. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 13(2), 121–139.
Kilpatri, J., Swaﬀord, J., & Findell, B. (Eds.). (2001). Adding it up: Helping ildren learn
mathematics. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Krauss, S., Brunner, M., Kunter, M., Baumert, J., Neubrand, M., Blum, W., & Jordan, A. (2008).
Pedagogical content knowledge and content knowledge of secondary mathematics teaers.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(716–715).
Lavy, I., & Shriki, A. (2008). Investigating anges in prospective teaers’ views of a “good teaer”
while engaging in computerized project-based learning. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 11(4), 259–284.
Leatham, K. R., & Peterson, B. E. (2010). Secondary mathematics cooperating teaers’ perceptions of
the purpose of student teaching. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 13(2), 99–119.
Llewellyn, A. (2009). “Gender games”: A post-structural exploration of the prospective teaer,
mathematics and identity. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12(6), 411–426.
Llinares, S., & Krainer, K. (2006). Mathematics (student) teaers and teaer educators as learners.
In A. Gutierrez & P. Boero (Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of mathematics
education: Past, present and future (pp. 429–460). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Llinares, S., & Valls, J. (2007). e building of pre-service primary teaers’ knowledge of
mathematics teaching: interaction and online video studies. Instructional Science, 37(3), 247–271.
Llinares, S., & Valls, J. (2010). Prospective primary mathematics teaers’ learning from online
discussions in a virtual video-based environment. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education,
13(2), 177–196.

Lloyd, G. M. (2008). Curriculum use while learning to tea: One student teaer’s appropriation of
mathematics curriculum materials. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 39(1), 63–94.
Lo, J.-J., Grant, T. J., & Flowers, J. (2008). Challenges in deepening prospective teaers’
understanding of multiplication through justiﬁcation. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 11, 5–22.
Lo, J.-J., & Luo, F. (2012). Prospective elementary teaers’ knowledge of fraction division. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 15(6), 481–500.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaing elementary mathematics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
McGraw, R., Lyn, K., Koc, Y., Budak, A., & Brown, C. A. (2007). e multimedia case as a tool for
professional development: An analysis of online and face-to-face interaction among mathematics
pre-service teaers, mathematicians, and mathematics teaer educators. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 10(2), 95–121.
Morris, A. K., Hiebert, J., & Spitzer, S. M. (2009). Mathematical knowledge for teaing in planning
and evaluating instruction: What can preservice teaers learn? Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 40(5), 491–529.
Murata, A., & Pothen, B. E. (2011). Lesson study in preservice primary mathematics methods courses:
Connecting emerging practice and understanding. In L. C. Hart, A. Alston, & A. Murata (Eds.),
Lesson study, research and practice in mathematics education (pp. 103–116). Dordrecht: Springer.
Nason, R., Chalmers, C., & Yeh, A. (2012). Facilitating growth in prospective teaers’ knowledge:
teaing geometry in primary sools. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 15 (3), 227–
249.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics. (1991). Professional standards for teaing
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Newton, J. N. (2009). Instructional practices related to prospective elementary sool teaers’
motivation for fractions. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12, 89–109.
Nicol, C., & Crespo, S. (2006). Learning to tea with mathematics textbooks: How preservice
teaers interpret and use curriculum materials. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 62, 331–
355.
Osana, H., Lacroix, G., Tuer, B. J., & Desrosiers, C. (2007). e role of content knowledge and

problem features on preservice teaers’ appraisal of elementary tasks. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 9(4), 347–380.
Peretz, D. (2006). Enhancing reasoning aitudes of prospective elementary sool mathematics
teachers. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 9(4), 381–400.
Peterson, B. E., & Williams, S. R. (2008). Learning mathematics for teaing in the student teaing
experience: Two contrasting cases. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11(6), 459–478.
Philipp, R. A., Ambrose, R., Lamb, L.L.C., Sowder, J. T., Sappele, B. P., Sowder, L., et al. (2007).
Eﬀects of early ﬁeld experiences on the mathematics content knowledge of prospective and
beliefs of primary sool teaers: An experimental study. Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 38(5), 438–476.
Pia-Pantazi, D., & Christou, C. (2011). e structure of prospective kindergarten teaers’
proportional reasoning. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14(2), 149–169.
Ponte, J. P., & Chapman, O. (2006). Mathematics teaers’ knowledge and practices. In A. Gutierrez
& P. Boero (Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of mathematics education: Past,
present and future (pp. 461–494). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Ponte, J. P., & Chapman, O. (2008). Preservice mathematics teaers’ knowledge and development. In
L. D. English (Ed.) Handbook of international resear in mathematics education: Directions for
the 21st century (2nd Ed., pp. 225–263). New York: Routledge.
Potari, D. (2011). Response to part II: Emerging issues from lesson study approaes in prospective
mathematics teaer education. In L. C. Hart, A. Alston, & A. Murata (Eds.), Lesson study,
research and practice in mathematics education (pp. 127–132). Dordrecht: Springer.
Prediger, S. (2010). How to develop mathematics-for-teaing and for understanding: e case of
meanings of the equal sign. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 13(1), 73–93.
Rhoads, K., Radu, I., & Weber, K. (2011). Teaer internship experiences of prospective high sool
mathematics teaers. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 9(4), 975–
998.
Ris, T. E. (2011). Process reﬂection during Japanese lesson study experiences by prospective
secondary mathematics teachers. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14(4), 251–267.
Ryken, A. (2009). Multiple representations as sites for teaer reﬂection about mathematics learning.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12, 347–364

Santagata, R., Zannoni, C., & Stigler, J. W. (2007). e role of lesson analysis in preservice teaer
education: An empirical investigation of teaer learning from a virtual video-based ﬁeld
experience. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 10(2), 123–140.
Seaman, C. E., & Szydlik, J. E. (2007). Mathematical sophistication among preservice elementary
teachers. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 10(3), 167–182.
Shulman, L. S. (1986). ose who understand: Knowledge growth in teaing. Educational
Researcher, 15(2), 4–14.
Son, J.-W., & Crespo, S. (2009). Prospective teaers’ reasoning and response to a student’s non-
traditional strategy when dividing fractions. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 12 ,
235–261.
Spitzer, S. M., Phelps, C. M., Beyers, J.E.R., Johnson, D. Y., & Sieminski, E. M. (2011). Developing
prospective elementary teaers’ abilities to identify evidence of student mathematical
achievement. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14, 67–87.
Steele, M. D., Hillen, A. F., Smith, M. S. (2013). Developing mathematical knowledge for teaing in
a methods course: The case of function. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 16, 451–482.
Stephens, A. C. (2006). Equivalence and relational thinking: Preservice elementary teaers’
awareness of opportunities and misconceptions. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education, 9 (3),
221–248.
Stoero, S. L. (2008). Using a video-based curriculum to develop a reﬂective stance in prospective
mathematics teachers. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11(5), 373–394.
Stylianides, G. J., Stylianides, A. J., & Philippou, G. N. (2007). Preservice teaers’ knowledge of proof
by mathematical induction. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 10(3), 145166.
Swars, S. L., Smith, S. Z., Smith, M. E., & Hart, L. C. (2009). A longitudinal study of eﬀects of a
developmental teaer preparation program on elementary prospective teaers’ mathematics
beliefs. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12(1), 47–66.
Tao, M. T., Lerman, S., & Novotna, J. (2010). e organization of the mathematics preparation and
development of teaers: A report from the ICMI Study 15. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 13(4), 313–324.
Tobias, J. M. (2013). Prospective elementary teaers’ development of fraction language for deﬁning
the whole. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 16(2), 85–103.

Watson, A., & Mason, J. (2007). Taken-as-shared: A review of common assumptions about
mathematical tasks in teacher education. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 10(4), 205–
215.
Wilson, S. M., Floden, R. E., & Ferrini-Mundy, J. (2001). Teaer preparation resear: Current
knowledge, gaps, and recommendations. Washington, DC: University of Washington Center for
the Study of Teaching and Policy.
Yow, J. A. (2012). Prospective teaer beliefs about liberative and oppressive mathematics teaing
practices: A ﬁrst step toward equitable instruction. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education,
15(1), 83–96.

11 Educating Future Mathematics
Education Professors1
Jeremy Kilpatrick and Denise A. Spangler
University of Georgia
In the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century, anyone looking at the pioneering
doctoral programs in mathematics education being established by David
Eugene Smith at Teaers College, Columbia University, and Felix Klein at
the University of Göingen could not have envisioned the variegated
landscape of su programs a century later. Similarly, no one today can
with any conﬁdence predict how mathematics education professors will be
educated during the next generation, let alone the next century. In this
apter, we examine those features of programs for educating the
professorate in mathematics education that ought to persist even as
programs come and go; tenology advances; instructional media and
delivery systems get reconﬁgured; faculty hiring and working conditions
ange; and both mathematics and mathematics education curricula are
revised in various directions. We explore what it might mean to prepare
doctoral students for their future roles as professors of mathematics
education.

A New Generation
Today’s doctoral programs in mathematics education are numerous and
extremely varied (see Andža¯ns, Bonka, & Grevholm, 2008, for examples
from around the world). Some are located in departments of mathematics
or mathematical sciences, where mathematics education might be viewed
as a (multidisciplinary) mathematical science. e term didactics of
mathematics is sometimes used to label su programs. e location is
likely to be an artifact of history. e university in whi the program is
situated might have originated as a normal sool or other pedagogical
institution whose mathematics department came to encompass, and oﬀer
doctoral degrees in, both mathematics and mathematics education. When
doctoral programs in mathematics education are located in a department of
mathematics or mathematical sciences, a new faculty member in
mathematics education might be expected to be especially well prepared in
mathematics.
An alternative is for the program in mathematics education to have been
placed in a department, sool, or college of education that originated
outside the university and then was incorporated into it as education gained
status as a solarly ﬁeld. In a few cases, the program might be located in a
separate department of mathematics education or mathematics didactics,
but it is mu more likely to reside in a department of pedagogy, subject-
maer didactics, curriculum and instruction, or general education. Mu
depends on the size of the program and on its history within the university
of whi it is a part. e location of the program within the university,
however, is generally not the main source of variance in programs.
Some universities have multiple doctoral programs in mathematics
education, whereas others share a doctoral program in mathematics
education with one or more other universities. An example of an institution
with multiple programs is Teaers College, Columbia University, where

there are programs in mathematics education leading to the Doctor of
Education (Ed.D.), the Doctor of Education in the College Teaing of an
Academic Subject (Ed.D.C.T.), and the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.).
According to Reys, Glasgow, Teuser, and Nevels (2007), approximately
15% of 70 U.S. institutions with doctoral programs in mathematics
education grant both the Ed.D. and the Ph.D. Worldwide, a distinction is
oen made between the two degrees, with the Ph.D., the “resear
doctorate,” seen as more scientiﬁc, contributing to knowledge, and the
Ed.D., the “professional doctorate,” as more applied, contributing to policy
or professional practice (Bernstein et al., 2014, p. 25; de Ibarrola &
Anderson, 2014, p. xi). Across institutions and countries, however, there is
considerable variation in how the two kinds of programs diﬀer, and there
are likely as many diﬀerences within Ph.D. programs and within Ed.D.
programs as there are between the two types of programs.
Increasingly in recent years there have been instances, particularly in
Europe, in whi institutions have collaborated to support doctoral studies
in mathematics education. e European Union’s ERASMUS (EuRopean
Community Action Seme for the Mobility 
of University Students)
Program has given grants to support internships and student exanges
across doctoral programs, and the European University Association has
established the so-called European doctorate (Doctor Europæus), whi
requires that the doctoral resear, thesis approval, languages of the thesis
defense, and thesis examination board span several European countries. In a
ﬁne example of cross-national cooperation, the Nordic Graduate Sool in
Mathematics Education (Grevholm, 2008), whi existed from 2004 to 2009,
held workshops, seminars, and summer sools for students from about 40
institutions in the Nordic and Baltic countries. During its six-year duration,
students in the school successfully defended over 50 doctoral dissertations in
mathematics education (Grevholm, 2009). Although that project has ended,
similar examples of su cooperation can be expected to emerge around

the world as more countries discover the value of regional programs.
Cross-institutional programs can also provide a means for developing
countries to harness the resources needed if they are to provide doctoral
education in the absence of a critical mass of either faculty or students at a
single institution. From 1997 to 2004, for example, the National Resear
Foundation of South Africa and the U.S. National Science Foundation
jointly sponsored an annual Research School in South Africa where doctoral
students in mathematics and science education from around the country
and region had opportunities to work for a week with solars from several
countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom, and South
Africa (Mewborn, 2008; for more details on resear in mathematics
education in South Africa, see Vithal, Adler, & Keitel, 2005). Since 2003, the
Southern African Association for Resear in Mathematics, Science, and
Tenology Education (SAARMSTE; see www.saarmste.org/) has been
hosting the Resear Sool. e sool, now a three- to four-day
residential workshop, provides some 40 to 50 participants, mainly from
southern Africa, with an opportunity to learn about various aspects of the
resear process. It is aended for doctoral students, postdoctoral fellows,
and supervisors in mathematics, science, and tenology education. At the
sool, experienced researers from universities around the world conduct
plenary sessions and workshops on issues of resear design, data
collection, data analysis, and writing for publication. e participants can
get feedba on their resear activities and their writing from experienced
researers as well as become acquainted with other new solars from the
region. e Resear Sool is only one of many activities of the
SAARMSTE that are intended to build capacity in education resear in
southern Africa.
Some doctoral programs in mathematics education, especially in North
America, consist primarily of several years of coursework followed by
qualifying examinations and a dissertation. Students take graduate courses

in mathematics, mathematics education, psyology, resear methods, and
other areas of interest to the student or emphasized by the institution. There
is oen a requirement that the student spend a certain number of terms in
residence at the institution. In contrast, other doctoral programs assume
that, by admiing students who already possess a master’s degree,
additional coursework can be deemphasized or eliminated. In su
programs, many of whi are in the European Higher Education Area
(Curaj, Sco, Vlasceanu, & Wilson, 2012), students enter the program with a
master’s degree and begin by engaging in independent resear guided by
a professor, with perhaps some coursework or intense independent study as
needed.
In the United Kingdom, for example, the main (and in many cases only)
component of the resear doctorate is a thesis or portfolio of original
resear that is then examined by an expert panel appointed by the
university. In Australia and New Zealand, coursework has not ordinarily
been part of doctoral programs, but it has become mu more common
during the past decade. In a recent online survey of doctoral students in ﬁve
Australian universities (Kiley, Bell, & Feng, 2013), 39% of the more than 700
respondents had undertaken or were undertaking coursework, and 57%
agreed that it should be part of the doctoral program. e meaning of the
term coursework, however, is not always clear, as Margaret Kiley of the
Australian National University, who has been studying the phenomenon,
revealed in an interview (Van, 2012):
When you actually spoke to those involved with the introduction of coursework and asked what
that was, there was an amazing variety of understandings of what “coursework” might be. For
example, you’ve got people who think coursework is about resear methods, those who would
call coursework “resear processes”—all the things to do with how to do resear. For others
coursework is actually disciplinary knowledge: advanced disciplinary knowledge. And those two
of course are quite different.
(p. 119)

As the availability of online courses, and perhaps even entire doctoral
programs, becomes more pervasive, one might expect residence
requirements to be abandoned and coursework requirements to ange,
becoming more tailored to the interests and qualiﬁcations of the student.
Individual programs are likely to ange their shape and nature during the
coming generation, but the great variety to be found among programs
internationally seems unlikely to diminish.

Needed Proficiency
Although there is great variety in the location and conﬁguration of doctoral
programs, it is reasonable to expect that there will continue to be some
commonalities in the proﬁciencies of doctoral students seeking to become
professors of mathematics education. Certainly proficiencies will vary based
on individual aspirations and interests and the emphases in speciﬁc
programs, but there are categories of proﬁciency one would expect to see
in all future mathematics education professors; namely, proﬁciency with
mathematics and with teaing. Given that professors of mathematics
education need preparation in both mathematics and education, there is
almost no possibility that their doctoral program can supply them with all
the preparation they will need in both ﬁelds, so whatever education they
receive ought to equip them to acquire additional proﬁciency once they are
on the job.
Mathematical Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities
Anyone being educated to become a professor of mathematics education
obviously needs a strong education in mathematics. How extensive should
that be? In some doctoral programs in mathematics education, the
assumption is made that students ﬁnishing the program ought to have
studied graduate-level mathematics to at least the equivalent of a master’s
degree in mathematics. Other programs ask for more mathematics than
that, particularly if the student is seeking a position to prepare
undergraduate mathematics instructors. Some programs ask for less
mathematics, however, particularly if the student is seeking a position to
prepare primary sool mathematics teaers. Dossey and Lappan (2001)
oﬀer guidelines for mathematics course oﬀerings for the diﬀerent

specializations available in U.S. doctoral programs that may apply to
programs in other countries as well.
e question of what mathematics a mathematics educator needs to
know was addressed more than a century ago by Felix Klein. In 1908, he
published the ﬁrst volume of his groundbreaking Elementarmathematik
vom höheren Standpunkte aus (Elementary Mathematics from a Higher
Standpoint), whi was his aempt to raise the level of secondary
mathematics instruction by equipping prospective teaers with a more
comprehensive view of the content they would be teaing. He had
expressed his views of mathematics education in his inaugural address
(Antrittsrede) of 1872 when he became professor at Erlangen at the age of
23. e problem of the secondary sool curriculum was, for Klein, neither
insuﬃcient time nor inadequate content: it was the absence of a revitalized,
more spirited treatment of the content that would reﬂect a beer
understanding of the mutual connections between problems in the various
domains of mathematics:
We, as university teaers, require not only that our students, on completion of their studies,
know what must be taught in the sools. We want the future teaer to stand above his
subject, that he have a conception of the present state of knowledge in his ﬁeld, and that he
generally be capable of following its further development.
(Klein, in Rowe, 1985, p. 139)
Discussing the mathematics a teaer needs to know, Klein (1924/1932)
wrote: “e teaer’s knowledge should be far greater than that whi he
presents to his pupils. He must be familiar with the cliﬀs and the whirlpools
in order to guide his pupils safely past them” (p. 162). e metaphor here is
that of guide, someone who knows the mathematical terrain well and can
conduct his or her students through it without them geing lost or injured.
Klein went on to discuss how the novice teaer needs to be equipped to
counteract common misperceptions of mathematical ideas:

If you la orientation, if you are not well informed concerning the intuitive elements of
mathematics as well as the vital relations with neighboring ﬁelds, if, above all, you do not know
the historical development, your footing will be very insecure. You will then either withdraw to
the ground of the most modern pure mathematics, and fail to be understood in the sool, or
you will succumb to the assault, give up what you learned at the university and even in your
teaching allow yourself to be buried in the traditional routine.
(Klein, 1924/1932, p. 236)
Consequently, Klein’s approach to mathematics for prospective teachers put
considerable emphasis on applications, geometric illustrations, space
perception, the concept of function, and the historical development of the
ﬁeld. As two examples of the greater knowledge teaers should have, he
thought they should understand the function-theoretic nature of the
logarithm and also know something of non-Euclidean geometry even
though neither topic, in his view, should be part of regular sool
instruction.
Klein’s eﬀorts anticipated later aempts to aracterize the particular
sort of mathematical proﬁciency needed by teaers—not simply a ﬁrm
knowledge of the content to be taught in sool but also an understanding
of where that knowledge ﬁts into the rest of mathematics, how it might
come to be grasped by the novice, and what learning diﬃculties it might
present: part of what has come to be called mathematical knowledge for
teaching (Ball, ames, & Phelps, 2008; Bass, 2005; Bromme, 1994; Carrillo,
Climent, Contreras, & Muñoz-Catalán, 2013; Rowland, Turner, waites, &
Hustep, 2009; Silverman & ompson, 2008). Our argument here is that
the potential mathematics education professor needs that sort of
proficiency, too.
Claiming that all mathematical knowledge for teaing (MKT) is
specialized, Carrillo et al. (2013) modiﬁed the MKT idea, proposing instead
what they call mathematics teaers’ specialized knowledge (MTSK). e
mathematical knowledge aspect of MTSK has three elements: knowledge
of topics (KOT), knowledge of the structure of mathematics (KSM), and

knowledge about mathematics (KAM). In our view, all three elements
should be included in the mathematical knowledge, skills, and abilities
expected of future mathematics education professors, appropriate to the
level at which they plan to work.
KOT is the knowledge of the concepts and procedures relevant to a topic
in sool mathematics together with an understanding of the theoretical
basis for those concepts and procedures. Any teaer should have
knowledge that is more formal and at a higher level than that of his or her
students. For example, although one’s students might know only that the
order in whi two numbers are added does not maer, as a teaer, one
needs the more tenical knowledge that addition (as well as multiplication
but not subtraction or division) is commutative. Similarly, the mathematics
education professor should possess KOT that is more formal and at a higher
level than that of the undergraduate and graduate students he or she is
teaing. For instance, a mathematics education professor teaing
prospective lower secondary sool teaers should have a robust
understanding of proportional reasoning, including the tenical diﬀerences
between fractions and ratios, when those diﬀerences maer, and when they
do not.
KSM is the knowledge of the structure of the discipline of mathematics:
its fundamental concepts, operations, and their properties and how they are
organized into various systems. For example, a teaer of mathematics
needs to know the properties of ea of the number systems to be found in
the sool curriculum, including the natural numbers, integers, rational
numbers, real numbers, and complex numbers. Similarly, the mathematics
education professor should possess knowledge not only of the
interrelationships among topics in a bran of mathematics but also of how
the various branes of mathematics are related. If the teaer of
mathematics needs a view of mathematics from 6,000 meters, the
mathematics education professor needs a view from 12,000 meters.

KAM is knowledge about how mathematics is created and established. It
includes knowing ways of producing syntactic knowledge in mathematics;
knowing aspects of mathematical communication, reasoning, and
evaluating; knowing how to deﬁne and use deﬁnitions; being able to
establish relations, correspondences, and equivalences; and being able to
select representations, argue, generalize, and explore. For example, any
teaer of mathematics should know what his or her students think an
explanation is. “What do they think it means to ‘know’ or to ‘do’
mathematics?” (Ball, 1990, p. 259). e mathematics education professor
should also understand how new knowledge is created and veriﬁed in the
field and how the discipline regulates knowledge development.
We ﬁnd that the Carrillo et al. (2013) formulation of the mathematical
knowledge aspect of MTSK constitutes a useful framework for thinking
about the specialized types of mathematical knowledge that a mathematics
education professor, as well as a teaer of sool mathematics, needs. at
knowledge is quite diﬀerent from the mathematical knowledge needed and
used by the ordinary citizen, the professional in another ﬁeld, or even the
resear mathematician. It involves the application of mathematics to the
ﬁeld of teaing. As Bass (2005) observed: “Mathematics education is not
mathematics. It is a domain of professional work that makes fundamental
use of highly specialized kinds of mathematical knowledge, and in that
sense it can, I suggest, be usefully viewed as a kind of applied mathematics”
(p. 418).
Pedagogical knowledge, skills, and abilities. Along with the
mathematical knowledge aspect of MTSK, Carrillo et al. (2013) analyzed its
pedagogical knowledge aspect.2 at aspect also has three elements:
knowledge of features of learning mathematics (KFLM), knowledge of
mathematics teaing (KMT), and knowledge of mathematics learning
standards (KMLS). All three elements should be included in the pedagogical
content knowledge, skills, and abilities expected of future mathematics

education professors.
KFLM is concerned with understanding how mathematics is learned.
What are the features of the mathematics learning process, and how are
students thinking when they are engaged in mathematical learning
activities? By knowing both the speciﬁc mathematical topic and the speciﬁc
group of students and by being familiar with a model or theory of learning,
a teaer can anticipate the diﬃculties the students might have in learning
it (Grossman & Soenfeld, 2005). For example, the teaer might
understand that given a problem requiring proportional reasoning, some of
his or her students might try adding rather than multiplying to ﬁnd the
missing quantity. As an extension of these ideas, the mathematics education
professor should know a variety of learning theories, and understand when
ea one is most appropriately applied to a particular piece of content or a
particular group of learners. e professor should have a broad
understanding of typical student errors, misconceptions, and strategies for
solving problems in the content areas most appropriate to his or her work
(e.g., primary, secondary, or tertiary). In contrast to the teaer noted
earlier who applies this knowledge to a particular group of learners, a
professor of mathematics education should be able to apply his or her
knowledge more generally. In addition, the professor needs to know what
the available resear says about the unique learning needs and
propensities of adult learners as well as those of children.
KMT involves pedagogical knowledge related to speciﬁc mathematical
content. e teaer knows resources appropriate to a mathematical topic,
including textbooks and other instructional materials. at knowledge
allows the teaer to oose or produce a particular representation or a
structured sequence of examples to illustrate the topic. KMT is not simply a
general knowledge of mathematics and of teaing it; KMT is pedagogical
knowledge integrated with speciﬁc mathematical content knowledge that
constrains the resulting teaing. For example, the teaer might know that

one sequence of quadratic equations is more helpful than another when
students are learning to solve su equations and might therefore oose to
use the former sequence. Again, the mathematics education professor also
needs more generalized KMT and should, for example, be able to
independently generate a variety of sequences of quadratic equations and
articulate the advantages and disadvantages of ea. rough a careful
selection of numbers and contexts, the professor should be able to construct
mathematical tasks for prospective teaers that would demand a solution
method beyond simple cross-multiplication. In addition, the professor needs
knowledge of appropriate representations and instructional materials for
both ildren and adult learners, and he or she should be able to evaluate a
variety of such things.
KMLS is pedagogical knowledge of the sool mathematics curriculum
across the grades, including knowledge of appropriate instructional
materials, evaluation instruments, and standards. KMLS is designed to
extend beyond the teaer’s immediate context to objectives and
performance measures developed by outside agencies, su as examination
boards and professional associations. For example, the teaer who knows
that the ministry of education has revised the syllabus for the sool-
leaving certiﬁcate in mathematics so that geometry proofs using
transformations are no longer accepted will be able to adjust his or her
instruction to beer prepare students for the corresponding certiﬁcate
examination. e mathematics education professor certainly needs
extensive KMLS, whether the national system is centralized or not but
especially if prospective teaers of mathematics in the program will be
headed for schools with a variety of curriculum and assessment formats.
Future mathematics education professors will need to acquire the
requisite pedagogical knowledge discussed both as part of their doctoral
program and outside it, both before they take their ﬁrst faculty positions
and throughout their careers. University courses and seminars can provide

helpful theoretical frameworks for understanding mathematics teaing
and learning, but only extensive experience in mathematics and
mathematics education classrooms can make those frameworks come alive
and help the future professor organize and build up his or her pedagogical
knowledge.

Needed Experience
Field Experience Teaching Mathematics
Anyone seeking a position as a faculty member in mathematics education
ought to be familiar with what it means to tea mathematics in sool or
college. If the prospective mathematics educator has not been inside a
sool or college classroom as a regular teaer of mathematics, he or she
will not be able to speak authoritatively to prospective mathematics
teaers about what they will encounter when they take teaing positions.
ose doctoral students who intend to work in teaer preparation should
gain some experience in primary, secondary, or tertiary classrooms during
their doctoral study. Doctoral students who pursue their degrees in other
than their home country and intend to seek employment in the new
country need classroom experiences, even if they have taught in their home
countries. is experience need not take the form of student teaing but
should include opportunities to observe and engage in mathematics
instruction.
Given the complexities of sools and diﬃculties of ﬁnding suﬃcient
high-quality placements for teaer education students, placing doctoral
students in sools or colleges can be diﬃcult. us it is worth considering
alternative models of ﬁeld experience. In his discussion of the professional
development of teaers, John Dewey (1904/1964) argued that teaing
demands preparation in both theoretical and practical work. Teaers need
to be prepared to address questions of the relationship between subject-
maer knowledge and educational theory while simultaneously managing
the daily routines of classroom practice. Dewey termed a focus on the
theoretical aspects of teaing the laboratory approa and a focus on the
practical aspects, the apprenticeship approa (Philipp et al., 2007). e
laboratory approa allows the prospective teaer to aend to how

students learn, understand, and do mathematics before having to tea a
lesson. It is “forward-looking” (p. 443), whereas the apprenticeship
approa “helps practicing teaers learn how to do that whi is currently
being done” (p. 443). Eﬀective teaer preparation demands both
approaes, but it tends to be dominated by apprenticeship activities su
as student teaing and other ﬁeld experiences in sools and colleges
(McIntyre, Byrd, & Foxx, 1996).
e resear of Philipp et al. (2007) demonstrated the relative
eﬀectiveness of a laboratory approa in whi two treatments to acquaint
prospective elementary sool teaers with ildren’s mathematical
thinking (either by wating videos or by wating videos and working
with ildren) were compared with two apprenticeship treatments that
involved visiting elementary sool mathematics classes (either typical
classes or classes selected because their teaers had participated in reform-
based professional development eﬀorts). Philipp et al. found that the
laboratory approa was only modestly beer than the apprenticeship
approa in improving prospective teaers’ mathematical knowledge, but
it improved their beliefs about ildren’s learning and thinking mu more
strikingly than the apprenticeship approa. e work of Philipp et al.
suggests that, for future mathematics education professors, deliberately
structured experiences outside the classroom can take the place of direct
classroom experiences teaing sool or college mathematics, at least for
some purposes.
Field Experience Teaching Mathematics Education
As future university faculty members, doctoral students can expect to be
called upon to tea a range of mathematics education courses, including
content and methods courses for prospective and practicing teaers, and

theory courses on a range of topics (su as assessment, learning, teaing,
curriculum) for master’s and doctoral students. Doctoral programs
generally do not provide explicit preparation for teaing su courses.
Some doctoral students get the opportunity to serve as teaing assistants
or instructors of record for undergraduate courses as part of their
assistantship duties, but many doctoral students have other assistantship
duties (su as resear) or no assistantship at all. Given that teaing will
almost certainly be expected of all future university or college faculty
members, doctoral programs should deliberately and systematically prepare
students for that role through internships or ﬁeld experiences. Su an
internship or ﬁeld experience would involve the doctoral student in all
aspects of instruction, including global planning for the course; daily
planning, selection and implementation of in-class and out-of-class tasks;
construction of assessment rubrics; consultation with individual students
outside of class; and assigning grades—all under the guidance of a seasoned
faculty member. e intern and faculty member would engage in
discussions about the rationale behind various decisions to help the intern
gain a sense of all that goes into designing and teaing undergraduate
courses. e point is not that there is one correct way to tea su courses
that doctoral students should learn, but rather that doctoral students should
have the opportunity to see the range of decisions that go into designing
and implementing a course so that they are prepared to think through those
decisions themselves.
Emphasizing the need to aend more to the laboratory approa and less
to the apprenticeship approa in teaer preparation, Feiman-Nemser
(2012) points out:
According to Dewey, the supreme mark of a teaer is the ability to interpret and activate
students’ motivational and intellectual processes. is means seeing what is going on in
students’ minds and figuring out how to engage them in worthwhile learning.
(p. 12)

Moving to the preparation of teaer educators, she makes a similar
argument, asserting that
the preparation of teaer educators must include experience with professional practice. Put
slightly diﬀerently, in order to learn how to tea teaers eﬀectively, aspiring teaer educators
must have experiences with the tasks and ways of thinking fundamental to learning teaching.
(Feiman-Nemser, 2013, p. 190)
To learn from experience, according to Feiman-Nemser (2013), teaer
educators need to overcome obstacles posed by their familiarity with
classroom teaing, the transitory quality of experience, and the isolated
aracter of teaing. She recounts what she has learned about the role of
experience over decades of teaing doctoral students, pointing out that
those students need to analyze their prior teaing experience from new
perspectives, engage in and analyze the ﬁrsthand experience they are
gaining as course instructors and what she calls “field instructors,” and work
together to observe and investigate various forms of recorded experience.
For “the teaing experiences of novice teaer educators [to become] an
educative resource … requires the design of professional learning
opportunities that allow teaer educators to learn in and from their
practice and the practice of others” (p. 206). Su learning opportunities are
rarely included in doctoral programs, but future mathematics education
professors are not likely to encounter them otherwise.
Although most doctoral students in mathematics education will have
taken graduate level theory courses, they likely will not have had any
reason to see the “behind the scenes” work that goes into craing su
courses. Generally, the ﬁrst time they will have an opportunity to think
deeply about the construction and implementation of su courses will be
when they are faced with teaing them. Expectations vary from institution
to institution regarding how mu freedom an instructor has to modify,
adapt, or create a syllabus, but even when standard syllabi exist, they oen

do not convey the full range of decisions that an instructor must make. New
professors oen then ﬁnd themselves constructing syllabi based on their
experiences as students but without the beneﬁt of the rationales that went
into developing those experiences. Perhaps this task is part of the learning
curve that is best accomplished on the job, as not all doctoral students will
be expected to teach these sorts of courses.
Research Experience
e ﬁeld of mathematics education has not simply grown over the past
century or so; it has also anged dramatically. Early researers in
mathematics education, for example, aempted to follow the model of the
natural sciences by seing up experiments, controlling variables, and
measuring 
eﬀects 
using 
quantitative 
methods 
(Kilpatri, 
1992).
Abandoning that model in the mid-20th century, researers began using
so-called qualitative resear methods to interpret the teaing and
learning of mathematics by observing mathematics classes as well as
interviewing teaers and learners. Today’s researers oen use
combinations of qualitative and quantitative methods. e popularity of
mixed-method resear has meant that future professors of mathematics
education need to be educated in understanding and employing both kinds
of methods, whi has added to the preparation they need. Further, there is
now a substantial resear literature—as shown by the apters in the
present Handbook—with whi those prospective professors need to be
acquainted.
e independent resear project for the dissertation or thesis is the gold
standard for the doctoral degree, yet many doctoral graduates of
mathematics education programs will take faculty positions in whi
conducting original resear is not part of their job responsibilities.

Traditional doctoral programs have culminated in a thesis, dissertation, or
portfolio that reports on some resear work they have done. e purpose
of the wrien document has been to certify that the candidate is capable of
making an original, independent, and signiﬁcant contribution to the ﬁeld.
e university typically convenes a group of experts to judge the
contribution. ey may be faculty members at the university, or outside
experts may be brought in to assist in the process. In the Scandinavian
countries, candidates may face one or more “opponents” brought in from
outside to contest the arguments the candidate has made in the dissertation.
One alternative in practice by some solars today is to require that the
student conduct resear within the sphere of inquiry in whi the major
professor is working. e beneﬁts of this arrangement are that the student
works with a well-established literature base, theoretical frameworks, and
data collection and analysis techniques, and that the research that comes out
of the dissertation contributes to an ongoing line of inquiry. Further, the
major professor is beer equipped than otherwise to oﬀer support and
suggest directions for further work. In this scenario, the doctoral student
might still collect original data (most certainly would analyze the data,
whether newly collected or existing) and would engage in writing up the
problem statement, literature review, methods, and results. us, the
student would be prepared for many aspects of resear but would not
necessarily get mu experience conceptualizing and designing a study
from scratch.
Another alternative to the individual resear project is what has been
termed the Mode 2 educational model for doctoral education (Nerad &
Trzyna, 2008, pp. 305–306) in whi an oen-interdisciplinary group of
students and senior researers work together on a marketable project.
Complaints about large numbers of new doctoral degree holders unable to
secure faculty positions have led funders of some programs in the social
sciences and education to support Mode 2 in an eﬀort to duplicate the

apparently more successful practices of doctoral programs in the natural
sciences and engineering. “Mode 2 doctoral education oﬀers the possibility
of organizing world-class doctoral study through networks of cooperation
with solars and universities across the globe as well as with solars in
many diﬀerent academic disciplines” (Nerad & Trzyna, 2008, p. 306). It
remains to be seen, however, whether or how far doctoral programs in
mathematics education move toward adopting a Mode 2 approach.
Certainly conceptualizing and designing studies are experiences that
doctoral students need if they intend to go on to careers in whi they will
be doing independent resear in the future, but do students with other
career aspirations need those experiences? Might these students be beer
served by learning how to apply literature, theoretical frameworks, and
methods in the context of their major professor’s line of inquiry? Of course,
that raises the question of who would decide whi students should do
original research and when that decision would be made.
Although not all future mathematics education professors will be
employed in positions that require them to create new knowledge by
conducting resear, all will be consumers of resear and need to be
prepared for that role. As consumers, professors are expected to use
resear to inform their instruction, read resear reports to keep abreast of
anges in the ﬁeld, and engage with policy makers and the general public
about resear results. Professors of mathematics education need to have a
solid understanding of what education resear can and cannot tell us, an
understanding of resear design suﬃcient to allow them to critique
published resear articles and ﬁnd ﬂaws in arguments presented in the
media, a familiarity with the most commonly used resear methods, and a
capacity to learn new methods as they emerge.
Currently, quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods designs are
commonly used in resear in mathematics education, so it behooves
professors to be familiar with all three and have a depth of understanding

in at least one. Given that many policy decisions are based on particular
interpretations of small slices of resear, future professors need to be
knowledgeable about and able to dissect bodies of work and even translate
them for lay people, su as policy makers. Further, a great deal of resear
about issues in education is being conducted by those outside of the ﬁeld,
su as economists and sociologists. It is critically important that the
professor of mathematics education possess the knowledge and vocabulary
to talk with su researers about their work. e profession depends on
the use of peer reviewers for journal articles, book apters, and grant
proposals, providing another reason for professors to have substantial
knowledge of resear methods. Although it is increasingly common for
resear teams to include methodologists who specialize in determining the
methods to be used in conducting a study, the mathematics educators on
the team still need to be conversant with the resear methods in order to
draw sensible conclusions, even if they do not have the skills to analyze the
data using sophisticated teniques and soware. As with most aspects of
the knowledge base for being a professor, resear methods are constantly
anging, so in addition to learning about current methods of resear,
future professors of mathematics education need to have the conﬁdence
and propensity to learn about emerging methods at a level suﬃcient for
interpreting research results.

Professional Identity
Like the professions of medicine and law, the profession of education
requires that professors in the ﬁeld be equipped to engage in both resear
and professional practice. Unlike medicine and law, however, sools of
education in most countries have relatively lile control over who becomes
certiﬁed to enter the profession. Teaer preparation, especially for
prospective primary and middle grades teaers, is oen available through
a variety of alternatives to college and university programs. Professors of
mathematics education may therefore need to be more than simply
researers and practitioners. ey may need to represent the ﬁeld not only
to their fellow practitioners but also to policy makers, parents, and the
general public. ey need to be promoters of their subject, building a
resear environment if one does not already exist; establishing projects
that help to make mathematics education a more visible, credible ﬁeld; and
engaging with issues connected to mathematics in the broader society. In
other words, they need to develop a professional identity (Grevholm, 2010).
e work of a university professor who is also a professional
mathematics educator always spans more than just teaing and resear.
At the institutional level, faculty members serve on departmental, college,
and university governance commiees (su as a curriculum commiee or
student academic appeals commiee), advise students, serve as major
professors for doctoral students, direct independent studies for students, and
write and read comprehensive exams for graduate students, among other
tasks. e future mathematics education professor is likely to be expected
to conduct a variety of activities to establish an academic reputation,
including identifying and formulating resear problems, seeking funding
to conduct resear, carrying out and writing up resear studies, reporting
on solarly work at conferences and in academic publications, reviewing
funding proposals and journal manuscripts, and a host of other academic

activities. Most of these activities are unlikely to have received extensive
aention in the prospective professor’s doctoral program—although some
might have been treated in depth—so he or she will need to acquire
experience with them on the job. Years ago, Walbesser and Eisenberg
(1971) addressed the question of the resear competencies needed by
mathematics educators and detailed a sequence of seminars at the
University of Maryland that were designed to provide su competencies,
but unless an institution has a fairly sizable doctoral program in
mathematics education, it is unlikely to be able to offer such seminars.
Professors of mathematics education also engage in a host of activities at
the institution and in the profession that are mu less obvious to doctoral
students. Oen, su professors are expected to inﬂuence educational
policy. They may be among the few people in academe who can speak with
authority about the teaing and learning of mathematics and how those
activities are being conducted and being debated in their country and
internationally. Part of their professional identity, for at least some future
professors of mathematics education, will require them to use their
knowledge and skills to defend the discipline and the students and teaers
who are being affected by changes in educational policy.
Many an assistant professor has been heard to lament, “But they didn’t
tea me how to do that!” ose of us conducting doctoral programs may
assume that immersion in the academic and professional milieu will
translate into knowing how to do these things, or perhaps we believe that
students can (and should) ﬁgure these things out on their own when they
become faculty members. Some individual faculty members and some
programs do explicitly include some of these items in doctoral education,
most commonly engaging doctoral students in joint reviews of conference
proposals and journal articles. Certainly, doctoral programs in mathematics
education cannot prepare students for every situation they will encounter in
their professional lives, but what would it mean to provide students with

internships that would deliberately expose them to a broader range of
activities included in the life of a professor?
It might be a useful exercise to consider how Feiman-Nemser’s (2001)
continuum of tasks of teaing might be applied to doctoral programs in
mathematics education. She subdivides the tasks of teaing into those that
are best learned during the preservice years, in the induction years, and
through professional development later in one’s career. Her continuum is
based on the most crucial items for teaers to learn at ea point in their
careers and the capacity of institutions (teaer education institutions,
sools, and professional development experiences) to foster particular
kinds of learning. Faculty members at doctoral-granting institutions might
engage in an analysis of the various aspects of being a professor and
identify those that are best learned while a doctoral student versus those
that are best learned on the job or through targeted support later in one’s
career.

Many Paths
e report of the ﬁrst U.S. national conference on doctoral programs in
mathematics education in 1999 was entitled One Field, Many Paths (Reys &
Kilpatri, 2001). e term many paths was osen because the conference
had revealed that those programs were enormously diverse in goals,
content, structure, requirements, operation, and virtually every other
respect. at diversity is even greater when one looks outside the United
States at doctoral programs around the world. Although most graduates of
su programs are likely to be involved in some sort of teaer preparation
or professional development, other options are increasingly available in
tertiary education or outside. e situation worldwide is even more
complicated than that portrayed in One Field, Many Paths, as doctoral
students come from a variety of bagrounds (classroom teaer, student of
graduate level mathematics), go through the variety of doctoral programs
noted earlier, and go on to a host of career options (including mathematics
education professor teaing primarily content courses, mathematics
education professor teaing primarily methods courses, or mathematics
education professor teaing both content and methods courses). One of the
oldest cliés in the business is that a professor’s education is a lifelong
process. Trite or not, we see that assertion as an enduring truth for the years
to come. Two decades or so of formal education along with several years of
experience teaing mathematics and mathematics education can provide
only the rudiments of the education one needs to ﬁll adequately the
position of professor of mathematics education. e biggest allenge to
the education of future professors of mathematics education is how to
arrange that process to provide a sensible balance between one’s formal
studies, organized experience, and on-the-job learning.

Notes
1. We are grateful to Barbro Grevholm, University of Agder, and Robert E. Reys, University of
Missouri, for their comments on an early draft.
2. In some countries, subject-maer didactical knowledge would be used in preference to
pedagogical knowledge in this context.

References
Andža¯ns, A., Bonka, D., & Grevholm, B. (Eds.). (2008). Selected papers of the ICME 11 Discussion
Group 12: Rethinking doctoral programs in mathematics education. Rı¯ga: University of Latvia,
Ma¯cı¯bu 
gra¯mata. 
Retrieved 
from
http://math.unipa.it/~grim/icme11_dg12_proceedings_final.pdf.
Ball, D. L. (1990). e mathematical understandings that prospective teaers bring to teaer
education. Elementary School Journal, 90, 449–466.
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it
special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59, 389–407.
Bass, H. (2005). Mathematics, mathematicians, and mathematics education. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 42, 417–430.
Bernstein, B. L., Evans, B., Fyﬀe, J., Halai, N., Hall, F. L., Jensen, H. S., Marsh, H., & Ortega, S. (2014).
e continuing evolution of the resear doctorate. In M. Nerad & B. Evans (Eds.), Globalization
and its impacts on the quality of PhD education: Forces and forms in doctoral education
worldwide (pp. 5–30). Rotterdam, the Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Bromme, R. (1994). Beyond subject maer: A psyological topology of teaers’ professional
knowledge. In R. Biehler, R. W. Solz, R. Sträßer, & B. Winkelmann (Eds.), Didactics of
mathematics as a scientific discipline (pp. 73–88). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer.
Carrillo, J., Climent, N., Contreras, L. C., & Muñoz-Catalán, M. C. (2013, February). Determining
specialized knowledge for mathematics teaing. Paper presented in Working Group 17 at the
Eighth Congress of European Resear in Mathematics Education (CERME 8), Manavgat-Side,
Antalya, Turkey.
Curaj, A., Sco, P., Vlasceanu, L., & Wilson, L. (Eds.). (2012). European higher education at the
crossroads: Between the Bologna Process and national reforms. Dordret, the Netherlands:
Springer.
de Ibarrola, M., & Anderson, L. W. (Eds.). (2014). e nurturing of new educational researers:
Dialogues and debates. Rotterdam, the Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Dewey, J. (1964). e relation of theory to practice in education. New York: Random House.
(Original work published 1904.)

Dossey, J. A., & Lappan G. (2001). e mathematics education of mathematics educators in doctoral
programs in mathematics education. In R. E. Reys & J. Kilpatri (Eds.), CBMS Issues in
Mathematics Education: Vol. 9. One ﬁeld, many paths: U.S. doctoral programs in mathematics
education (pp. 67–72). Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2001). From preparation to practice: Designing a continuum to strengthen and
sustain teaching. Teachers College Record, 103, 1113–1055.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2012). Teachers as learners. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
Feiman-Nemser, S. (2013). e role of experience in the education of teaer educators. In M. Ben-
Peretz (with S. Kleeman, R. Reienberg, & S. Shimoni) (Ed.), Teaer educators as members of
an evolving profession (pp. 189–210). New York: Rowan & Littlefield.
Grevholm, B. (2008). A Norwegian doctoral programme in didactics of mathematics—Doctoral
programmes in the Nordic resear communities. In A. Andža¯ns, D. Bonka, & B. Grevholm
(Eds.), Selected papers of the ICME 11 Discussion Group 12: Rethinking doctoral programs in
mathematics education (pp. 26–43). Rı¯ga: University of Latvia, Ma¯cı¯bu gra¯mata. Retrieved
from http://math.unipa.it/~grim/icme11_dg12_proceedings_final.pdf.
Grevholm, B. (2009). Nordic collaboration in mathematics education resear. Nordic Studies in
Mathematics Education, 14(4), 89–100.
Grevholm, B. (2010). Mathematics teaer education: A Scandinavian perspective. In G. Anthony &
B. Grevholm (Eds.), SMDF Papers: No. 8. Teaers of mathematics: Recruitment, retention,
professional development and identity (pp. 93–100). Kristiansand, Sweden: Svensk förening för
MatematikDidaktisk Forskning.
Grossman, P. L., & Soenfeld, A. (with Lee, C. D.). (2005). Teaing subject maer. In L. Darling-
Hammond, J. Bransford, P. LePage, K. Hammerness, & H. Duﬀy (Eds.), Preparing teaers for a
anging world: What teaers should learn and be able to do  (pp. 201–231). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey Bass.
Kilpatri, J. (1992). A history of resear in mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.),
Handbook of research on mathematics research and teaching (pp. 3–39). New York: Macmillan.
Kiley, M., Bell, K., & Feng, L. (2013, November). Report of the online surveys related to OLT-funded
project: Coursework in Australian Doctoral Education: What’s happening, why, and future
directions? (Report to the Council of Deans and Directors of Graduate Studies in Australia

[DDOGS]). Canberra: Australian National University, Centre for Higher Education, Learning &
Teaching. Retrieved from http://chelt.anu.edu.au/doctoral-coursework/presentations.
Klein, F. (1932). Elementary mathematics from an advanced standpoint: Arithmetic, algebra,
analysis (3rd Ed., Vol. 1). (E. R. Hedri & C. A. Noble, Trans.) New York: Macmillan. (Original
work published 1924.)
McIntyre, D. J., Byrd, D. M., & Foxx, S. M. (1996). Field and laboratory experiences. In J. Sikula (Ed.),
Handbook of resear on teaer education (2nd ed., pp. 171–193). New York: Simon & Suster
Macmillan.
Mewborn, D. S. (2008). Program delivery issues, opportunities, and allenges. In R. E. Reys & J. A.
Dossey (Eds.), CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education: Vol. 15. U.S. doctorates in mathematics
education: Developing stewards of the discipline (pp. 129–136). Providence, RI: American
Mathematical Society.
Nerad, M., & Trzyna, T. (2008). Globalization and doctoral education—toward a resear agenda. In
M. Nerad & M. Heggelund (Eds.), Toward a global PhD? Forces and forms in doctoral education
worldwide (pp. 300–312). Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Philipp, R. A., Ambrose, R., Lamb, L. L., Sowder, J. T., Sappelle, B. T., Sowder, L., anheiser, E., &
Chauvot, J. (2007). Eﬀects of early ﬁeld experiences on the mathematical content knowledge and
beliefs of prospective elementary sool teaers: An experimental study. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 38, 438–476.
Reys, R. E., & Kilpatri, J. (Eds.). (2001). CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education: Vol. 9. One ﬁeld,
many paths: U.S. doctoral programs in mathematics education. Providence, RI: American
Mathematical Society.
Reys, R., Glasgow, R., Teuser, D., & Nevels, N. (2007). Doctoral programs in mathematics education
in the United States: 2007 Status Report. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 54(11),
1283–1293.
Rowe, D. E. (1985). Felix Klein’s “Erlanger Antrisrede”: A transcription with English translation
and commentary. Historia Mathematica, 12, 123–141.
Rowland, T., Turner, F., waites, A., & Hustep, P. (2009). Developing primary mathematics
teaching: Reflecting on practice with the knowledge quartet. London: Sage.
Silverman, J., & ompson, P. W. (2008). Toward a framework for the development of mathematical

knowledge for teaching. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 11, 499–511. Retrieved from
http://pat-thompson.net/PDFversions/2008SilvermanThompsonMKT.pdf.
Van, L. K. (2012). First course: Formal coursework and the new Australian PhD: An interview with
Margaret 
Kiley. Digital 
Culture 
& 
Education, 
5(2), 
119–126. 
Retrieved 
from
www.digitalcultureandeducation.com/cms/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/van.pdf.
Vithal, R., Adler, J., & Keitel, C. (Eds.). (2005). Researing mathematics education in South Africa:
Perspectives, practices and possibilities. Pretoria, South Africa: Human Sciences Research Council.
Walbesser, H. H., & Eisenberg, T. (1971). What resear competencies for the mathematics educator?
American Mathematical Monthly, 78, 667–673.

Section III
Transformations in Learning
Contexts

12 Problem Solving in a 21st-Century
Mathematics Curriculum
Lyn D. English
Queensland University of Technology
JulieGainsburg
California State University, Northridge
Problem solving makes a wonderful banner under whi to mar as long as no one looks too
closely at what others mean by the term.
(Kilpatrick, 1981, p. 2)

Introduction
Resear on problem solving in the mathematics curriculum has spanned
many decades, yielding pendulum-like swings in recommendations on
various issues. Ongoing debates concern the eﬀectiveness of teaing
general strategies and heuristics, the role of mathematical content (as the
means versus the learning goal of problem solving), the role of context, and
the proper emphasis on the social and aﬀective dimensions of problem
solving (e.g., Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007; Lester, 2013; Lester & Kehle, 2003;
Soenfeld, 1985, 2008; Silver, 1985). Various solarly perspectives—
including cognitive and behavioral science, neuroscience, the discipline of
mathematics, educational philosophy, and sociocultural stances—have
informed these debates, oen generating divergent resolutions. Perhaps due
to this uncertainty, educators’ eﬀorts over the years to improve students’
mathematical problem-solving skills have had disappointing results.
alitative and quantitative studies consistently reveal mathematics
students’ struggles to solve problems more signiﬁcant than routine
exercises (OECD, 2014; Boaler, 2009).
Another perspective on problem solving considers the demands of
modern life and work. We anowledge that preparation for adult work
and life is not the only goal of mathematics education. We contend,
however, that for the vast majority of students (who will not become
academic mathematicians), enhancing their opportunities and performance
in work and life should indeed be the main purpose for mathematics
education. Worldwide, linking mathematics education and workplace
preparedness has become a central policy theme (Grubb & Lazerson, 2004;
Mehta, 2013; Miller, n.d.), while linking with life enhancement is less so.
Nevertheless, insuﬃcient eﬀort has been made to move beyond this policy
rhetoric—to critically examine the mathematical demands of 21st-century
work and life, and to consider how these demands should reshape

mathematics education. is apter aims to contribute to this eﬀort. We
examine how employers, workers, economists, and other solars portray
the problem-solving demands of modern work and life, and the
contributions of sooling. We then consider how certain historical
problem-solving debates could be resolved if the overriding purpose of
mathematics instruction were to prepare students to meet the demands of
work and life today.
One diﬃculty immediately arises when investigating problem solving in
mathematics education: Numerous interpretations of problems and problem
solving have been oﬀered over the years with no universally accepted
deﬁnitions (English & Sriraman, 2010; Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007; Lester,
2013; Soenfeld, 2013; Toerner, Soenfeld, & Reiss, 2008; Zawojewski,
2010). e domain of problem solving is broad, resulting in the myriad
approaes to deﬁning it. In 1981, Kilpatri complained that the “imprecise
and indiscriminate use” of the terms problem and problem solving “allows
numerous sins to be commied in their name” (p. 2), and the situation
seems hardly improved today.
Traditionally, problems have been deﬁned as tasks in whi the solver
does not know how to arrive at an answer. Lester (2013) reviews numerous
examples of this sort of deﬁnition, su as Duner’s: “A problem arises
when a living creature has a goal but does not know how this goal is to be
reaed” (1945, p. 1). Newell and Simon (1972) eoed this notion of
bloage but included a motivational aspect: “A person is confronted with a
problem when he wants something and does not know immediately what
series of actions he can perform to get it” (p. 72). Some more recent
deﬁnitions of mathematical problem solving still refer to the uncertainty of
solution, su as Mamona-Downs and Downs’s (2013) notion of
“engagement on any mathematical task that is not judged procedural or the
student does not have an initial overall idea how to proceed in solving the
task” (p. 139). Other solars recognize the breadth of the notion, as can be

seen in English and Sriraman’s (2010) simple statement regarding their use
of the term problem solving: “in a broad sense to cover a range of activities
that allenge and extend one’s thinking” (p. 263). Also oﬀering a broad,
albeit more comprehensive, view is Hegedus’s definition:
We take a very broad view of what is mathematical problem-solving viewing it as an enterprise
of collaborative investigation where multiple approaes are valid. It is not just about solving a
speciﬁc problem, whi has a speciﬁc answer or application into the real world, but rather it is
an investigation that might have multiple approaes and where students can make multiple
observations.
(2013, p. 89)
ese newer interpretations of problems and problem solving reﬂect
dissatisfaction with the traditional notions and their unhelpfulness for the
teaching of problem solving (Lester, 2013).
Taking the perspective of preparation for adult work and life, another
ambiguity emerges: Should problems in mathematics education refer to
mathematical problems (posed, solved, and concluded in the domain of
mathematics) or to real-world problems and problems in other domains
(su as science or business) that can be solved by applying mathematics?
In our resear for this apter, we tried to stay open with regard to the
meaning of problem solving in mathematics education, to avoid arbitrarily
constraining our interpretations of what 21st-century demands might
require of mathematics education.
We structure the remainder of our apter as follows. First, we review
brieﬂy some key debates in mathematical problem-solving resear of past
decades. We then review the literature about the demands of modern work
and life. Here, we examine drivers of ange in the workplace and
everyday life, the nature of quantitative problems that need to be solved in
these anging contexts, and the competencies required in doing so. Finally,
we return to the key debates to discuss possible resolutions suggested by
the research about problem solving in the 21st century.

Debates (and Disappointments) of Mathematical
Problem-Solving Research
Promoting mathematical problem solving has been a long-standing, oen
contentious endeavor. e importance of problem solving in the
mathematics curriculum has been universally recognized, and solars have
advanced numerous strategies for building students’ competencies in
solving multiple problem types. e 1980s was to be the “decade of
problem solving,” with the National Council of Teaers of Mathematics’
(NCTM) An Agenda for Action recommending the mathematics curriculum
be organized around problem solving (1980, p. 2). Recent years have seen a
resurgence of interest in problem solving among mathematics-education
researers, as evidenced by the many publications devoted to numerous
issues pertaining to problem-solving theory and practice, both in sool and
beyond. For example, the 2013 special issue of e Mathematics Enthusiast
(Vol. 10, nos. 1–2) aimed to address “the current trends in problem solving
resear and … the main results that inﬂuence teaers’ practices and
curricula design” (Moreno Armella & Santos-Trigo, 2013, p. 4). In another
journal special issue (ZDM, Vol. 39, nos. 5–6), Toerner, Soenfeld, and
Reiss (2008) edited a review of problem-solving developments around the
world. And a recent special issue of Educational Studies in Mathematics
(Vol. 83, no. 2013) and an edited book, Problem Posing: From Resear to
Eﬀective Practice (Singer, Ellerton, & Cai, 2013) were devoted entirely to
the topic of problem posing.
Unfortunately, this decades-long focus on mathematical problem solving,
while yielding important insights into the phenomenon, has not produced
clear guidance for educational practice. estions about how to promote
problem-solving competency remain; indeed, we contend that they have
become more perplexing in light of proliferating interpretations of
problems and problem solving, the recent emphasis in many countries on

equitable education for a greater range of students, and the anging
demands of work and society. In particular, certain unresolved debates
appear to impede our forward movement. We review some of those
debates here.
Teaching Problem Solving versus Teaching
Mathematics through Problem Solving
Should the overaring goal of using problems in the mathematics
classroom be to tea problem solving per se, or to tea mathematical
content, using problem solving as a vehicle? Some solars (e.g., Anderson,
2014) blame disappointing student gains on the traditional treatment of
classroom problem solving, where it is independent of, and isolated from,
the development of core mathematical ideas, understandings, and processes.
In sool, problem solving oen takes the form of application (“story”)
problems at the end of the textbook apter, positioning it as an add-on
task, presumably to promote the ability to apply already-learned content.
Su problems rarely serve either the purpose of teaing problem solving
or building or deepening the knowledge of that content (Anderson, 2014).
But the limited resear aention to how concept development might be
accomplished through problem solving indicates that problem solving has
not been seen as playing a central role in the curriculum but rather has been
pushed to the periphery (Rigelman, 2013). Also needed are studies that
explore whether both goals can be accomplished at once, examining the
impact of problem-driven conceptual development on the development of
problem-solving competencies (Lester & Charles, 2003; Soen & Charles,
2003). In sum, while more recent solarship favors problem solving as a
means for developing mathematics-content understanding as opposed to an
end in itself, the debate is far from settled.

The Effectiveness of Heuristics and General Skills
Closely related to the debate about the purpose of problem solving in the
classroom is a second debate about how to tea students to solve
problems. Earlier solarship rested on the notion of problem solving as a
general ability (or ability set) that could be developed across content areas
or even in a decontextualized manner. Perhaps the most contentious facet
of this debate has been the eﬃcacy of teaing general strategies and
heuristics—the tools of an “expert” problem solver—instigated largely by
Polya’s seminal book, How to Solve it (1945). is book has long been
regarded as a valuable resource for improving students’ abilities to solve
unfamiliar problems by oﬀering a list of steps and solution strategies to
take when “stu.” Despite some evidence that su tools can contribute to
successful problem solving, they nevertheless appear not to have delivered
the improvements in problem solving that educators envisioned many
years ago (e.g., Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007; Lester & Kehle, 2003; Soenfeld,
2013; Silver, 1985).
Other general competencies have also been associated with problem
solving. Metacognition (the reﬂection of the solver on his or her thinking
and solving processes) is presumed to inﬂuence problem solving, with more
sophisticated levels of self-awareness and explicitness about strategies
being associated with greater success in solving problems (Kapa, 2001;
Sneider & Artelt, 2010). Over the years, numerous instructional
interventions have been developed and implemented to enhance
metacognition as an indirect means of improving problem-solving
competence (e.g., Goos, Galbraith, & Renshaw, 2002; Kramarski, Weisse, &
Kololshi-Minsker, 2010). Social skills su as collaboration and
communication have also been linked to problem-solving competence and,
again, targeted directly with instructional interventions (Goos & Galbraith,
1996; McKenna & Agogino, 2004).

Overall, there appears lile evidence to suggest that improving these
general skills or heuristics leads to greater success in solving problems
(mathematical or otherwise) (Lester, 2013), though other positive outcomes
surely result. One explanation for this limited success is that these general
skills are oen presented as a collection of separate entities to be learned
and applied, without students fully knowing and understanding why, when,
and how to do so (e.g., English & Sriraman, 2010; Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007;
Lester, 2013). Another explanation is that problem-solving skills and
heuristics, initially conceived to be used interactively with students engaged
in authentic problem solving, are oen incorporated into textbooks
didactically and thus reduced to procedural algorithms (Stanic & Kilpatri,
1989).
The Role of Context and Authenticity
Mathematics educators frequently debate the role of realistic contexts in
teaing. Students’ diﬃculties in applying mathematical concepts and
abilities (that they presumably have learned in sool) outside of sool, or
in other classes, su as those in the sciences, have been amply documented
(de Abreu, 2002; Greiﬀenhagen & Sharro, 2008; Nunes, Sliemann, &
Carraher, 1993). A prevailing explanation for these diﬃculties is the
context-speciﬁc nature of learning and problem solving. at is, problem-
solving competencies that are learned in one situation take on features of
that situation; transferring them to a new problem in a new context poses
allenges (Lobato, 2003; Hohensee, 2014). is view of problem solving
would also explain why acquiring general (heuristic, metacognitive, and
social) skills might do lile to improve problem-solving competence;
indeed, it allenges the existence of “problem-solving competence” as a
unitary phenomenon. One resolution is to situate mathematics learning in

real-world problem-solving contexts, although the problem remains that
mathematics learned in one context does not easily transfer to other
contexts. Additional concerns have been raised regarding the equitability of
contextualizing mathematics instruction. Lubienski (2000) found ildren
from low-income households less able to access the mathematics in a
contextualized curriculum, while Cooper and Dunne (1998) showed low-
income students scoring more poorly on contextualized assessment
questions. Both studies concluded that the context presented a distraction
that higher income students knew to ignore. Finally, importing real-world
problems and contexts into the classroom necessarily reduces their
authenticity, for pedagogical and logistical reasons. As Bakker, Kent, Derry,
Noss, and Hoyles (2008) warned, we cannot simply reproduce workplace
experiences within the classroom in the hope of increasing students’
ances of success beyond sool. More resear is needed to sele
questions about whether teaching mathematics through real-world problem
contexts improves students’ abilities to solve a range of problems in
adulthood and, if so, how authentic those contexts must be.
What Mathematical Content to Teach
A more general debate that overlaps with the issue of problem solving
concerns what mathematical content is most important to tea. is
question, too, can be answered from many perspectives, including the
perpetuation of the discipline, the preparation of future mathematicians,
readiness for future mathematics or other classes, and personal intellectual
development or enjoyment. Again, the perspective we take here is
preparation to meet the demands of modern work and life, with full
recognition that this is only one of many valid goals.
In the next section, we examine how employers, workers, economists,

and other solars portray the problem-solving demands of modern work
and life and the contributions of sooling, as a means of shedding new
light on these classic debates.

The Demands of 21st-Century Work and Life
Drivers of Change
e very phrase “21st-century demands” implies a view that life and work
today signiﬁcantly diﬀer from life and work even a few decades ago, in
ways that alter cognitive requirements and obligate new educational
priorities. Before examining those new requirements and priorities, we ﬁrst
ask what has driven change in life and work and what is the basis for claims
that their requirements are different.
ose who believe 21st-century life and work has anged signiﬁcantly
point to several sources. Tenological advances and ubiquity are perhaps
the most commonly cited drivers of ange (Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2011;
Goldin & Katz, 2008; Handel, in press). In the workplace, computers and
robots now accomplish routine or manual tasks that once required human
actors (Autor, Levy, & Murnane, 2003; Partnership for 21st-Century Skills
[P21], 2008). is development, in turn, purportedly requires workers to
have higher-level problem-solving skills (Kaput, Noss, & Hoyles, 2008;
Hoyles, Noss, Kent, & Bakker, 2010; P21, 2008). Multiple explanations have
been oﬀered for the meanism by whi tenology elevates cognitive
demands on the workforce as a whole. Automation by computers or robots
may be replacing low-cognitive-level jobs, leaving only higher-level jobs
remaining. Alternately, tenology may be transforming what were once
low-level jobs, because working with tenology, or coping with
tenological ange requires higher levels of cognition (Sultz, 1975;
Wel, 1970 [both cited in Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012]). Or the meanism
may be less direct: some resear ﬁnds that company-level tenology
investments yield productivity gains only when accompanied by
organizational anges su as new strategies, processes, practices, and
structures (P21, 2008). us, tenology may be altering the cognitive

demands on workers by anging their organizational roles, engaging
them, for example, in self-managed teams, information sharing, and/or
decentralized decision making.
Whi, if any, of these meanisms accurately ties tenological
advances to increased cognitive demands at work is uncertain. As
Brynjolfsson and McAfee write, “Digital tenologies are one of the most
important driving forces in the economy today. ey’re transforming the
world of work and are key drivers of productivity and growth. Yet their
impact on employment is not well understood, and deﬁnitely not fully
appreciated” (2011, p. 9). Handel’s (in press) study of U.S. workers
allenges both the job-replacement and job-transformation explanations.
Furthermore, anges in organizational structures and practices that elevate
cognitive demands on workers, su as ﬂaer hieraries and greater use of
teams (Tuer, 2013), may have other causes than tenology. Globalization
and intensifying international competition are oﬀered as other major
drivers of elevated cognitive demands in the workplace (Hoyles et al.,
2010). Most employers surveyed by the Partnership for 21st-Century Skills
felt global competitiveness had shied the importance of certain skills and
competencies in their companies. Other ange drivers—some of whi are
interdependent with tenology, globalization, and ea other—include the
transformation from a manufacturing to a service or information economy
(P21, 2008; Rei, 1991[cited in Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012]), the rapid pace of
ange in business (P21, 2008), mass customization of products, and
elevated standards for communication with customers (Hoyles et al. 2010).
Despite these economic anges, there is some debate about whether the
cognitive demands of the workplace, overall, are actually rising. Levy and
Murnane (2004 [cited in Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012]) argue that the modern
workplace increasingly requires the ability to solve nonroutine problems, as
well as complex communication competencies and verbal and quantitative
literacy. Yet a meta-analysis by Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001), as well

as other studies reviewed by Pellegrino and Hilton (2012), show small to no
correlations between scores on basic cognitive tests and earnings since the
1970s, suggesting that the labor-market demand for cognitive competencies
has been static. Also debated is whether anges in workforce needs, if they
do exist, constitute a crisis, as many proclaim. In the U.S., for example,
STEM ﬁelds may be enjoying high job growth (Langdon, McKiri,
Beede, Khan, & Doms, 2011) but experts (e.g., Atkinson & Mayo, 2010;
Salzman, Kuehn, & Lowell, 2013) diﬀer in their assessments of employers’
ability to ﬁll those new positions. Other experts (Barton, 2000; Pellegrino &
Hilton, 2012) also note an elevated premium on college degrees but
question the reason. Rather than requiring college-level skills and
knowledge, employers may seek a college degree only as a means of
screening for basic skills, persistence, or work ethic (Murnane & Levy, 1996;
Vedder, Denhart, & Robe, 2013).
Perhaps the new environmental condition that maers most to education
is ideational. Mehta (2013) describes how the 1983 report A Nation at Risk
linked—to a degree not seen before—sooling to individual and national
economic success, thus engendering a new paradigm. is paradigm
presumed that sools (not social forces) should be held responsible for
academic aievement, were substantially underperforming in this role, and
could be compelled to improve through monitoring by standardized
cognitive tests—presumptions that have opened the door for and
legitimized a dramatic shi from local to federal control of U.S. public
sools. e implication of this new paradigm for our discussion is that
notions of elevated cognitive demands on today’s workers may not reﬂect
actual economic or tenological developments as mu as a new
perspective on the purpose of sooling (and policies that embody this
perspective) that directly ties education to the quality of the workforce.
Overall, despite general agreement that broad economic and
tenological ange has occurred in the past few decades, its impact on

employment and its cognitive demands are not well established. Handel (in
press) sums up the situation: “Researers have only a cloudy sense of the
levels and kinds of job skill requirements, rates of ange, the dimensions
along whi job skills are anging, and the interrelationships between
skills, technology, and employment involvement” (p. 3).
Unsurprisingly, given a current policy environment that prioritizes
economic gain among the purposes of education, less resear has targeted
the anged demands of 21st-century life outside of work. A major source
of su solarship is Decision Resear (www.decisionresearch.org), a
nonproﬁt organization that investigates human judgment, decision making,
and risk. Multiple studies from this group document recent movement in
the areas of health care and personal ﬁnance towards greater consumer
decision making, at the same time that available information about these
areas is burgeoning. In health care, “Coverage oices are becoming more
complicated and varied, health delivery systems more complex, and
evidence of provider quality and treatment eﬃcacy more transparent.
Consumers therefore require more knowledge and greater skill to take full
advantage of new sources of information and to make appropriate oices”
(Hibbard, Peters, Dixon, & Tusler, 2007, p. 380). In one study, 50% of people
seeking information about cancer ﬁrst consulted the Internet; only 25% ﬁrst
consulted a doctor (Nelson, Fagerlin, & Peters, 2008). Mu of this health-
care and ﬁnancial information is represented by statistics (e.g., regarding
risks and beneﬁts) and graphs (e.g., survival and mortality curves), as well
as in complex documents and forms (e.g., from insurers). One’s ability to
understand this information has obvious consequences for one’s health and
well-being (Nelson et al., 2008).
In 1988, Davis observed that virtually all aspects of modern life had
become mathematized, including driving, warfare, and even aesthetic
judgment. He argued that citizens now needed not tenical mathematical
skills as mu as an understanding of the ways mathematics shaped their

lives, so that they could participate knowledgeably in social decisions rather
than ceding control to a mathematically expert elite. In 2015, Davis’s
observation has only become truer. (Indeed, this sort of socio-mathematical
savvy might allow people to more critically analyze policy rhetoric about
the economic imperatives for increased schooling or cognitive skill!)
Problems Faced in 21st-Century Life and Work
Whether or not the demands of 21st-century work and life have anged
considerably, and regardless of the reason, it is still meaningful to ask about
the nature of the problems that need to be solved there. Most investigations
into the cognitive requirements of the modern workplace are general:
asking large groups of employers what they desire from workers; or trying
to correlate levels of sooling with employment, earnings, or national
productivity. Smaller-grained studies of the kinds of intellectual problems
that arise in work (or everyday life) are few and, by necessity, highly
context speciﬁc. Su studies are usually ethnographic and thus, while
providing a thorough aracterization of problems in particular workplaces
or everyday settings, are difficult to generalize across adult activity.
Mu of the ethnographic resear about the kinds of problems modern
workers need to solve has been conducted by the Teno-Mathematical
Literacies in the Workplace Project. Between 2003 and 2007, Hoyles, Noss,
Kent, Bakker, and colleagues followed midlevel workers in IT-intensive
seings: ﬁve manufacturing companies and two ﬁnance companies. While
the problems these workers solved on a regular basis varied considerably,
commonalities were observed within and across companies. All of the work
centered on highly mathematized processes, for example, statistical process
control (SPC) in manufacturing and the calculation of interest rates in
ﬁnance. Graphs, arts, spreadsheets, and computer simulations displayed

the input variables and output data for these processes. Everyday problems
involved the impact of anges in input variables on output data, requiring
workers to interpret these tenological displays. e resear team coined
the term teno-mathematical literacies (TmL) to capture the ways that
mathematical processes were understood with and through tenological
representations. Hoyles et al. (2010) observed that in these workplaces,
“Calculation and basic arithmetic are of subsidiary importance compared to
a conceptual grasp of how, for example, process improvement works, how
graphs and spreadsheets may highlight relationships, and how systematic
data may be used with powerful, predictive tools to control and improve
processes” (p. 168). Unfortunately, many workers laed suﬃcient TmL to
solve their everyday problems eﬀectively. e team concluded that the
workers’ “major skills gap” could be closed not with more mathematical
training (e.g., to understand the algebra in whi the processes were
formally described) but with a deeper understanding of the mathematical
models underlying the processes. Bakker et al. (2008) further investigated
the nature of problem solving engaged in by workers using SPC, in contrast
to the statistical reasoning required in sool tasks. ey found that both
forms of problem solving aim for generalization, use data as evidence,
employ probabilistic language, and compare data against models. But SPC
involves generalizing about a process (rather than a population, as in sool
tasks) and its goal is (a decision about) action, to reduce output
discrepancies. us, SPC requires abductive inference (explaining data
anomalies as results of process events or conditions) rather than inductive
(simply predicting data paerns). Also, unlike sool tasks, whi oen
entail suppressing context, interpreting SPC data relies on context (e.g.,
cost, knowledge of process).
Gainsburg’s (2006, 2007a, 2007b) ﬁndings from her ethnographic study of
structural engineers eo the ﬁndings of the TmL team. e phenomena at
the center of the engineers’ problem solving were not processes per se but

structures and their behavior. However, the need to understand underlying
models that were represented mathematically (and tenologically) was
just as crucial. Indeed, in Gainsburg’s assessment, “e heart of the
intellectual work of structural engineers is the application of mathematical
representations and procedures to solve design problems, whi usually
requires the selection, adaptation, or creation of a model” (2007b, p. 38). In
structural engineering, mathematical models are unavoidable because the
structures do not yet exist. A main source of problems is the complexity
and uniqueness of ea building, whi preclude the simple application of
established procedures. Structural engineers need a deep understanding of
structural behavior, combined with conceptual ﬂuency with usually basic
mathematics, to create models that accurately represent the proposed
building or elements. As with midlevel manufacturing and ﬁnancial work,
the problems that structural engineers must solve are, at root, about
prediction, and the tools that support that prediction are mathematical
models and processes.
It is important to note that not only do these ethnographic ﬁndings not
necessarily generalize across workplaces, they do not even represent the
work of all employees within these ﬁelds. For example, a study by Kent
and Noss (2002) of a mu larger structural-engineering ﬁrm than the ones
studied by Gainsburg painted a diﬀerent picture: Here, the creation of
mathematical models was assigned to mathematical specialists and not
generally handled by engineers (also Dudley, 2010). Similarly, in the
manufacturing ﬁrms in the TmL project, higher-level employees interacted
with the processes in ways that required more formal mathematical
understanding and manipulation, while lower-level workers presumably
never solved problems involving mathematically described processes.
Handel (in press) conducted a rare example of a broader investigation
about the nature of problems encountered across a spectrum of work
seings. In his survey of 2,000 workers across a range of U.S. workplaces,

only 22% of the respondents reported having to solve “hard” problems
“oen” in their jobs; about 33% said they rarely or never had to do so.
While the frequency of hard problems did not vary greatly by broad
occupational type, it was somewhat correlated with the level of formal
education a job required. e contrast between Handel’s ﬁndings and those
of the TmL team and Gainsburg is striking. One explanation might be that
the laer focused on unusually allenging jobs. A diﬀerent explanation
might be methodological: people are known to be poor describers of their
own activity. In particular, when reporting on their mathematical problem
solving, people default to sool-type aracterizations of mathematics
(formal and algorithmic), whi are rarely evident in their work (Hoyles,
Noss, & Pozzi, 2001). Ethnographers generally take a broader view of
mathematics and “see” the same people using mathematics to solve
everyday problems. It must also be noted that the TmL team detected
problems that could have been (beer) solved with more signiﬁcant
understanding and quantitative reasoning than they actually were. Thus, the
TmL team described problems in the workplaces they studied that were
only hypothetically allenging. Had Handel surveyed these same workers,
they might also have reported that they rarely solved hard problems.
Outside the workplace, the Decision Resear group portrays the kind of
problems that people encounter in making everyday decisions about
personal health care. ese portrayals appear to be based on the
researers’ experience or literature reviews and not systematic resear.
Reyna, Nelson, Han, and Diemann (2009) and Hibbard et al. (2007)
describe typical problems related to personal health care: having to perform
basic arithmetic operations on information embedded in a document,
interpreting the information on medication prescription or nutritional
labels, choosing among hospitals based on comparative data, and estimating
risk magnitudes. While these problems sound less allenging than those
facing engineers and midlevel manufacturing and ﬁnance workers, they

may be more problematic for most people because they arise infrequently
and thus never become routine, as do many workplace problems. Indeed, as
will be discussed later, most people struggle to solve these health care–
related problems.
In sum, we la a comprehensive view of the kinds of problems people
must solve in 21st-century work and life, but generalizations are probably
impossible anyway. Some workers solve complex problems that require
mathematical interpretation and reasoning, some do not, and some who
don’t would probably accomplish their jobs beer if they did. e advent of
sophisticated, mathematized processes and computerized representations of
their output may have elevated the need for people to “make sense of
meanism” (Kaput, Noss, & Hoyles, 2008), as is the case for structural
engineers and midlevel manufacturing and ﬁnance workers, but more
resear is needed to determine the ways and extent to whi this is true
and for what segments of the population.
Competencies Required by 21st-Century Work
and Life
Researers have taken many routes to try to determine the competencies
required by modern work and life. At the most macroscopic end are studies
that examine the impact of sooling in general on national and individual
economic outcomes. ese studies are valuable in that they measure real
outcomes, but they oﬀer only blunt proxies for cognitive competencies and
problem-solving success. ey are relevant to our discussion only if we
presume that “going to sool” yields competencies needed in the
workplace and that economic gains indicate worker eﬀectiveness in solving
workplace problems—presumptions we problematize later.
Very generally speaking, time spent in sool correlates with both

individual and national economic gains (Barton, 2000; Bowles, Gintis, &
Osborne, 2001; Cawley, Heman, & Vytlacil, 2001; Goldin & Katz, 2008;
Heman, Stixrud, & Urzua, 2006; Tienken, 2008). Unclear, however, is why
sooling produces economic gains—what sooling imparts that maers
(Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012). An obvious explanation—that sooling impacts
the economy by increasing cognitive ability—has been tested repeatedly,
with conﬂicting or inconclusive results (Bowles et al., 2001; Cawley et al.,
2001, Hanushek & Woessman, 2008, 2011; Murnane, Wille, & Levy, 1995;
OECD, 2010). Furthermore, the impact of sooling on national economic
outcomes may vary by educational level. e eﬀect is unquestionably
strong in developing countries. Elevating a national average from
elementary to middle-sool education, or elevating low cognitive abilities
to moderate ones, yields greater economic gains than adding years of more
advanced sooling or high-level cognitive skills (Bowles et al., 2001;
Hanushek & Woessmann, 2008; Tienken, 2008). (In fact, Tienken argues that
causality runs in the opposite direction in highly educated countries:
thriving economies beget high education levels.) e value of college,
however, has recently come under scrutiny. College degrees certainly
advantage individuals in employment seeking (Greenstone & Looney, 2011;
Zaba, Carlson, & Crellin, 2012), but experts diﬀer on how mu countries
stand to gain by increasing their college-going populations (e.g., Goldin &
Katz, 2008; Handel, in press; Lim & Kim, 2013; Vedder, Denhart & Robe,
2013; Wolf, 2009).
Tenology appears to mediate the relationship between sooling or
cognitive ability and economic outcomes, although, again, there is lile
agreement about how. Goldin and Katz (2008) contend that rising U.S.
income inequality is the combined result of tenological advances and a
drop in college-degree completion—a low-supply, high-demand situation
that elevates the individual economic return on a college degree. Closer
inspection, however, reveals a “hollowing out” eﬀect: midlevel white-collar

work is disappearing, due, as some argue, to automation, rendering the
greatest job growth at the “ends,” in areas of low and high cognitive
demand (manual labor and cuing-edge innovation) (Barton, 2000;
Brynjolfsson & McAfee, 2011; Krugman, 2011). is bodes poorly for
increased college education as an overall workforce-development strategy.
Globally, tenology exerts varied demands on diﬀerent nations’ needs for
cognitive ability. To make economic progress, developing countries need
only imitate other countries’ tenologies (an endeavor with lesser
cognitive requirements) while developed countries must advance through
innovation, which requires greater cognitive skill (Hanushek & Woessmann,
2008, 2011).
Many studies have aempted to trace the economic eﬀects of sooling
to speciﬁc courses, particularly mathematics, again with conﬂicting ﬁndings.
Altonji (1995) found ea additional 10th–12th-grade mathematics course
predicted a very small earnings beneﬁt for individuals, compared to the
beneﬁt of a year of sool in general, and no beneﬁt to wage growth over
the ﬁrst few years of work. Levine and Zimmerman (1995) documented a
somewhat larger wage beneﬁt for high-sool mathematics courses, but
only for female college graduates. ese weak eﬀects for mathematics
courses may be a function of averaging a range of high-sool courses,
possibly diluting stronger earnings returns to more advanced courses with
the weaker returns to more basic courses. Interestingly, Bishop and Mane
(2004) found that, among high-sool courses, career-and-tenical-
education courses had the biggest earnings impact, an eﬀect that was
amplified for students who attended college.
e diﬃculty of aributing the economic outcomes of sooling to
speciﬁc courses raises the question: What skills, knowledge, or behaviors
are learned in sool that maer in the workplace? Various surveys of
employers reveal their desire for workers who possess “so skills” related
to collaboration and communication, personal attributes like industriousness

and perseverance, and general, higher-order, cognitive skills used in
problem solving and critical thinking. ree-hundred Fortune 500
executives surveyed by MetLife (2010) felt the most important areas for
college and career readiness were problem-solving skills, critical-thinking
skills, clear and persuasive writing, and the ability to work both
independently and on teams; they considered higher-level mathematics and
science skills far less important. Similarly, 100 U.S. business leaders
surveyed by the Business Council (2013) rated the most important
skills/capabilities for workers, in order, as work ethic, teamwork, decision
making, critical thinking, basic reading and math, and computer literacy.
e Partnership for 21st-Century Skills identiﬁed four broad areas of
employer-desired skills: core subjects and 21st-century themes; learning and
innovation skills; information, media, and tenology skills; and life and
career skills (P21, 2009). Learning and innovation skills subdivided into
three categories: creativity and innovation, critical thinking and problem
solving, and communication and collaboration. Relevant to our apter is
their articulation of critical thinking and problem solving:
Reason Effectively
Use various types of reasoning (inductive, deductive, etc.) as
appropriate to the situation.
Use Systems Thinking
Analyze how parts of a whole interact with each other to produce
overall outcomes in complex systems.
Make Judgments and Decisions
Eﬀectively analyze and evaluate evidence, arguments, claims and
beliefs.
Analyze and evaluate major alternative points of view.
Synthesize and make connections between information and
arguments.

Interpret information and draw conclusions based on the best
analysis.
Reflect critically on learning experiences and processes.
Solve Problems
Solve diﬀerent kinds of nonfamiliar problems in both
conventional and innovative ways.
Identify and ask signiﬁcant questions that clarify various points of
view and lead to better solutions.
Overall, su employer surveys are useful for their “close-to-the-ground”
perspective on the requirements of the 21st-century workplace, but they do
not empirically link these competencies to actual outcomes su as
productivity, employment, or wages. (A 2013 Gallup study of recent
graduates, ages 18–35, however, links sool experience with these skills to
self-reported success in the workplace.) Su surveys may, however, help
explain the meanisms by whi sooling contributes to su outcomes.
Studies comparing high-sool graduates to earners of high-sool
equivalency-exam certiﬁcates suggest that valuable “noncognitive traits”
are acquired through aendance in sool and rewarded with increased
earnings, especially for women and for men in low-skill markets (Heman
et al., 2006). Relatedly, Cawley et al. (2001) found that speciﬁc behavioral
and social skills impacted earnings independently of cognitive skills,
although they seemed to operate by increasing sool aendance and
performance. Unfortunately, these and other reports (Business Council,
2013; Fiser, 2013; P21, 2006) make clear that many U.S. workers, even
those with college degrees, la the interpersonal and problem-solving
skills, and the work ethic, that employers desire.
What of the mathematical requirements of modern work and life? In
contrast with current policy rhetoric, researers have observed that most
work over the past few decades has involved only basic mathematics. In the

1995 National Job Task Analysis (Paer, 1997), 3,000 U.S. workers across
levels reported on the skill requirements of their jobs. Only one of the 25
competencies that they rated most important (Number 14) was
mathematical: “perform arithmetic.” Further analysis showed that the
content of the most basic high-sool algebra and geometry courses more
than covered the mathematical skill requirements of the vast majority of
workers. Apparently lile has anged since the 1990s. Handel (in press)
interviewed 2,000 workers across levels and found that, whereas most
workers used arithmetic on the job and about 66% used fractions, decimals,
and percentages, only about 25% used more advanced mathematics, usually
simple algebra. (In an interesting exception, 15% to 30% of “skilled blue-
collar workers” used geometry, trigonometry, inferential statistics, and
complex algebra—similar to the rates of use among managers and
professionals—while all other groups rarely did.) e U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics conﬁrms these worker self-reports of low mathematics
requirements in its 2001–2012 projections for job openings (Barton, 2006).
So, too, do the findings of a National Center on Education and the Economy
(NCEE) (2013) study of U.S. community colleges. (Because community
colleges provide the bulk of U.S. vocational education, their course
requirements arguably represent a baseline for career readiness.) For the
initial credit-bearing courses in the eight most popular community-college
programs, middle-sool-level mathematics—especially arithmetic, ratio,
proportion, expressions, and simple equations—was most important. Only
one program required Algebra 2. Yet many programs required
mathematical skills not emphasized in high sool: sematics, geometric
visualization, complex applications of measurement, mathematical
modeling, statistics, and probability. As with so, social, and general
problem-solving skills, many workers and community college students la
even these basic mathematical skills (Murnane & Levy, 1996; NCEE, 2013;
Paer, 1997). We have previously noted the shortcoming of su studies:

They are constrained by their respondents’ mathematical skills. They cannot
reveal whether improved mathematical skill, understanding, or application
ability among workers would increase the number of topics and level of
mathematics they used and whether that would, in turn, enhance their
productivity or work quality.
More or beer mathematics learning might also enhance life outcomes.
Studies conducted by the Decision Resear group showed more numerate
people making beer health and ﬁnancial decisions and enjoying beer
health and ﬁnancial outcomes. Eoing workplace studies, these authors
report that many people la the requisite numeracy for su decisions,
even though the mathematics involved is basic, suggesting that improved
mathematical skill would enhance many lives (Peters, Hibbard, Slovic, &
Dieckmann, 2007). Their methodology is, in itself, illuminating: Numeracy is
treated as a somewhat hybrid construct, measured by a test of quantitative
reasoning in context. As su, it is theoretically decoupled from sooling,
education level, and intelligence (Nelson et al., 2008; Peters & Levine, 2008).
at is, the independent variable (numeracy) captures the ability to apply
particular mathematical concepts, overlapping somewhat with the
dependent variable (making real-world decisions involving quantity). is
might shed some light on why years of high-sool mathematics—a purer
measure of mathematical competence—poorly predicts workplace
performance (i.e., earnings): e mathematics in high-sool courses is
probably more topically advanced than necessary for real-world decisions,
but su courses do not enable students to apply mathematics in real-world
problem solving. As Pellegrino and Hilton (2012) note, “Over a century of
resear on transfer has yielded lile evidence that teaing can develop
general cognitive competencies that are transferable to any new discipline,
problem, or context, in or out of school” (p. 8).

How and Where Might 21st-Century
Competencies Be Developed?
Despite their pessimism about teaing for transfer, Pellegrino and Hilton
(2012) conclude their review of 21st-century competencies with a call for
exactly that. Indeed, for them, what makes something a 21st-century
competence is that a person can apply it in situations diﬀerent from the one
in whi it was learned. Drawing on a large body of education resear,
they propose that sooling should aim for “deep learning”—an
understanding of the general principles or structures that underlie concepts
and problems—because deep learning promotes transfer.
Pellegrino and Hilton concede uncertainty about what sooling imparts
that promotes positive outcomes in 21st-century work and life, and even
about whether the current labor market truly demands increased cognitive
competence. Regardless of this uncertainty, or maybe due to it, they put
their faith in sool-based improvements to promote adult success.
Specifically, they recommend transforming teaching to focus on:
underlying principles
the process of learning
high-level skills, even if low-level skills have not yet been mastered
learning skills and concepts in a specific domain
the conditions for application
using multiple representations, especially graphic or tactile
integrating noncognitive skills
giving the learning process ample time.
ese recommendations are presumed to increase the likelihood of transfer
and produce more eﬀective problem solvers in an unpredictable and fast-
anging workplace or society because the knowledge and skills learned

can be employed ﬂexibly and across a range of problem situations. Still,
Pellegrino and Hilton anowledge the power of context, recommending
teaing the use of skills and knowledge in speciﬁc domains, making
explicit the conditions in whi the knowledge might be applied, and
assessing its application. As su, Pellegrino and Hilton’s recommendations
(albeit not aimed at mathematics speciﬁcally) depart from a view that
prevailed for decades: that mathematics education provides general mental
training/discipline that can transfer across fields (Stanic & Kilpatrick, 1989).
Responding to the low level of mathematical topics required in
profession-oriented community-college courses and students’ inability to
apply 
even 
this 
low-level 
mathematics, 
the 
NCEE’s 
(2013)
recommendations for mathematics education generally eo Pellegrino and
Hilton’s. The NCEE urges K–12 schools to spend far more instructional time
on proportional relationships, percents, graphical representations, functions,
expressions, and equations, emphasizing conceptual understandings of these
topics and their application to practical problems. Contradicting current
policy statements, but reﬂecting Pellegrino and Hilton’s appeal for ample
time to the learning process, the NCEE argues against requiring Algebra 2
in high sool and advises delaying Algebra 1 for some students. Further,
the NCEE advocates for multiple mathematical paths, not just the
traditional one leading to calculus. Options in statistics, data analysis, and
applied geometry, for example, would beer reﬂect the mathematics used
across occupations and retain more students in the STEM pipeline.
Other scholars (e.g., Bishop, 1993; Fischer, 2013; Harvard Graduate School
of Education [GSE], 2011) argue for contextualized or job-speciﬁc learning,
either in sool or in workplace seings. Noting diﬀerences among the
qualities that constitute “readiness” for the workplace, college, and healthy
personal development, respectively, the Pathways to Prosperity report
(Harvard GSE, 2011) concludes that “a more holistic approa to education
—one that aims to equip young adults with a broader range of skills—is

more likely to produce youth who will succeed in the 21st century” (p. 4).
is more holistic education includes vocational education, career
counseling from the early grades, and structured workplace experiences in
high sool. e report lauds work-related K–12 educational experiences
su as the engineering curriculum, “Project Lead the Way”, California’s
“Linked Learning” initiative, robotics competitions, and various career-and-
tenical and career-academy programs. And while over 90% of the U.S.
CEOs surveyed by the Business Council (2013) rated secondary and four-
year college education “very/most important” for a top-quality workforce,
82% felt the same way about “on-the-job training.” e TmL researers
aimed their interventions at experienced workers but proposed that gaps in
adult TmL might be lessened by sool instruction that anowledged the
importance of context, real-world constraints, action, and responsibility
(Bakker et al., 2008). Empirical support for this idea comes from the Gallup
(2013) study showing that sool experience with real-world problem
solving, more than with any other 21st-century skill, predicted self-reported
success at work.
e potential contributions of work-based or work-related learning to
21st-century problem solving are twofold: First, it provides realistic
contexts for learning that could help overcome the failure of abstract,
general knowledge to transfer and thus promote the use of academic
knowledge for solving real problems. (Less clear, however, is whether
context-speciﬁc learning enables knowledge to be used in solving problems
beyond the context in whi it was learned [Cognition & Tenology
Group at Vanderbilt, 1990].) Second, work-related learning is likelier to
engender the so skills and aitudes desired by employers, especially if it
involves work on projects with real purposes and clients. But blending
work (or real-world) situations and classroom learning is not a
straightforward maer. e TmL researers warn that, “Formulating
potential implications of workplace resear for sool education is a triy

business…. One should not make the mistake to try and copy workplace
situations in sool education” (Bakker et al., 2008, p. 142). Indeed, a current
topic of contention is whether 21st-century competence is beer learned in
sool or in workplace or other out-of-sool seings (Fiser, 2013). Fiy-
nine percent of the young employees in the Gallup (2013) study reported
learning most of the skills needed in their current job outside of sool, but
this percent dropped signiﬁcantly for college graduates. e implications of
these ﬁndings are unclear: they may suggest room for improvement in the
way high sools prepare students for the workplace, or they may indicate
that the kinds of jobs ﬁlled by high-sool graduates rely less on
intellectual, school-taught skills than do jobs requiring a college degree.

Advancing Problem Solving in the Mathematics
Curriculum
Recent resear about 21st-century work and life, summarized in the prior
section, yields conﬂicting perspectives about how tenology has impacted
workplace problem solving and whether cognitive demand is rising in
general. Nevertheless, some principles emerge from this resear with
direct relevance to mathematics education:
Problem solving in work and life requires a more solid and ﬂexible
grasp of basic mathematics than mu of the population currently
possesses. Advanced mathematics courses do not appear to be the
solution.
Certain noncognitive and general skills (that are typically
underpromoted in education) are critical for workplace problem
solving. Many of these are cognitively high level.
Many jobs, particularly in IT-intensive ﬁelds, require an understanding
of conceptual models that underlie processes or systems (“making
sense of meanism”), whi in turn requires interpretations of
complex representations within the work context and a deep
understanding of the work domain.
In some contrast, everyday life decisions increasingly require
interpreting quantitative data in various complex forms, in multiple,
unfamiliar domains.
e ability to apply one’s training and knowledge to novel, unfamiliar
problems (transfer) is highly privileged by employers, and is presumed
most eﬀectively fostered when learning occurs in work-based contexts
on the job or replicated in schools.
In light of these principles, we revisit the debates presented earlier and

consider how we might approa mathematical problem solving within the
sool curriculum for the purpose of preparing students for success in 21st-
century work and life.
Problem Solving: Process and Content
Earlier, we described a decades-long debate on teaing problem solving
versus teaing mathematics through problem solving. Mathematical-
content knowledge per se is almost never an explicit goal of employers, but
their clear desire for workers who are eﬀective problem solvers implicitly
argues for sools to tea problem solving as an end in itself. us, despite
the mathematics-education community’s recent bent towards problem
solving as a vehicle for learning mathematical content, we recommend
honoring both goals. We advocate restructuring this debate to ask, instead,
how we might design problems that are suﬃciently cognitively demanding
to foster both signiﬁcant mathematical content and eﬀective problem-
solving capabilities. As a start, we might consider redeﬁning problem
solving as an experience where the solver or a collaborating group “needs
to develop a more productive mathematical way of thinking about the
given situation” (Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007, p. 782). e focus then becomes
one of learning or idea generation, rather than the application of problem-
solving processes or strategies. Hence, one key feature of problem solving
that promotes both process and content is the opportunity for student
generation of mathematical ideas, indeed, even before su content is
formally introduced.
is feature of idea generation reﬂects calls for more cognitively
allenging tasks that encourage high-level thinking and reasoning, have
multiple points of entry, and enable the use of varied solution approaes.
Unfortunately, as Silver, Mesa, Morris, Star, and Benken (2009) report,

emphasis in the 1990s on the importance of cognitively demanding tasks
(e.g., Stein, Grover, & Henningsen, 1996) appears to have gone largely
unheeded. is is a pity because Stein et al.’s criteria provide a pertinent
basis for designing mathematics-curriculum problems that target 21st-
century demands related to communication and other general problem-
solving skills. For example, problems with high cognitive demand require
students to explain, describe, and justify; make decisions, oices, and plans;
formulate questions; apply existing knowledge and create new ideas; and
represent their understanding in multiple formats. Students are likely to
face su demands when encountering problems outside of sool, where
uncertainty and a broadening of mathematical content call for problem
solvers who have the disposition and ability to generate mathematical
knowledge on an “as-needed basis.” Although debates continue about
whether the cognitive allenges of the workplace are truly increasing, we
do know that more skillful decision making and problem solving are
needed in all avenues of life, where solving information-laden problems has
become increasingly vital to one’s overall health, well-being, and
achievements.
General Skills and Heuristics
Collectively, the general skills for successful problem solving advocated by
employer groups and mathematics educators share some features, although
recommendations for fostering these skills remain challenging and, at times,
contradictory. From the extensive literature on general skills, the four broad
areas of employer-desired skills that have been identiﬁed by the
Partnership for 21st-Century Skills (P21, 2010) appear particularly pertinent.
ese areas, whi we have delineated in a prior section, include eﬀective
reasoning, using systems thinking, making judgements and decisions, and

solving problems. ese skill areas are reﬂected in recent writings of
Soenfeld (2011, 2013) and Lester (2013), who raise the importance of
recognizing and constructing paerns of inference and making careful
judgments during the problem-solving process. Soenfeld’s (2013)
inclusion of solvers’ beliefs and dispositions about themselves and the
discipline being engaged, together with their “decision-making meanism”
(p. 17), is an interesting extension of his earlier work, in whi “dispositions,
beliefs, values, tastes, and preferences” (Soenfeld, 2010, p. 29) were
identiﬁed as core features of successful problem solving. More recently,
Swanson (2013) also highlighted the importance of students’ beliefs and
orientations when faced with allenging mathematics problems. She aptly
titled her article “Overcoming the Run Response,” invoking the fear su
problems can instill in students. In revealing students’ emotional reactions
to these problems, Swanson stressed the importance of self-awareness and
regulation, in other words, metacognition. Metacognition, in broad terms, is
increasingly recognized as playing a critical role in successful problem
solving, both within and beyond the curriculum (e.g., Lester, 2013;
Pellegrino & Hilton, 2012). Lester’s (2013) inclusion of “intuition” as one of
the key components of successful problem solving further supports the
recognition of general cognitive components, provided students become
conscious of their intuitions and can evaluate their implications for the
problem at hand. Yet, as he and others (e.g., Sneider & Artelt, 2010) have
lamented, we still know lile about how to develop students’
metacognitive abilities. Indeed, current approaes may be inherently self-
contradictory (see Kirshner, Chapter 4 in this volume).
e extent to whi these competencies and dispositions exist as general
abilities that individuals can possess and apply across domains, mu less be
taught, remains unclear. e strong consensus on their importance in the
workplace could mean employers have actually seen workers—their most
valuable ones—repeatedly solve nonroutine problems, implying that su

general competencies exist. Even so, nonroutine should not be confused
with contextually unfamiliar, a broader condition. Exemplary workers have
the ability to solve novel problems within their domain (e.g., auto
meanics) but there is no reason to expect this ability to extend to
problems in other domains (e.g., cooking). is distinction might inform the
issue of problem-solving heuristics: within-domain heuristics (e.g., for
mathematical problem solving, as Polya’s were originally intended) might
hold promise, but not cross-domain heuristics. Still, even the observation of
able solvers of nonroutine problems within a domain does not guarantee
that within-domain heuristics explain their success or even exist. Clearly,
more resear is needed on within-domain problem-solving expertise and
how it is learned.
Contexts and Authenticity
It is apparent that domain knowledge is key to workplace problem solving.
Beyond speciﬁc job training, however, it is hard to see how to address this
in sools. Further, while it may be possible to succeed at work with
expertise in only a single domain, everyday life decisions occur in multiple
domains encountered too infrequently to become familiar (e.g., medical and
ﬁnancial decisions). Still, with lile resear support for the transfer of
mathematical skills learned in the abstract to contextual problems, it seems
advisable to engage students in learning to solve contextualized problems
with mathematical tools and in making sense of models (real-world
systems and processes that mathematically relate quantities). As more
classrooms employ context-based mathematical learning and modeling,
more research can be conducted on the effect of such education on students’
problem-solving ability in future courses, work, and life—speciﬁcally, how
well learning to use mathematics to solve problems in certain contexts (in

school) prepares students for doing so in other contexts outside of school.
Even if su transfer remains hard to prove, there are other reasons to
tea mathematics in the context of solving realistic problems. It oﬀers a
more realistic view of real-world problem solving, whi is usually
interdisciplinary and dependent on contextual speciﬁcs (unlike traditional
sool math problems); this view should beer prepare students for su
problem solving. It could also reveal the nature of various workplaces, thus
building career awareness and a general understanding of what adult work
requires. Realistic problem solving could also invoke and build
noncognitive skills desired by employers, su as collaboration and
communication. It might also build positive dispositions towards the use of
mathematics in solving real-world problems, convincing students that
mathematical tools can be useful in problem solving, developing self-
eﬃcacy in the use of those tools, and showing that persistence is oen
required.
Mathematical Content
Here, the message from the resear is clear: For solving the vast majority
of problems arising in work and life, only basic mathematics is needed, but
people need to be far more ﬂuent with its use and application than they are
today. e current press to expose more students to more advanced
mathematics topics before college appears to head in the wrong direction,
especially when these topics are covered rapidly and cursorily. More
advisable would be spending more time with ea topic, enriing students’
understanding by using the topic to solve a variety of mathematical and
real problems. For most students, a goal of mastery of basic algebra and
geometry by the end of high sool seems most justiﬁed, with the addition
of the less-traditional topics of statistics, data analysis, and solid geometry.

Despite the shortcomings of transfer resear, the ﬁnding by the TmL
researers of the importance of understanding the conceptual models
underlying real-world processes supports the idea that deep understanding
of somewhat generalizable concepts is more eﬃcacious in promoting
problem-solving ability, at least within a domain, than shallower, situation-
speciﬁc, procedural knowledge. is suggests that whatever the
mathematical content (and whatever the context), the primary goal for
teaing should be deep understanding of the underlying principles and
concepts. is should work in both directions: problem solving in real
contexts can contribute to a deep understanding of mathematical concepts
and principles, and applying mathematical tools to real problems can
contribute to a deep understanding of the concepts and principles
underlying the real-world systems or phenomena. e sentiments of
employers and the observations by workplace ethnographers underscore
the importance of learning and metacognition on the job: successful
engineers, scientists, and tenology workers use mathematics or
quantitative reasoning to beer understand the systems at the heart of their
work, at the same time honing their mathematical or quantitative “tools”
for future problem solving. Sools should make explicit to students that
this learning cycle is part of what the best STEM workers do.

Mathematical Modeling—One Way to Prepare for
21st-Century Demands
Mathematical modeling is becoming increasingly important in the
workplace and in many other avenues in life. e terms models and
modeling have been interpreted variously in the literature (e.g., English,
2013; Gainsburg, 2006; Lesh & Doerr, 2003; Lesh & Zawojewski, 2007;
Stillman & Galbraith, 2011), with debate over whether these are
components of the broad problem-solving spectrum or entities in their own
right. Without taking a stance on this debate, we consider modeling a
powerful vehicle for bringing features of 21st-century problems into the
mathematics classroom.
Modeling has an extensive history within the mathematics community,
as can be seen in the 1983 establishment of International Conferences on
the Teaing of Mathematical Modeling and Applications (ICTMA; Kaiser,
2010). Various interpretations and forms of models and modeling exist,
even within the ICTMA community, but we refer to Lesh and Fennewald’s
(2010) basic “ﬁrst-iteration deﬁnition of a model,” namely, “A model is a
system for describing (or explaining, or designing) another system(s) for
some clearly speciﬁed purpose” (p. 7). is interpretation is especially
germane to ﬁelds beyond mathematics education, including engineering
and other mature science domains. Some of the experiences that engage
students in modeling from this perspective have been described as model-
eliciting activities (MEAs; English, 2007; Hamilton, Lesh, Lester, &
Brilleslyper, 2008; Lesh & Doerr, 2003), where the focus is on the processes
of interpretation and reinterpretation of problematic information, and on
the iterative development of mathematical ideas as models are formed,
tested, and reﬁned in response to certain speciﬁcations. MEAs give students
the opportunity to create, apply, and adapt mathematical and scientiﬁc
concepts in interpreting, explaining, and predicting the behavior of real-

world based problems su as those that occur in engineering (e.g.,
Gainsburg, 2006).
Exposure to statistical information in these MEAs provides a valuable
basis for developing the skills that consumers need in working eﬀectively
with data. Interpreting and understanding the implications of insurance
documents, ﬁnancial agreements, and political agendas, to name a few,
requires an ability to deal with complex information. Modeling problems
present students with su data, whi must be interpreted, diﬀerentiated,
prioritized, and coordinated to produce a solution model. Furthermore,
students’ modeling work oen elicits nontraditional mathematics topics for
their grade level, because diﬀerent types of quantities and operations are
needed to deal with realistic situations. For example, MEAs oen involve
accumulations, probabilities, frequencies, and ranks, with the associated
operations of sorting, organizing, selecting, quantifying, weighting, and
transforming large data sets (Doerr & English, 2003; Lesh, Zawojewski, &
Carmona, 2003). Integral to the mathematizing process are the myriad
representational media required in expressing and documenting the models,
including computer-based graphics, tables, lists, paper-based diagrams and
graphs, and oral and wrien communication (Lesh & Harel, 2003). Because
these representations embody the factors, relationships, and operations that
students considered important in creating their models, MEAs oﬀer an
additional beneﬁt to teaers and researers: powerful insight into the
growth of students’ mathematical thinking.
As we noted in our discussion on 21st-century demands, the importance
of 
understanding 
the 
underlying 
models 
that 
are 
represented
mathematically and tenologically is crucial in many ﬁelds, including
engineering, ﬁnance, manufacturing, and agriculture. Virtually all aspects of
modern life have been mathematized using the modeling components we
have highlighted; our future citizens need to be aware of, and understand
how, this mathematization shapes their lives in so many ways. In preparing

our students to become mathematically aware, consideration needs to be
given to how we might select contexts that approximate authenticity and
foster an appreciation of learning through classroom problem solving.
Modeling problems also foster the types of general skills that employers
demand in the workplace and that citizens need for maximum societal
participation. Su skills include critical and innovative thinking, complex
reasoning, metacognitive actions, and collaboration and communication
within and across disciplines. In sum, modeling activities represent an
excellent example of an instructional strategy that should promote the kind
of learning valued in 21st-century work and life.

Concluding Points
We commenced this apter by reviewing some of the key debates on
mathematical problem solving over past decades. Given that these debates
remain largely unresolved, we turned to resear on the demands of
modern work and life and examined drivers of ange in these seings. We
considered the nature of the problems that need to be solved in these
anging contexts and the competencies required for dealing eﬀectively
with the allenges that arise. In light of this resear, we revisited
mathematics education and suggested how we might beer prepare
students for successful problem solving in the 21st century.
Where do we stand then, with regard to suggestions for how we might
advance students’ problem solving in today’s world? Clearly, there are
many courses of action that might be adopted and, with the diverse range
of learning contexts we face, no one set of recommendations would suit all
sool systems. Nevertheless, we have focused on ways in whi we might
tea problem-solving processes in conjunction with developing
mathematical content, how we might address context and authenticity, and
how general skills might be developed to enhance problem-solving success
in the modern workplace and life. Many allenges remain, however, in
implementing our recommendations and issues for further investigation
abound. We address just a couple of such issues in closing.
We have given MEAs as an example of a ri source for developing both
problem-solving processes and mathematical content as well as providing
authentic contexts and fostering general skills. Other cognitively
demanding problem types that oﬀer similar learning opportunities should
also be incorporated within the mathematics curriculum. Interdisciplinary
problems that require synthesizing knowledge from across STEM domains
—for example, problems in an engineering context—can be appealing and
authentic, but they remain rare in the mathematics curriculum (English,

Hudson, & Dawes, 2012; Suh, Seshaiyer, Moore, Green, Jewell, & Rice,
2013).
Modifying “traditional” mathematical problems to foster idea generation
rather than mere procedural application is another area in need of attention.
Su modiﬁcation can be both teaer and student initiated. Teaers can
restructure existing problems to be interdisciplinary (perhaps in
collaboration with teaers of other subjects), so that obvious solution paths
become less apparent, not all of the required mathematics is presented, and
a more open approa to solution is encouraged. And the renewed interest
in problem posing oﬀers valuable suggestions for engaging students in
adapting, creating, and solving their own problems, beginning with su
experiences in the earliest years of sooling. For example, English and
Watson (2014) have shown how problem posing can be integrated within
the regular mathematics curriculum in the areas of statistics and probability,
where students direct their own investigations.
inking more broadly, we advocate an increased awareness of
mathematical problem solving beyond the classroom and greater insights
into how the demands of the 21st century are impacting our lives. While we
cannot simply transport the mathematical problems of the outside world
into the classroom, there are many ways in whi we can more realistically
contextualize “sool 
problems.” 
Su 
recontextualization 
should
incorporate a transition to more cognitively allenging problems—ones
whi stimulate curiosity, foster critical thinking, promote creative
solutions, and feature multiple entry and exit points for increased access by
a range of students.

References
Altonji, J. G. (1995). e eﬀects of high sool curriculum on education and labor market outcomes.
The Journal of Human Resources, 30(3), 409–438.
Anderson, J. (2014). Forging new opportunities for problem solving in Australian mathematics
classrooms through the ﬁrst national mathematics curriculum. In Y. Li & G. Lappan (Eds.),
Mathematics curriculum in school education (pp. 209–230). Dordrecht: Springer.
Atkinson, R. D., & Mayo, M. (2010). Refueling the U.S. innovation economy: Fresh approaes to
science, tenology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education. e Information
Tenology & Innovation Foundation. Retrieved from www.itif.org/files/2010-refueling-
innovation-economy.pdf.
Autor, D., Levy, F., & Murnane, R. (2003). e skill content of recent tenological ange: An
empirical exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1279–1333.
Bakker, A., Kent, P., Derry, J., Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (2008). Statistical inference at work: Statistical
Process Control as an example. Statistics Education Research Journal, 7(2), 130–145.
Barton, P. E. (2000). What jobs require: Literacy, education, and training, 1940–2006. Educational
Testing Service Policy Information Report.
Barton, P. E. (2006). High sool reform and work: Facing labor market realities. Educational Testing
Service Policy Information Report.
Bishop, J. (1993). Improving job mates in the U.S. labor market. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. Microeconomics, 1993(1), 335–400.
Bishop, J. H., & Mane, F. (2004). e impacts of career-tenical education on high sool labor
market success. Economics of Education Review, 23, 381–402
Boaler, J. (2009). e elephant in the classroom: Helping ildren learn and love maths . London:
Souvenir Press.
Bowles, Ginits, & Osborne (2001). e determinants of earnings: A behavioral approa. Journal of
Economic Literature, 39(4), 1137–1176.
Brynjolfsson, E. & McAfee, A. (2011). Race against the maine: How the digital revolution is
accelerating innovation, driving productivity, and irreversibly transforming employment and the
economy. Lexington, MA: Digital Frontier Press.

Business Council. (2013, May). CEO survey results: e Business Council survey of CEOs in
collaboration 
with 
the 
Conference 
Board. 
Retrieved 
from
www.thebusinesscouncil.org/assets/TCB_BCS_MAY_2013.pdf.
Cawley, J., Heman, J. J., & Vytlacil, E. J. (2001). ree observations on wages and measured
cognitive ability. Labour Economics, 8(4), 419–442.
Cognition & Tenology Group at Vanderbilt. (1990). Anored instruction and its relationship to
situated cognition. Educational Researcher, 19(6), 2–10.
Cooper, B. & Dunne, M. (1998). Anyone for tennis? Social class diﬀerences in ildren’s responses to
national curriculum mathematics testing. The Sociological Review, 46(1), 115–148.
Davis, P. J. (1988). Applied mathematics as social contract. Mathematics Magazine, 61(3), 139–147.
de Abreu, G. (2002). Mathematics learning in out-of-sool contexts: A cultural psyology
perspective. In L. D. English (Ed.). Handbook of International resear in mathematics Education
(pp. 323–353). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Doerr, H. M., & English, L. D. (2003). A Modeling perspective on students' mathematical reasoning
about data. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 34(2), 110–136.
Dudley, U. (2010). What is mathematics for? Notices of the AMS, 57(5), 608–613.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological Monographs, 58(5).
English, L. D. (2007). Interdisciplinary modelling in the primary mathematics curriculum. In J.
Watson & K. Beswi (Eds.), Mathematics: Essential resear, essential practice. Proceedings of
the 30th annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia (Vol. 2,
pp. 275–284). Adelaide: MERGA.
English, L. D. (2013). Complex modelling in the primary and middle sool years: An
interdisciplinary approa. In G. Stillman, G. Kaiser, W. Blum, & J. Brown (Eds.), Mathematical
modelling: Connecting to practice—Teaing practice and the practice of applied
mathematicians (pp. 491–505). New York: Springer.
English, L. D., Hudson, P. B., & Dawes, L. (2012). Engineering design processes in seventh-grade
classrooms: Bridging the engineering education gap. European Journal of Engineering Education,
37(5), 436–447.
English, L. D., & Sriraman, B. (2010). Problem solving for the 21st century. In B. Sriraman & L. D.
English (Eds.), Advances in Mathematics Education. eories of mathematics education: Seeking

new frontiers (pp. 263–285). New York: Springer.
English, L. D., & Watson, J. M. (2014). Statistical literacy in the elementary sool: Opportunities for
problem posing. In F. Singer, N. Ellerton, & J. Cai (Eds.), Problem posing: From resear to
effective practice. Dordrecht: Springer.
Fiser, K. (2013). e employment mismat. e Chronicle of Higher Education (Mar 4).
Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/article/The-Employment-Mismatch/137625/#id=overview.
Gainsburg, J. (2006). e mathematical modeling of structural engineers. Mathematical inking
and Learning, 8(1), 3–36.
Gainsburg, J. (2007a). e mathematical disposition of structural engineers. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 38(5), 477–506.
Gainsburg, J. (2007b). Problem solving and learning in everyday structural engineering work. In R. A.
Lesh, E. Hamilton, & J. Kaput (Eds.), Foundations for the future in mathematics education (pp.
37–56). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gallup (2013, May 28). 21st century skills and the workplace: A 2013 Microso Partners in Learning
and Pearson Foundation study. Retrieved from www.gallup.com/services/176699/21st-century-
skills-workplace.aspx.
Goldin, C. & Katz, L. F. (2008). e race between education and tenology. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Goos, M., & Galbraith, P. (1996). Do it this way! Metacognitive strategies in collaborative
mathematical problem solving. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 30, 229–260.
Goos, M., Galbraith, P., & Renshaw, P. (2002). Socially mediated metacognition: creating
collaborative zones of proximal development in small group problem solving. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 49, 193–223.
Greenstone, M. & Looney, A. (2011). Where is the best place to invest $102,000—In stos, bonds, or a
college 
degree? 
Report 
from 
the 
Hamilton 
Project, 
Brookings. 
Retrieved 
from
www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2011/06/25-education-greenstone-looney.
Greiﬀenhagen, C., & Sharro, W. (2008). Sool mathematics and its everyday other? Revisiting
Lave’s ‘Cognition in Practice.’ Educational Studies in Mathematics, 69, 1–21.
Grubb, W. N., & Lazerson, M. (2004). e education gospel: e economic power of sooling.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Hamilton, E., Lesh, R., Lester, F., & Brilleslyper, M. (2008). Model-eliciting activities (MEAs) as a
bridge between engineering education resear and mathematics education resear. Advances
in Engineering Education, 1(2), 1–25.
Handel, M. J. (in press). What do people do at work? A proﬁle of U.S. jobs from the survey of
workplace skills, tenology, and management practices (STAMP). In F. Green & M. Keese (Eds).
Paris: OECD Publishing.
Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann, L. (2008). e role of cognitive skills in economic development,
Journal of Economic Literature, 46(3), 607–668.
Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann. L. (2011). How much do educational outcomes matter for developed
countries? Economic Policy, 26(67).
Harvard Graduate Sool of Education (GSE). (2011, February). Pathways to prosperity: Meeting the
allenge of preparing young Americans for the 21st century. Report from the Pathways to
Prosperity Project.
Heman, J. J., Stixrud, J., & Urzua, S. (2006). e eﬀects of cognitive and noncognitive abilities on
labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3), 411–482.
Hegedus, S. (2013). Young ildren’s investigating advanced mathematical concepts with haptic
technologies: Future design perspectives. The Mathematics Enthusiast, 10(1–2), 87–108.
Hibbard, J. H., Peters, E., Dixon, A., & Tusler, M. (2007). Consumer competencies and the use of
comparative quality information: It isn’t just about literacy. Medical Care Resear and Review,
62(4), 379–394.
Hohensee, C. (2014). Baward transfer: An investigation of the inﬂuence of quadratic functions
instruction on students’ prior ways of reasoning about linear functions. Mathematical inking
and Learning, 16(2), 135–174.
Hoyles, C., Noss, R., Kent, P., & Bakker, A. (2010). Improving mathematics at work: e need for
techno-mathematical literacies. London: Routledge.
Hoyles, C., Noss, R., & Pozzi, S. (2001). Proportional reasoning in nursing practice. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 32, 4–27.
Kapa, E. (2001). A metacognitive support during the process of problem solving in a computerized
environment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 47, 317–336.
Kaiser, G. (2010). Introduction: ICTMA and the teaing of modelling and applications. In R. Lesh,

P. Galbraith, C. R. Haines, & A. Hurford (Eds.), Modeling students’ mathematical modeling
competencies (pp. 1–2). New York: Springer.
Kaput, J., Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (2008). Developing new notations for a learnable mathematics in the
computational era. In L. D. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics
education (2nd ed., pp. 693–715). New York: Routledge.
Kent, P., & Noss, R. (2002, January). e mathematical components of engineering expertise: e
relationship between doing and understanding mathematics. Paper submied to the Institution
of Electrical Engineers Annual Symposium on Engineering Education, London.
Kilpatrick, J. (1981). One point of view: Stop the bandwagon, I want off. Arithmetic Teacher, 28(8), 2.
Kramarski, B., Weisse, I., & Kololshi-Minsker, I. (2010). How can self-regulated learning support the
problem solving of third-grade students with mathematics anxiety? The International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 42 (2), 179–193.
Krugman, P. (2011, Mar 9). Degrees and dollars. New York Times . Retrieved from
www.nytimes.com/2011/03/07/opinion/07krugman.html.
Langdon, D., McKiri, G., Beede, D., Khan, B., & Doms, M. (2011). STEM: Good jobs now and for
the future. U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration. Retrieved
from www.esa.doc.gov/Reports/stem-good-jobs-now-and-future.
Lesh, R. & Doerr, H. M. (2003). Foundations of a models and modeling perspective on mathematics
teaing, learning, and problem solving. In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr (Eds.), Beyond constructivism:
Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics problem solving, learning, and teaing (pp.
3–33). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R., & Fennewald, T. (2010). Introduction to part 1 modeling: What is it? Why do it? In R. Lesh,
P. Galbraith, C. R. Haines, & A. Hurford (Eds.), Modeling students’ mathematical modeling
competencies (pp. 5–10). New York: Springer.
Lesh, R., & Harel, G. (2003). Problem solving, modeling, and local conceptual development.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 5(2–3), 157–189.
Lesh, R. & Zawojewski, J. S. (2007). Problem solving and modeling. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second
handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 763–804). Charloe, NC:
Information Age Publishing.
Lesh, R., Zawojewski, J., & Carmona, G. (2003). What mathematical abilities are needed for success

beyond sool in a tenology-based age of information? In R. Lesh & H. M. Doerr (Eds.),
Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics teaing, learning,
and problem solving. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lester, F. K., Jr. (2013). oughts about resear on mathematical problem-solving instruction. The
Mathematics Enthusiast, 10(1&2), 245–278.
Lester, F. K., Jr., & Charles, R. I. (Eds.). (2003). Teaing mathematics through problem solving:
Grades pre-K–6. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Lester, F. K., Jr., & Kehle, P. E. (2003). From problem solving to modeling: e evolution of thinking
about resear on complex mathematical activity. In R. Lesh & H. Doerr, (Eds.), Beyond
constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on mathematics problem solving, learning and
teaching (pp. 501–518), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Levine, P. B., & Zimmerman, D. J. (1995). e beneﬁt of additional high-sool math and science
classes for young men and women. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 13(2), 137–149.
Levy, F., & Murnane, R.J. (2004). e new division of labor: How computers are creating the next job
market. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lim, G, & Kim, C. (2013). Who has to pay for their education? Evidence from European tertiary
education. Educational Researcher, 42(4), 250–252.
Lobato, J. (2003). How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer and vice versa.
Educational Researcher, 32(1), 17–20.
Lubienski, S. (2000). Problem solving as a means toward mathematics for all: An exploratory look
through a class lens. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(4), 454–482.
Mamona-Downs, J., & Downs, M. (2013). Problem solving and its elements in forming proof. The
Mathematics Enthusiast, 10(1–2), 137–162.
McKenna, A. F., & Agogino, A.M. (2004, April). Supporting meanical reasoning with a
representationally-rich learning environment. Journal of Engineering Education, 97–104.
Mehta, J. (2013). How paradigms create policies: e transformation of American educational policy,
1980–2001. American Educational Research Journal, 50(2), 285–324.
MetLife. (2010). e MetLife survey of the American teaer: Preparing students for college and
careers. Retrieved from www.metlife.com/teachersurvey.
Miller, R. (n.d.). Education and economic growth: From the 19th to 21st century. Paper

commissioned 
by 
Cisco 
Systems. 
Retrieved 
from
www.cisco.com/web/strategy/docs/education/eeg_what_research_says.pdf.
Moreno Armella, L., & Santos-Trigos, M. (2013). Introduction to international perspectives on
problem solving research in mathematics education. The Mathematics Enthusiast, 10(1–2), 3–8.
Murnane, R. J., & Levy, F. (1996). Teaing the new basic skills: Principles for educating ildren to
thrive in a changing economy. New York: The Free Press.
Murnane, R. J., Wille, J. B., & Levy, F. (1995). e growing importance of cognitive skills in wage
determination. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2), 251–266.
National Center on Education and the Economy (NCEE). (2013, May). What does it really mean to
be college and work ready? e mathematics required of ﬁrst year community college students.
Retrieved from www.ncee.org.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1980). An agenda for action. Reston, VA: Author.
Nelson, W., Fagerlin, A., & Peters, E. (2008). Clinical implications of numeracy: eory and practice.
e 
Society 
of 
Behavioral 
Medicine, 
35 , 
261–274. 
Retrieved 
from
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs12160-008-9037-8.
Newell, H. A., & Simon, A. H. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Nunes, T., Sliemann, A. D., & Carraher, D. W. (1993). Street mathematics and sool mathematics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
OECD. (2010). e high cost of low educational performance: e long-run economic impact of
improving 
PISA 
outcomes. 
Paris: 
OECD 
Publishing. 
Retrieved 
from www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/education/the-high-cost-of-low-educational-performance_9789264077485-en.
OECD (2014). PISA 2012 results: What students know and can do: Vol. 1. Student performance in
mathematics, reading and science—Volume 1. Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved from
www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results-volume-I.pdf.
Paer, A. (1997). Mathematical competencies that employers expect. In L. A. Steen (Ed.), Why
numbers count: antitative literacy for tomorrow’s America (pp. 137–154). New York: College
Entrance Examination Board.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2006). Are they really ready to work? Employers’ perspectives on
the basic knowledge and applied skills of new entrants to the 21st century U.S. workforce.
Retrieved from www.p21.org.

Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2008). 21st century skills, education and competitiveness: A
resources and policy guide. Retrieved from www.p21.org.
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2009). P21 framework definitions. Retrieved from www.p21.org.
Pellegrino, J. W., & Hilton, M. L. (Eds.) (2012). Education for life and work: Developing transferable
knowledge and skills in the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. Retrieved
f
r
o
m www.nap.edu/catalog/13398/education-for-life-and-work-developing-transferable-
knowledge-and-skills.
Peters, E., Hibbard, J., Slovic, P., & Diemann, N. (2007). Numeracy skill and the communication,
comprehension, and use of risk-benefit information. Health Affairs, 26(3), 741–748.
Peters, E., & Levin, I. P. (2008). Dissecting the risky-oice framing eﬀect: Numeracy as an
individual-diﬀerence factor in weighting risky and riskless options. Judgment and Decision
Making, 3(6), 435–448.
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Reyna, V. F., Nelson, W. L., Han, P. K., and Diemann, N. F. (2009). How numeracy inﬂuences risk
comprehension and medical decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 135(6), 943–973.
Rigelman, N. R. (2013). Become a mathematical problem solver. Mathematics Teaing in the
Middle School, 18(7), 416–423.
Salzman, H., Kuehn, D., & Lowell, L. (2013, April 24). Guestworkers in the high-skill U.S. labor
market: An analysis of supply, employment, and wage trends. EPI Briefing Paper #359, Economy
Policy Institute. Retrieved from www.epi.org/files/2013/bp359-guestworkers-high-skill-labor-
market-analysis.pdf.
Sneider, W., & Artelt, C. (2010). Metacognition and mathematics education. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 42, 149–161.
Soen, H. L., & Charles, R. I. (2003). Teaing mathematics through problem solving: Grades 6–12 .
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2008). Problem solving in the United States, 1970–2008: Resear and theory,
practice and politics. In G. Törner, A. H. Soenfeld, & K. Reiss (Eds.), Problem solving around
the world—Summing up the state of the art. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics
Education, special issue (1).

Soenfeld, A. H. (2013). Reﬂections on problem solving theory and practice. e Mathematics
Enthusiast, 10(1&2), 9–34.
Sultz, T. W. (1975). e value of the ability to deal with disequilibria. American Economic
Review, 13(3), 827–846.
Silver, E. (Ed.). (1985). Teaing and learning mathematical problem solving: Multiple resear
perspectives. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Silver, E. A., Mesa, V., Morris, K. A., Star, J. R., & Benken, B. M. (2009). Teaing mathematics for
understanding: An analysis of lessons submied by teaers seeking NBPTS certiﬁcation. U.S.
Educational Research Journal, 46(2), 501–531.
Singer, F., Ellerton., N., & Cai, J. (Eds.). (2015). Mathematical problem posing: From resear to
effective practice. Dordrecht: Springer.
Stanic, G.M.A., & Kilpatri, J. (1989). Historical perspectives on problem solving in the mathematics
curriculum. In R. I. Charles & E. A. Silver (Eds.), e teaing and assessing of mathematical
problem solving (Vol. 3, pp. 1–22). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Stein, M. K., Grover, B. W., & Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical
thinking and reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. American
Education Research Journal, 33, 455–488.
Stillman, G., & Galbraith, P. (2011). Evolution of applications and modelling in a senior secondary
curriculum. In Kaiser, G., Blum, W., Borromeo Ferri, R., & Stillman, G. (Eds.), Trends in teaing
and learning of mathematical modelling: ICTMA14 (pp. 689–699). New York: Springer.
Suh, J. M., Seshaiyer, P., Moore, K., Green, M., Jewell, H., & Rice, I. (2013). Being an environmentally
friendly package engineer. Teaching Children Mathematics, 20(4), 261–263.
Swanson, R. E. (2013). Overcoming the run response. Mathematics Teaing in the Middle sool,
19(2), 94–99.
Tienken, C. H. (2008). Rankings of international aievement test performance and economic
strength: Correlation or conjecture? International Journal of Education Policy & Leadership, 3(4).
Toerner, G., Soenfeld, A. H., & Reiss, K. (Eds.). (2008). Problem Solving Around the World—
Summing up the State of the Art. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics Education,
39(5–6), plus special issue (1).
Tuer, M. (2013, June 6). A framework for thinking and learning. EducationWeek. Retrieved from

http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/top_performers/2013/06/a_framework_for_thinking_and_learning
Vedder, R., Denhart, C., & Robe, J. (2013). Why are recent college graduates underemployed?
University enrollments and labor-market realities. Center for College Aﬀordability and
Productivity. 
Retrieved 
from
http://centerforcollegeaffordability.org/uploads/Underemployed%20Report%202.pdf.
Welch, F. (1970). Education in production. Journal of Political Economy, 78(1), 35–59.
Wolf, A. (2009, July-August). Misunderstanding education: Why increasing enrollments can’t and
won’t ﬁx the economy. Change. Retrieved from www.changemag.org/July-August 2009/full-mis
understanding.html.
Zaba, K., Carlson, A., & Crellin, M. (2012). e economic beneﬁt of postsecondary degrees: A state
and national-level analysis. Report from the State Higher Education Executive Oﬃcers.
Retrieved 
from
www.sheeo.org/sites/default/files/publications/Econ%20Benefit%20of%20Degrees%20Report%20wi
Zawojewski, J. (2010). Problem solving versus modeling. In R. A. Lesh, P. L. Galbraith, C. R. Haines,
& A. Hurford (Eds.). Modeling students’ mathematical modeling competencies (pp. 237–244).
Dordrecht: Springer.

13 Critical Issues in Culture and
Mathematics Learning
Peter Appelbaum
Arcadia University, Philadelphia, United States
Charoula Stathopoulou
University of Thessally, Volos, Greece
It has become routine to tentatively suggest that people should no longer
be willing to think of mathematics and mathematics education as far
removed from culture, politics, and controversy. ere is a long tradition of
su solarship (Zaslavsky, 1973a, 1973b; Pinxten, van Dooren, & Harvey,
1983; D’Ambrosio, 1985; Mellin-Olsen, 1987; Pinxten, van Dooren, &
Soberon, 1987; Bishop, 1988a, 1988b; Aser, 1991; Gerdes, 1992, 1994, 1996;
Lerman, 1994; Skovsmose, 1994, 2004, 2011; Appelbaum, 1995; Baker, Clay,
& Fox, 1996; Barton, 1996a; Powell & Frankenstein, 1997; Dowling, 1998;
Eglash, 1999; Boaler, 2000; Martin, 2000; Adler, 2001; de Abreu, Bishop, &
Presmeg, 2002; Gutstein, 2003; Kumashiro, 2009; Presmeg, 2007). Increasing
aention to the eﬀects of globalization, international economic and cultural
proliferation, and a surge of migration and immigration leading to ever-
diverse communities, has buressed interest in cultural contexts of
education in general, and mathematics education in multicultural
communities in particular. Lerman (2000) dubbed this the “social turn” at
the turn of the century. Yet, aer at least 40 years of solarship, as
indicated by our brief representative sample of references, resear and
practice in mathematics education rarely moves beyond a surface
suggestion that culture might be relevant to explore the nuances and

complexities of mathematics and mathematics education as culturally
constructed, embedded in cultural contexts, or as a component of socio-
political institutions of power and authority.
A brief ﬂirtation with multicultural methods in the 1980s and 1990s led to
many suggestions for classroom activities that connect mathematics to:
games and practices from non-Western cultures (see, e.g., Zaslavsky, 1993;
1996, & 1998; Whitin & Wilde, 1995, Lipka, Sharp, Adams, & Sharp, 2007);
nonstandard calculation procedures and algorithms (Stathopoulou &
Kalabasis, 2002; Moreira, 2003; Knijnik, Wanderer, & Oliveira, 2005;
Stathopoulou, 2005; Moreira & Pires, 2012; Orey & Rosa, 2008); multiple
representations of mathematical concepts (Favilli, 2007; Gerdes, 1988,
Barton, 1995; Palhares, 2012), and to a cultural pride linked to mathematics
(Mahews, 1989; Appelbaum, 1995; Moses & Cobb, 2001; Gutstein, 2003).
ere has been a recent eﬀort in this century to develop sool
mathematics activities and projects that take advantage of the funds of
knowledge that students bring to sool from home and community
cultures (see, e.g., Gerdes, 1988; Civil & Kahn, 2001; Stathopoulou, 2006;
Klein & Showalter, 2012). However, there remains a limited focus on using
social practices from “other,” nonmainstream cultures to lure learners into
an understanding of traditional mathematics content (Bazin & Tamez, 2002).
Few culturally sensitive curricular practices that work with the culturally
speciﬁc knowledge that learners bring to sool support these learners
taking what is enhanced or reﬁned in sool ba into home cultures. Even
the more politically sensitive approaes to mathematics teaing and
learning (Civil, 2002; Frankenstein, 1987; Gutstein & Peterson, 2005) assume
the mathematics to be politically neutral, however politicized its
applications. And few resear projects, curriculum development eﬀorts, or
cross-cultural collaborations in mathematics education take seriously the
notion that potentially confusing and complex multiplicities of cultures and
identities are manifest in what might be taken on ﬁrst glance to be a single,

monolithic “culture” in contemporary, postcolonial, creolized “inter-
cultural” contexts (Appelbaum, 1995, 2008; Valero & Stentof, 2010; Swanson
& Appelbaum, 2013; Chronaki, 2005).
As recently as 2007, Norma Presmeg wrote that mathematics education
had “experienced a major revolution in perceptions,” so that “mathematics,
long considered value- and culture-free, is indeed a cultural product, and
hence that the role of culture—with all its complexities and contestations—is
an important aspect of mathematics education” (Presmeg, 2007, p. 435). As
late as the revised edition of Against Common Sense, Kevin Kumashiro
could write, “More than any discipline, math is considered by many people
to be the least inﬂuenced by social factors, and, therefore, to be the most
bias-free of all subjects being taught and learned in sool. People have told
me that race might maer when treating students of color diﬀerently in a
math classroom, but race has lile, if anything, to do with adding and
subtracting numbers” (Kumashiro, 2009, p. 111). How has it come about
that he needs to write this as late in history as 2009? Virtually the same
comments can be found in most of the references already cited in this
paragraph, from at least as long ago as the 1970s.
It is time to take sto of mathematics education and culture, in order to
understand the range of working deﬁnitions that are commonly muddled
and confused in professional and public discourse. It is perhaps time also to
consider alternatives to “culture” as a central concept in mathematics
education. Approaes to mathematics education and culture take diﬀerent
forms depending on how one conceives of mathematics, (mathematics)
education, and culture. One can imagine a three-dimensional set of axes
with categories along ea of these dimensions, so that the combinations of
presumptions about ea of these terms and the practices they represent
come together in any given resear project or reﬂection on mathematics
education to create a common-sense “reality” that is made “real” by this
work. If we take a look at only two of these at a time (given the limitations

of a text-based apter, this is the easiest way to represent su
interactions, but also, it is useful to isolate the interactions taken two
dimensions at a time to introduce this idea of complex interactions), we can
visualize subsets of the larger taxonomy. (See Table 13.1)
We share Table 13.1 not to establish an exhaustive taxonomy, but to
communicate the variety of assumptions that a typical resear project,
curriculum design, or development eﬀort carries with it as common sense.
In order to study and understand issues of culture and mathematics
learning/teaing, one needs to consider various lenses from mathematics
education, educational anthropology, sociology, sociolinguistics, and critical
theory, and so on. In general, the questions in this apter assume that
knowledge is related to experience in inhabited social and cultural worlds,
and that knowledge passes through social and cultural systems and
institutions through norms, values, conventions, and practices. At the same
time, those socializing norms, values, conventions, and practices pass
through structures of reality and ideology associated with knowledge.
Knowledge and culture cannot be extricated from ea other, and neither
one should be conceived as a context for the other.
Approaes to mathematics education and culture establish forms of
reality and common sense through the application of distinctions, oen
without any clear aention to these distinctions. In this way, these
approaes 
create 
implicit—sometimes 
explicit—assumptions 
about
diotomies su as in-sool and out-of-sool learning, formal and
informal education, teaing and learning, mathematics and culture, student
or teaer identity and mathematics, and so on. For example, if we carry
out a project or tea a sool mathematics lesson trying to make it more
meaningful and relevant to some students in the classroom by noting that
they are members of a nonmainstream subculture, we are reducing the
uniqueness of ea individual to a set of stereotypical assumptions from a
generic caricature of this subculture. Ea individual may or may not ﬁt this

set of assumptions. Indeed, most of the learners in this situation are
members of multiple subcultures at the same time, and are in any given
moment having experiences that resonate with cultural habits and
dispositions from more than one of these subcultures. We want to use
categories based on cultural distinctions to analyze situations, because this
seems like the only reasonable, common-sense way for us to make sense of
the seing and the people in it. Yet, as soon as we use these distinctions, we
are already aware of the variations within any given group that seem more
extreme than diﬀerences between groups. And as soon as we try to take
into account the variations within any given group, we are already aware
of the ways in whi these variations are inadequate to capture the
variations within any one individual within that group. at is, borders
between categories are permeable, so that (to keep this simple) say, a
Catholic, Latina girl in a Chicago classroom may or may not be having an
experience consistent with what her teaer might expect of a learner
recently relocated from New Jersey with her Cuban-American, Jewish
father, working in a small group with her Chicano best friend and a recent
immigrant from Albania. In other words, ea learner is determined to
some extent by the cultural contexts that are part of their life; yet, as
individuals, learners have a repertoire of behaviors and ways of making
meaning out of experience that are specific to them.
Table 13.1 Complex interactions of mathematics, (mathematics) education, and culture.



It is increasingly allenging to exploit all resources available in the
interests of mathematics learners, given the myriad of types of resources
and locations of these resources; at the same time, conﬂicts exist in most
discussions of education broadly conceived about the role of mathematics in
the lives of ildren and adults—both in the present and in their futures, in
terms of both individual and societal needs. ese conﬂicts and associated
confusions regarding the role(s) of mathematics are made more complex by
the expectations for mathematics and mathematics learning, more or less
culturally determined, that meet ea other in educational encounters. is
apter addresses these issues through the variety of cultural approaes to
mathematics education pedagogy and resear that have become
signiﬁcant in the ﬁeld, including mathematics as a culture; funds of
knowledge pedagogies; ethnomathematical critiques and approaes to
teaing and learning; popular culture studies; public pedagogies; and
critical mathematics education. ese are not separate, analytic categories,
but mutually informing strands of interwoven discourse. Given space
restrictions endemic to a resear handbook, and the important
interrelations of those newly signiﬁcant approaes in the ﬁeld of
mathematics education, we do not address here every conceivable aspect of
culture, nor do we focus on aracteristics or components of culture su as
language and organizational climate, whi deserve aention elsewhere.
We also limit our discussion to mathematics learning, saving culture and
mathematics teaching for another comprehensive synthesis.
We have osen to use “culture” to refer to aspects of cultural contexts,
and more speciﬁcally, aspects of culture related to learning and knowledge,
rather than to speak of culture in general. We do this to avoid the
discontinuity that appears at sool through diotomies of formal and
informal learning, distinguished by the role of a designer or evaluator of
learning experiences not present in the learning context that is necessary
for “formal” learning to take place. Culture, more broadly, is both “an

historically transmied paern of meanings embodied in symbols, a system
of inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms by means of whi
men communicate, perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and
their aitudes toward life” (Geertz, 1973a, p. 89), and those “webs of
significance” people themselves spin (Geertz, 1973b, p. 5).

Culture of Mathematics
One notion is that mathematical thinking is a particular culture of its own,
independent of social categories su as race, class, gender, ethnicity,
religion, sexual orientation, and so on. Alan Bishop’s (1988a; 1988b) early
work in this area oﬀers a broad, universal set of intellectual practices that
could be taken as “mathematical,” independent of the particular social
context: counting, measuring, locating, designing, playing, and explaining.
e apparent universality of mathematics results, according to Bishop, from
the universality of the adaptive, human goals that deﬁne these six types of
activities, rather than the a priori nature of mathematical principals. Bishop
assumed the cultural universality of the activities, but emphasized the
diversity found in symbolic mathematical tenologies produced by the
activities within varying cultural contexts. ere are at least four
implications of this initial foray into mathematics and culture:
(1) If we start from the premise that there are particular and unique ways
of being mathematical, then sool mathematics experiences are either
experiences of enculturation (as in the title of Bishop’s book), in whi
younger members of the culture are enabled to become more
sophisticated, grown-up, members of that culture over time; or
acculturation, in whi there are power relations between those who
are more or less sophisticated and experienced, and in whi those
whose identity is more closely aﬃliated with the dominant, sool
mathematical culture have advantages in these power relations; or both.
In this sense, the term learning in the title of our apter might be
suitably replaced by enculturation, acculturation, or both.
(2) Mathematics might involve its own “register” and/or “language” that
must be learned and practiced in order for people to become beer able
to function in a mathematical culture.

(3) Mathematics might be a family of practices that embrace and maintain
particular values (Bishop 1988a,b, 2007). For example, Bishop’s
empirical comparison of mathematics with science distinguished the
epistemological commitment to rationalism and objectivism, the pursuit
of control and progress, and the strong adherence to openness and
mystery that aracterizes mathematics as a ﬁeld of practices with the
subtly contrasting commitments of science to a rationalism and
objectivism more distinguished by analogical thinking and the
identiﬁcation of problems, control associated with paradigms and
circumstances rather than security, progress focused more on plausible
alternatives, openness more aligned with human construction than with
veriﬁcation. Mystery for mathematics is, according to Bishop, more
associated with abstraction, wonder, dehumanized knowledge, and
intuition, while for science mystery is aracterized by guesses,
daydreams, curiosity, and fascination (Bishop, 2007, pp. 127–28). Values
also enter into discussion of mathematics education when one considers
cultural contexts. For example, Seah (2004) describes the socialization
experiences of immigrant teaers in Australia in terms of interactions
between cultural values. Home cultures were regarded as shaping
personal values, and consequently, worldviews pertaining to education,
mathematics, and mathematics teaing and learning; at the same time,
students of sool mathematics were found to acquire an internally
consistent set of mathematical values that aﬃrms Bishops’ categories,
seemingly immune to cultural diﬀerences. Most importantly, according
to Seah (2004), a shi from examining teaers’ negotiation of
perceived value diﬀerences to exploring the nature of those diﬀerences
pointed to the co-construction of social values independent of a
teaer’s agency and more associated with a broader context of
socialization. Values, in this sense, are inculcated through experience
(Andersson & Seah, 2013). It is interesting, however, as noted by

Grootenboer, Lomas and Ingram (2008), that resear in this area has
not yet adequately addressed this experience through direct, classroom-
based studies of that experience, but rather through self-reporting by
mostly secondary students in surveys and interviews.
(4)  It becomes confusing to tease out how mathematics in this broadly
universal conception is and is not imbricated in a colonialist enterprise.
e expectation of a universality at some level carries with it some
elements of the Western, ideological framework of mathematics as
neutral and distant from culture, so that an analysis on this macro level
creates a continuity with that perspective, rendering local variations
across cultures and subcultures less signiﬁcant or seemingly irrelevant.
Every 
mathematical 
knowledge 
not historically and culturally
embedded in Western mathematics is measured and deﬁned by
Western mathematics. Indeed, it has become central to the study of
mathematics and mathematics education to view mathematics as a
cultural construct, and to recognize the potential for resear based on
su a view to contribute to the development of both mathematics and
mathematics education (Barton, 1996b, p. 9; Appelbaum, 1995; Davis &
Hersh, 1986). (Even this notion of mathematics and mathematics
education as a cultural construct carries with it the colonialist legacy of
anthropological study, whi itself is a “Western” epistemological
project that needs self-interrogation. is might explain, for example,
the dominance of Western researers in the citations included in this
apter; cultural perspectives are historically located in European and
Western academic traditions, reﬂected in the literature that has grown
out of these traditions.)
When speaking of early years of sooling, enculturation is not really
apprenticeship within the ild’s own culture since a sool curriculum has
already decided before the arrival of the ild what and how he or she will

learn. In this sense, no sool experiences are ever enculturation. We inherit
the term enculturation from the title of Alan Bishop’s (1988b) book; yet he
himself later used the more appropriate concept acculturation, given that
every learner grapples with cultural conﬂicts (Bishop, 2002). A
psyological approa that contrasts with the socio-cultural orientation
discussed here would make an analogous distinction: enculturation can be
understood as acquiring the aracteristics of a subculture, in this case,
mathematics, through being enmeshed within that culture; while
acculturation would refer to “ﬁing in” to a cultural milieu by emulating
the aracteristics of those who are already members of that milieu
(Kirshner, 2004). Here milieu refers to broader social interactions beyond
the focus on “register.” e cultural perspective emphasizes how
intercultural experiences are always bound up in unequal power relations
that serve important roles in the experiences of those involved. We might
say that sool mathematics serves through acculturation important
functions in social and cultural reproduction, contributing to the
development of “reasonable” people who reason in particular ways, and
who are also able to be governed by systems of power and established
authorities (Cline-Cohen, 1982; Walkerdine, 1987; Appelbaum, 1995). At the
same time, an awareness of the special vocabulary of sool mathematics,
and the idiosyncratic ways of working as a student of mathematics that
help learners succeed in su a context, oﬀers useful ideas for supporting
learners of mathematics who are not yet demonstrating mastery of the
material. is cultural approa distinguishes between the subject
knowledge of a course in mathematics and the norms and expectations that
teachers of mathematics might have for learners in the course.
Sometimes described as “academic literacy,” the norms and expectations
for how one works and demonstrates learning in a sool context have
been shown to be teaable and assimilable when made explicit to the
students, and when practiced as explicit ways of working (Appelbaum,

2008; Polya, 1945; Mason, Burton, & Stacey, 1985; Brown & Walter, 2005;
Coon, 2010). To use Geertz’s image of webs of signiﬁcation, the culture of
a mathematics classroom is the tangled interweaving of webs of meaning
and interpretation brought to the classroom by teaers, learners, broader
aracteristics of the social milieu of the sool and society, etc. e
academic literacy expectations structure the potential interactions that
occur in educational encounters, constraining and enabling activity,
interpretations, expectations, fears and desires.
Nasir, Hand, and Taylor (2008) distinguish between “cultural” knowledge
and “domain” knowledge: “that is, knowledge derived from seings outside
of sool, typically in students’ homes and communities, … and …
knowledge valued in the practices prescribed by mathematicians and math
educators” (p. 187). ey note the importance of discerning how the
features of diﬀerent social contexts mediate what is learned in interaction
with the proclivities and dispositions of the learners. When mathematics
and culture are constructed in this way, it becomes possible to ask what
might be done to help learners who are not demonstrating knowledge to
do so more successfully, as in closing a racial or ethnic aievement gap, or
i n minimizing gaps between current levels of performance and
predetermined, “levels of excellence.” It becomes possible, as well, to
describe ways that learners apparently demonstrate mathematical skills in
everyday contexts that they do not demonstrate in sool contexts. Yet, this
seeming “progress” in understanding things also constructs what is possible
to say about mathematics education and culture: distinguishing between
cultural and domain “knowledge” presumes knowledge as something that
can be taken or transferred out of one social context and put into another.
While it appears to be a major shi in thinking about the nature and role of
culture in learning, it merely reproduces common-sense distinctions
between knowledge and culture that do not address the ways that
knowledge and culture are mutually determined, and inseparable. When we

separate mathematics as a domain of knowledge from mathematics
education as a cultural system, we run the risk of reifying mathematics as a
universal body of knowledge, even if we want to de-center this universal
domain, placing it alongside everyday, out-of-sool, informal, and home
mathematical practices. What is more relevant about diﬀerent contexts of
mathematics learning is how communication of mathematical ideas and
practices create a negotiation of what constitutes “learning,” “knowing,”
“mathematics,” and so on.
It may seem powerful to distinguish between mathematics in and out of
sool, because it allows us to indicate the importance of accounting for
alignment and power in analyzing language in a mathematics classroom
(Nasir et al., 2008; Lerman, 2001). In this way, resear can delineate
features of mathematics classrooms that clash or resonate with home and
neighborhood cultures, and thus establish initially unobservable, now
visible, systematic forms of power that lead to inequity. Some features of
pedagogical practices support and constrain diﬀerent forms of knowing and
being for students in a general sense; at the same time, we might unravel
how diﬀerent forms of knowing and being mathematical may or may not
be available or possible for speciﬁc individuals or particular groups of
students (Presmeg, 2002; Atweh, Graven, & Secada, 2011). Nevertheless, it is
important to note that su assumptions about mathematics education and
culture prevent mathematics education researers and educators from
undertaking their work independent of the history of their ﬁeld. For
example, the history of sool mathematics as a form of cultural practice
replicates the idea that one can separate some knowledge from others, and
then wonder who has the right or authority to decide what knowledge is of
most worth; this could go unnoticed unless one sees the interconnections
between culture and education. Some solars have suggested that the
diotomy between “everyday” and “sool” mathematics is false (Mellin-
Olsen, 1987; Appelbaum, 1995; Moskovi, 2007). Others (e.g., Gutiérrez,

2002a; 2002b; Gutstein, 2003; 2006) maintain that knowledge of
mathematics must include as part of knowing mathematics an ability to
critique the role of mathematics in society and to use mathematics as a tool
for social justice. Already in the phrasing of su utopian goals we miss the
mark of rethinking mathematics and mathematics education itself.

Funds of Knowledge and Critical Mathematics
Education
Culture sometimes enters into discussions of mathematics education policy
and practice as a response to increased diversity among the teaers and
learners of the mathematics. For example, increased immigration in Europe
and elsewhere has created a relatively new “problem” of integrating
immigrants into mainstream society while also helping new members of
the community to learn mathematics. In North and South America,
immigration combined with the legacy of slavery and long-standing border
crossings of citizens has led to multiply complex, multilingual and
multiethnic communities. Members of nondominant groups are oen
constructed as culturally diﬀerent, despite generations of cohabitation. e
dominant society appears innocent when social and economic diﬀerences
are interpreted as cultural. It is diﬃcult to disconnect cultural diﬀerences
from political oices. For example, in recent years, Roma ildren in
Greece were prevented by parents of non-Roma students from aending
local sools. It is not a cultural oice not to be at sool in this situation,
but the result of long-standing eﬀorts on the part of members of dominant
groups in society to prevent Roma children access to the public schools1.
Marta Civil (2008) quotes Peter Gates (2006, p. 391):
In many parts of the world, teaers—mathematics teaers—are facing the allenges of
teaing in multiethnic and multilingual classrooms containing, immigrant, indigenous,
migrant, and refugee ildren, and if resear is to be useful it has to address and help us
understand such challenges.
Given a history of sooling that sees immigration and other forms of
diversity as creating new problems for schools, a particularly political act on
the part of educators is to turn the tables on the ordering of culture and
knowledge, breaking down the appearance of these as categories. Instead of

looking for successful ways to support learning by culturally diverse
students, the question becomes how to take advantage of the knowledge
that learners bring with them to sool from their home and community
environments (Civil, 1996; 2008; Lipka & Moha, 1998; Gorgorió & Planas,
2001; Lipka, 2005; D’Ambrosio, 2006; Klein & Showalter, 2012). Civil (1996)
asked,
Can we develop learning experiences that tap on students’ areas of expertise and at the same
time help them advance in their learning of mathematics? And, What are the implications of
critical pedagogy for the mathematics education of “minority” and poor students?
(Civil, 1996, quoted in Civil, 2008, p. 3)
Her responses have been grounded, as have the responses of other
mathematics educators, in theories of funds of knowledge (González, Moll,
& Amanti, 2005), whi refer to the knowledge and experiences that exist
in any household, and that could be reﬁned, extended, and built upon in
sools and other educational seings. On one level, advocates of funds of
knowledge resear and pedagogical practices simply emphasize the need
for teaers to beer understand their students and their families. On
another level, this work requires that teaers, curriculum developers, and
researers engage in collaborative action resear in multicultural contexts
if they are to adequately know about and eventually work with the funds
of knowledge that learners bring to educational encounters (Dominguez,
2012; Radosavljevic, 2012; Willey, Lopez Leiva, & Vomvoridi-Ivanovic,
2012; Gerardo, Gutiérrez & Irving, 2012; Diéz-Palomar, 2012). is
perspective has led to serious eﬀorts to include families and community
members in sool learning activities, to systematic use of experiences with
families and in out-side-of-sool social contexts as ﬁeld work for
preservice teaers, and to a rise in aer-sool and weekend curricula that
focus on community involvement.
For some educators, a la of facility with indigenous and folk traditions

is further understood to undermine potentially successful mathematics
education experiences (D’Ambrosio, 2006; Fasheh, 2012). Others emphasize
the need not only to build on funds of knowledge brought into sool from
outside experience, but to also take sool mathematical experiences ba
out into everyday life in ways that support and nurture culturally speciﬁc
values and goals (Mukhopadhyay & Roth, 2012; Klein & Showalter, 2012).
On yet a more important level, funds of knowledge resear and practice
undermine a common-sense separation between home and sool,
recognizing that learning occurs not just in both, but that learning
experiences in one or another of these places—along with learning on the
street, while playing video games at a shopping mall, listening to music,
and so on—is never only in that one place, but pulls together experiences
across any and all su places, with resonances, dissonances, and combined
reverberations.
Assumptions about the location and nature of mathematics learning are
similarly allenged by critical mathematics education, another subﬁeld
concerned with the social and political aspects of mathematics learning.
Critical mathematics education focuses on providing access to mathematical
ideas for all, independent of race, gender, class, and other categories of
social distinction. It addresses the use and function of mathematics-in-
practice, whether as an advanced, tenological application, or as everyday
experience. Within classrooms, critical mathematics education supports
democratic forms of pedagogy, in whi ideas are presented and negotiated
together toward the cultivation of democratic citizenship. Critical
mathematics education demands a critical perspective on both mathematics
and the teaing/learning of mathematics. In doing so, it takes one step
further in questioning our assumptions about what mathematics education
could mean and what democratic participation should mean.
Ole Skovsmose (1994) describes a classroom in whi critical
mathematics education is taking place as one in whi the students (and

teaers) are aributed a “critical competence.” Decisive and prescribing
roles are abandoned in favor of all participants having control of the
educational process. Instead of merely forming a classroom community for
discussion, Skovsmose (1994) suggests that the students and teaers
together must establish a “critical distance.” What he means is that
seemingly objective and value-free principles for the structure of the
curriculum are put into a new perspective, and that su principles are
revealed for the teaers and learners as value-loaded, necessitating critical
consideration of contents and other subject-maer aspects as part of the
educational process itself.
Keitel, Klotzman, and Skovsmose (1993) describe mathematics as a
tenology with the potential to work for democratic goals, and make
distinctions between diﬀerent types of knowledge based on the object of
the knowledge. e ﬁrst level of mathematical work, they write, presumes
a true-false ideology and corresponds to mu of what we witness in
current sool curricula. e second level directs students and teaers to
ask about right method: Are there other algorithms? Whi are valued for
our need? e third level emphasizes the appropriateness and reliability of
the mathematics for its context. is level raises the particularly
tenological aspect of mathematics by investigating speciﬁcally the
relationship between means and ends. e fourth level requires participants
to interrogate the appropriateness of formalizing the problem for solution: a
mathematical/tenological approa is not always wise and participants
would consider this issue as a form of reﬂective mathematics. At the ﬁh
level, a critical mathematics education studies the implications of pursuing
special formal means; it asks how particular algorithms aﬀect our
perceptions of (a part of) reality, and how we conceive mathematical tools
when we use them universally. us the role of mathematics in society
becomes a component of reﬂective mathematical knowledge. Finally, the
sixth level examines reﬂective thinking itself as an evaluative process,

comparing Levels 1 and 2 as essential mathematical tools, Levels 3 and 4 as
the relationship between means and ends, and Level 5 as the global impact
of using formal teniques. On Level 6, reﬂective evaluation as a process is
noted as a tool itself and as su becomes an object of reﬂection. When
teaers and students plan their classroom experiences by making sure that
all of these levels are represented in the group’s activities, it is more likely
that students and teaers can be aributed the critical competence
envisioned as the more general goal of mathematics education, building
upon and reﬁning the funds of knowledge that teaers and students bring
to the experiences.
One important direction for critical mathematics education is in the
examination of mathematics as a culture to be craed in educational
experiences, and in particular, to critically consider the authority to phrase
the questions for discussion. Who sets the agenda in a critical thinking
classroom? Stephen Brown and Marion Walter (2005) laid out a variety of
powerful ways to rethink mathematics investigations through e Art of
Problem Posing, and in doing so present a number of ideas for enabling
students both to “talk ba” to mathematics and to use their problem
solving and problem posing experiences to learn about themselves as
problem solvers and posers. In the process, they help frame yet another
dilemma for future resear in mathematics education: Is it always more
democratic if students pose the problem? e kinds of questions that are
possible, and the ways that we expect to phrase them, are to be examined
by a critical thinker. Susan Gerofsky (2001, 2010) noted that the questions
themselves reveal more about our fantasies and desires than about the
mathematics involved.
Finally, it becomes crucial to examine the discourses of mathematics and
mathematics education in and out of sool and popular culture
(Appelbaum, 1995). Critical mathematics education asks how and why the
split between popular culture and sool mathematics is evident in

mathematical discourse, and why su a strange diotomy must be
resolved between mathematics as a “commodity” and as a “cultural
resource.” Mathematics is a commodity in our consumer culture because it
has been turned into “stuﬀ” that people collect (knowledge) in order to
spend later (on the job market, to get into university, etc.). But it is also a
cultural resource in that it is a world of metaphors and ways of making
meaning through whi people can interpret their world and describe it in
new ways. Critical mathematics educators recognize the role of
mathematics as a commodity in our society, but they sear for ways to
eﬀectively emphasize the meaning-making aspects of mathematics as part
of the variety of cultures. In doing so, they make it possible for
mathematics to be a resource for political action. In formulating a
democratic, critical mathematics education, it is also essential that teaers
grapple with the serious multicultural indictments of mathematics as a tool
of postcolonial and imperial authority. What we once accepted as pure,
wholesome truth is now understood as culturally speciﬁc and tied to
particular interests. Philip Davis and Reuben Hersh (1986) and David
Berlinski (2000), for instance, have described some aspects of mathematics
as a tool in accomplishing a fantasy of control over human experience.
ey use the examples of math-military connections, math-business
connections, among others (See also, Schoenfeld, 1991; Gutstein, 2012).
Mathematics can serve the good as well as the evil: the power of
mathematics is at least double edged. On one hand great aievements in
arts, science, and tenology are mathematically based. On the other,
mathematics is implicated in tenologically caused catastrophes (Atweh,
2007; D’Ambrosio, 2006). Yet this does not mean that mathematics itself is
some neutral tool that might be used one way or the other, nor does it
mean that the way we tea mathematics leads to “good” applications or
“bad”: mathematics, mathematics education, and culture, as mutually
determined and evolving, together create what we call mathematics, what

we identify as mathematics education, and what we label culture, aer the
fact.
Skovsmose (2004) argues that the socio-political roles of mathematics, its
meaning, its uses, and its application, are not essentially determined within
mathematics itself. ere is no intrinsic connection between mathematical
knowledge and how to use it once it is situated in a cultural context. In the
same way, mathematics education also has no ﬁxed, agreed-upon method
of working with mathematical knowledge. How to represent mathematics
and how to handle it is always a compendium of oices, circling ba upon
culture in this mutually evolving fashion. Even a mainstream curriculum
that is teaing traditional mathematical knowledge implies a perspective
on how mathematics is handed down from one generation to another
(François, 2007). Mathematics education is therefore critical in the sense that
it is situated in uncertainty. is uncertainty is grounded in the nature of
mathematics, a human practice determined by contingency at the moment
of its construction. A second aspect—and perhaps the more important
aspect—of this uncertainty is the fact that the result of that human practice,
namely the mathematical knowledge, will be applied by human beings
with their diverse and sometimes conﬂicting needs, beliefs, and interests.
is is what makes mathematics uncertain and why mathematics education
is critical per se. e fact that educators and researers now anowledge
these uncertainties makes mathematics education a “critical mathematics
education:” there is no ﬁxed curriculum, nor are there predetermined
content and methods; mathematics education as a profession has become
the act of reﬂecting on the nature and the function of mathematics, time
and again.

Ethnomathematics, Multiculturalism, and
Diversity Education
Mathematics educators ask why students—and people, in general—do not
generally see mathematics as helping them to interpret events in their lives
or to gain control over human experience. ey sear for ways to help
students appreciate the marvelous qualities of mathematics without
glorifying its historic roots in militarism and other fantasies of control.
Funds of knowledge approaes embrace the skills and concepts that
students bring with them from everyday life into sool, oen culturally
diﬀerent from, if mathematically equivalent to, the practices that are
demanded of learners. Ethnomathematics, the anthropological study of
mathematical practices not necessarily rooted in Western European history,
makes it clear that mathematics and mathematical reasoning are cultural
constructions (Bishop, 1988b; Barton, 1996a; D’Ambrosio, 1987, 1988; Favilli,
2007; Gutstein et al., 1997.) See Barton, 1996b, for a thorough review of
deﬁnitions of ethnomathematics, and Barton, 1996c, for a discussion of
ethnomathematics as a resear program that examines how cultural
groups understand, articulate, and use the concepts and practices that we
describe as mathematical, “whether or not the cultural group has a concept
of mathematics” (Barton, 1996c, p. 214). is raises the allenge to
embrace the global variety of cultures of mathematical activity, and to
confront the politics that would be unleashed by su aention in a typical
Amero-European school.
Multicultural education has taken a variety of forms in the past century,
ranging from an awareness that some learners need special aention
addressing cultural needs, to a more politicized sensitivity to the ways that
sool practices might undermine altruistic goals of educational systems, to
explicitly constructing sool experiences that promote and advocate social
ange (Appelbaum, 2002; Sleeter & Soriano, 2012; Sleeter & Grant, 2007).

Multicultural mathematics education has taken shape in analogous ways.
Early eﬀorts used non-Western activities as examples through whi
learners could “see” mathematical concepts and skills in action; some
educators tried to connect personally with students’ home cultures by using
games and activities associated with what the educators knew about the
home culture. Later uses of non-Western examples made an eﬀort to
integrate culture and mathematics in more nuanced ways—for example, by
studying the diversity of mancala versions across African cultures as both
mathematical and cultural, rather than as an excuse to practice counting or
grouping; in su classrooms, it became possible to ask how the diﬀerent
versions lead to different strategies and to different mathematical decisions.
What multicultural and ethnomathematics approaes share is an
insistence on aention to cultural diﬀerences and a special concern for
students who come from socially vulnerable groups. Initially, most
educators ﬁnd su an insistence to be an important contribution to equity
and social democratic understanding. However, members of groups other
than the dominant group tend within a multicultural framework to be
constructed as diﬀerent in a sense that is “other” to the mainstream,
dominant culture. An excellent example of how this plays out in an
epistemological way is the questioning of codiﬁed curricula as being
“watered down” by the inclusion of non-Western problems, algorithms, and
aesthetic applications of mathematics (Atweh, Forgasz, & Nebres, 2001;
Olin, 2003; Orey and Rosa, 2008; Sykes, 1995). While one might see certain
activities as mathematical when interpreted through a lens of “modern
mathematics,” some mathematicians sometimes claim that the activities are
not inherently mathematical, and that they are not even mathematical
when practiced in their original, social context; at other times, we ﬁnd
complaints that the time taken to place the mathematics into the non-
Western context is not justiﬁed given the tangential connections that are
attempted.

Ron Eglash (1999) proposed a continuum of mathematized activities,
ranging from a nonmathematical practice that is possible to interpret
mathematically if so desired, toward an explicit use of abstraction,
theorization, and exploration, to a meta-abstraction of alternative theories.
Yet, su a continuum perpetuates a Western comprehension of
mathematical action premised on a centrality of abstraction, theory, and
meta-analysis that may or may not be valid across cultures, in an
ethnomathematical sense; it also further normalizes Western mathematics
to whi “other” cultures of mathematics would be compared, further
extending the problematic nature of multicultural eﬀorts grounded in the
concept of culture itself. In contemporary societies, various cultural groups
are not “other,” but instead are part of the mosaic of cultures that make up
the community in which the school is found and the mathematics is learned.
Multiculturalism can also run the risk of promoting ethnocentrism and
marginalization of immigrant groups (Govaris & Antwniadou, 2000; Radtke
1994). A ri, diverse mathematics education would position itself as
alternative to multiculturalism, recognizing that intercultural relationships
are (almost always) asymmetrical, and that intercultural education should
aim to repair the damages caused by aention to what once might have
been called “egregious cultural differences.”
For these reasons, many educators have come to define their work, not in
terms of multiculturalism, but instead in terms of “diversity education”
(Appelbaum, 2002; Nolan, 2009; Swanson, 2010; Walshaw, 2010; Martin &
Gohlson, 2012). Diversity education takes as a given the state of formal
educational systems as posing for students of every conceivable subgroup
diﬀerences that must be confronted. One example of this is the ways that
performance is commonly evaluated in relation to formal education’s
measures, independent of where and how students begin, and independent
of how the confrontation with diﬀerences is experienced. In the case of
Roma students, who typically are very eﬀective in complex, mental

calculations, yet who are perceived as allenged by formal, sool
mathematics, teaers in Greek sools following an oﬃcial curriculum are
not interested in su skills. Meanwhile, grade 4 Latina/o youth in
Philadelphia are observed composing their own investigations of the
common aracteristics of trapezoids, parallelograms, rhombi, and kites on
the playground at recess, yet are described by their teaers as unprepared
for grade-level geometry based on a district diagnostic test of shape names
and area models of fractions. Learners are subjected to decisions made by
authorities that address a view of the larger society without regard for the
nuances of diﬀerences and the ways that power unfolds through forms of
mathematics education. is is further illustrated by the emphasis on
“problem solving,” collaboration, and “communities of learning,” whi
have been shown to sanctify mathematics and mathematicians as
possessing authoritative knowledge over increasing realms of human
phenomena, narrowing in the process the boundaries of possible action and
critical thought, and extending the ways that pedagogical aention to
“equity” with “no ild le behind” increasingly divide, demarcate, and
exclude particular ildren from participation in sool mathematics
(Popkewitz, 2004). At the same time, an emphasis on educational reform
built upon “culture” independent of critical cultural studies clouds the
supposedly transparent mathematics in a cacophony of confusion, where
students are seduced into the ambiguity of problems while teaers are
bewildered by the plethora of “diﬀerent” cultures bringing a myriad of
assumptions to the classroom (Zolkower, 1995). Some mathematics
educators worry about the ways that culture in the mathematics classroom
makes possible actions only visible in places where things are “not
supposed to make sense” (Zolkower, 1995, p. 154), a departure from
tradition that it seems many teachers are not ready to make.
Instead of removing the diﬀerences, or criticizing current practices as
harmful to social justice, diversity educators work with the recognition of

diﬀerence and promote direct aention to how the use of cultural
diﬀerence by a language of multiculturalism might be coopted for social
justice. Unlike Zolkower’s fear of culture leading to a slippage away from a
dominant construction of mathematical knowledge, diversity educators
trouble notions of diﬀerence as perpetuating inequality, questioning any
assignation of resistance to learning as a sign of cultural diﬀerence.
Diversity educators sear for those times and places where the function of
something designated as “cultural diﬀerence” serves to support a new
version of racism or marginalization—as, for example, in the expression,
“culturally incompatible”—in order to respond together with their students
(Balibar & Swenson, 2003; Govaris & Antwniadou, 2000; Skovsmose &
Penteado, 2011; Mishra, 2012). Indicative of the slippery slope from cultural
awareness into political oppression is the analysis of cultural diﬀerence
frameworks in apartheid South Africa by Vithal and Skovsmose (1997) in
their article, “e End of Innocence.” Within the subﬁeld of
ethnomathematics, su concerns have been voiced in terms of restoring
cultural dignity and oﬀering the intellectual tools for the exercise of
citizenship (D’Ambrosio 1999).

Sociopolitical Turn
Roelle Gutiérrez (2010) uses the phrase “sociopolitical turn” to describe a
growing body of researers and practitioners who foreground the political
and engage in the tensions that surround that work. In a synthetic
introduction to a 2010 special issue of the Journal of Resear in
Mathematics Education devoted to equity, she summarized three types of
theoretical perspectives that begin with knowledge, power, and identity as
interwoven and arising from (and constituted within) social discourses.
Adopting su a stance means for these perspectives the uncovering of
taken-for-granted rules and ways of operating that privilege some
individuals and exclude others. Gutiérrez aracterized work grounded in
these theories as pursuing not only a beer understanding of mathematics
education in all of its social and cultural forms, but also working in su a
way that contributes directly to the transformation of mathematics
education to privilege more socially just practices. e ﬁrst of her examples
is critical mathematics education, discussed earlier in this apter. e
second, growing out of the North American context where social justice
studies oen obscure a direct reference to racial inequality, is the
combination of “critical race theory” and “Latcrit theory,” whi privilege
the voices of solars of color and the experiences of students and teaers,
and whi work against popular discourses that suggest su experiences
are subjective, illegitimate, or biased.
Critical race theory and Latcrit theory use counternarratives and
storytelling to make experiences of marginalized subcultures clear; the
stories capture uniqueness as overcoming racial inequality instead of as
cultural diﬀerence (Leonard & Martin, 2013; Martin, 2000, 2009; Téllez,
Moskovi, & Civil, 2011). ere have not been many publications using
critical race theory or Latcrit theories in mathematics education, yet those
that do draw on these frameworks oﬀer convincing claims about the value

of deconstructing race and racism in particular as a means to highlight
whiteness as property and its relation to “normality,” to value the strategies
and strengths of people of color, to highlight community wealth, and to
allenge commonly held beliefs about a racial hierary or a neutral
society (Gutiérrez, 2010; Tate, 1997; Tate & D’Ambrosio, 1997).
Gutiérrez brings together researers and theorists who aend to
discourses as an entry into many of these issues under the collective term,
“poststructural,” her third example of the sociopolitical turn. In su
approaes to mathematics education, learners, teaers, and researers
are both results of and producers of discourses. Because discourses are
inherently social, political, historical, and connected with the construction of
meaning, these approaes share mu with those ways of thinking about
mathematics education that are connected to a concern with culture. In this
subﬁeld, however, meaning, reasoning, knowledge, action, learning, and so
on, are products of discourses, not aracteristics of culture, and are also
constantly renegotiated in social and cultural contexts, ﬁnding their
meaning in the outcomes of actions and interactions moment by moment
(see, e.g., Appelbaum, 1995, 2008; Walshaw, 2007). In other words,
meanings that people make of themselves and their world are forever
being created in and through interactions with others, in larger social and
political contexts, with discourses that are themselves renewed and
modiﬁed through these experiences and events. Discourses are sometimes
confused with paradigms, since they connote taken-for-granted ways of
interacting and operating, and because they are part of what comes to be
expected and experienced as “normal.”
An example described by Gutiérrez (2010) is the aievement gap in the
United States. Discourses of diﬀerence create this state of things that people
take as normal and comprehensible, and refer to as a “gap.” Although the
supposed “gap” might be beer understood as one of excellence in
pedagogy and resources provided (Tate, 1997; Tate, Anderson, & King,

2011), it is what people take as the normal state of things because it has
been repeated and reported upon in so many ways. at this gap presumes
a dominant, White majority as a norm is never explicitly considered; that
there are many brilliant, Bla ildren routinely demonstrating excellence
in multiple ways (Leonard & Martin, 2013) is not part of this discourse.
Alternative stories do not enter common-sense decision making.
e importance of understanding discourses in this way is that they
produce common sense “truths”: rather than reﬂecting some clear sense of
reality, they structure reality for people. Similar examples can be unraveled
for 
what 
discourses 
construct 
as “aievement,” “equity,” 
and
“mathematics” itself. Gutiérrez writes,
Unless learners and practitioners have the means to allenge these discourses or re-inscribe them
with other meanings, they can come to believe they are successful or unsuccessful based on the
discourses that operate in sooling practices. As su, they may evaluate themselves (oen
unconsciously), perhaps even reign in particular behaviors so as to be in line with what we think
of as habits of successful learners or practitioners (a form of internal surveillance).
(p. 43)
As an example of how aention to discourse can address what might
otherwise be considered a “cultural” issue, we can consider Gutiérrez’s
example of speciﬁed algorithms being required in a sool curriculum.
When learners are asked to “show their work,” this practice can lead to
immigrant students discounting the knowledge of their parents who have
learned mathematics in other countries (or, more generally, in other
communities or other cultural contexts even if those “foreign” algorithms
are correct. Of course, we might go even further with our analysis: Su
practices deﬁne some algorithms and forms of knowledge not only as
correct, but as foreign, despite the fact that their very presence in the
community belies their exoticism and demonstrates their presence in the
multicultural society. In this laer sense, culture has become a tool of
ignorance, whether it is perpetuating a la of personal awareness or

disguising knowledge.

Public Pedagogy
Reading some of our discussion of critical mathematics education and
diversity education, one might wonder if the concept of “culture” has run its
course for mathematics education. ere is a trajectory of awareness and
perspective that begins with seeing culture as relevant to teaing and
learning mathematics, moving on to questioning common pedagogical
practices because of a cultural understanding, then to seeing limitations of
culture as possibly too crude to comprehend an individual’s ever-evolving
collection of cultural identities, and later to recognizing culture as a tool of
ignorance. It is tempting to propose replacing culture with more useful
tools, such as race, immigration status, power, and so on.
Yet it might be that culture is not so mu a conceptual tool to be
brought into use within education, but rather that education can be a tool of
conceptual use within culture. When we stop to think about it, there is no
experience that is not educational. A person is always learning. Walking
down the street, we learn where and when we can and cannot be
(sometimes with help from uniformed representatives of a state), how trees
and animals can and should share public spaces with us, and what it means
to live in a community. In community gardens and graﬃti tagging we learn
how to reclaim public spaces to be used in new ways. We listen to music,
dance with others, cull something to eat from found plants despite a
drought, and learn what is possible, new ways to feel and solve problems,
how to decide when someone has an expertise we can share. In a
profoundly deep way, “culture” is not a context in whi we live, but the
result of what we are always learning and what we are always learning
from. Instead of asking what culture can do for mathematics teaing and
learning, and how we might beer understand mathematics education with
culture, we might beneﬁt more from understanding what mathematics
teaing and learning can do for culture and the understanding of culture.

Just as culture is a web of meanings and interpretations, not a context,
education is also a web of evolving meanings and interpretations-in-action.
is swit to the mathematics education of culture leads educators and
researers to consider mathematics teaing and learning that takes place
on television, in public protest, in social media, and other aspects of
everyday life. “Education is an enveloping concept, a dimension of culture
that maintains dominant practices while also oﬀering spaces for their
critique and reimagination.” (Sandlin, Sultz, & Burdi, 2009, p. 1). Oen,
the forms of mathematics education that are studied in this way—as
important features of culture and popular media—take place outside of
traditional classroom walls. For example, one can study or facilitate the
mathematics of music videos and video games, street theater, or
mathematics cafés that meet in ur basements or neighborhood nail
salons (Appelbaum, 1995; 2012). is study would not be in the service of
clever ways to “tri” students into focusing on sool mathematics (See,
e.g., Burks, 2010; Chappell & ompson, 2009; Popmatics, 2010), but rather
to understand how people are learning and reﬁning mathematical skills and
concepts by their participation in these social, cultural activities. ese
forms of teaing and learning do not concern themselves with the
limitations of sools and sool structures, and because of this they oﬀer
opportunities to expand our comprehension of the universe of mathematics
education that is taking place in the lives of all people every day, and at the
same time, they oﬀer a seemingly unlimited well of new possibilities for
mathematics curriculum and mathematics pedagogies. ey are “public
pedagogies” (Sandlin et al., 2009; Trifonas, 2012), that is, spaces, sites, and
languages of learning and education that are growing and proliferating
outside of the traditional institutions of sooling—yet they are pedagogies
that are just as crucial to our understanding of the development of
individuals, intellectual work, and social ange, if not more so, than what
takes place in classrooms.

e study of public pedagogies might help those working in sools to
bring ways of working and creating that are successful outside of sool
ba into classrooms, as “playbooks” to guide new forms of sool learning
(Goble, 2013); there is the further potential that educators can reframe
sool mathematics experiences as only one of many forms of acculturation
into/with mathematics that aracterize contemporary mathematics
learning. However, public pedagogies are also a possible alternative future
for mathematics education unrestricted by the traditions and politics of
state-sponsored or otherwise designed and organized educational
institutions.

Learning Mathematics
ere was a time not long ago when “culture” was adopted as a tool by
mathematics educators for improving the eﬃciency and eﬃcacy of sool
mathematics pedagogy. “On the other hand,” write Rosa and Orey (2011),
“the learning of mathematics has always been associated with the sooling
process, that is, it was thought that mathematical concepts and skills were
acquired only if individuals went to sool” (p. 7). is is an example of
how sool mathematics and culture mutually buress common sense
about mathematics and mathematics learning. What does it mean to “learn”
mathematics? e answer to this question circles ba to what people have
“learned,” whi, in many cultures, is related to sool experiences only,
despite tangled webs of mathematical experiences and personal
transformations in multiple sites of formal and informal education,
everyday life, and public pedagogical encounters. Sool mathematics
continues in many instances to be a process of appropriating teniques and
skills. When this circles ba upon what might be identiﬁed culturally as
“mathematical,” many experiences that could be otherwise deﬁned as
mathematical learning are overlooked, dismissed, or ridiculed.
When “culture” is added to the collection of analytic tools for
comprehending mathematics learning, we have emphasized in this apter
that learners cannot be deﬁned in terms of “a” culture, but rather that we
are always referring to multiple, overlapping, and potentially conﬂicting
subcultures. At the same time, “learning” cannot be isolated from culture,
since learning both deﬁnes and is deﬁned by the multiplicity of cultures to
whi we refer in the plural. Although many researers have been
interested in connecting culture and mathematics learning (as is evident in
the persistence of su diotomies as formal-informal learning, sool-
extracurricular learning, academic-nonacademic learning, and so on) these
distinctions have not been suﬃcient to address the facilitation of learning,

especially learning by members of minority and marginalized groups. We
suggest that it is useful to avoid the diotomies when referring to
knowledge and learning. Knowledge is everywhere created and
transformed in every moment; there is a complex web of meanings and
interpretations among people and within learners, whi, ironically, in turn,
is itself part of a complex web of meanings and interpretations. “Culture”
does not give answers to problems of mathematics education; issues of
power, authority, and policy need to be included in any aempt to
understand culture and mathematics learning. Unless these and other issues
of postcolonial intercultures are centered in our analyses, we run the risk of
limiting ourselves to naïve yet symbolically violent versions of assimilation
and acculturation to the dominant culture, su as in those found
contemporary eﬀorts to integrate culturally diﬀerent ildren into a
mainstream school culture.
A culture of questioning (Giroux, 2011) might be culled from those
aspects of critical multiculturalism, diversity education, ethnomathematics,
critical race theory, Latcrit theories, and the emerging interest in public
pedagogies. In these eﬀorts, mathematics educators collaborate to be part
of the creation of new institutions and public pedagogies that promote a
culture of deliberation grounded in allenging oppression, exploitation,
and exclusion. In this sense, we ﬂip the direction of mutual inﬂuence, and
focus on those ways that mathematics learning becomes part of eﬀorts to
construct a culture that creates ideological and structural conditions
necessary for the development of an informed public, and new discourses
for thinking through the processes of oppression, exploitation, and
exclusion.

Notes
1. e European Court of Human Rights condemned Greece for violation of the right to education
and the provisions of the Convention prohibiting discrimination. Twenty-three Roma parents
had complained about the exclusion of ildren from primary sools in Sofades Karditsa, and
the subsequent, compulsory education in separate sools for Roma ildren. (See TVXS,
http://tvxs.gr/news/ελλάδα/πρόστιμο-για-αποκλεισμό-παιδιών-ρομά-από-σχολεία.)

References
de Abreu, G., Bishop, A. J., & Presmeg, N. C. (Eds.). (2002). Transitions between contexts of
mathematical practices. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Adler, J. (2001). Teaing mathematics in multilingual classrooms. Dordret, e Netherlands:
Kluwer.
Andersson, A. & Seah, W. T. (2013). Facilitating mathematics learning in diﬀerent contexts: e
values perspective. Proceedings of the seventh international mathematics education and society
conference (MES7), 1(2), 193–202. International Mathematics Education and Society Conference
(MES7), South Africa.
Appelbaum, P. (1995). Popular culture, educational discourse, and mathematics. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Appelbaum, P. (2002). Multicultural and diversity education: A reference handbook. Santa Barbara,
CA: ABC-CLIO.
Appelbaum, P. (2008). Embracing mathematics: On becoming a teaer and anging with
mathematics. New York: Routledge.
Appelbaum, P. (2012). Democracy & mathematics circles/Le démocratie et les cercles mathématiques.
Prezi for a workshop held at the International Commission for the Study and Improvement of
Mathematics 
Teaing, 
Rhodes, 
Greece. 
Retrieved 
from
http://prezi.com/s_3pvca2bb8j/democracy-mathematics-circles-le-democratie-et-les-cercles-
mathematiques/.
Aser, M. (1991). Ethnomathematics: A multicultural view of mathematical ideas. Paciﬁc Grove,
CA: Brooks/Cole.
Atweh, B., Forgasz, H., & Nebres, B. (Eds.). (2001). Sociocultural resear on mathematics education:
An international perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Atweh, B. (2007, November). Pedagogy for socially response-able mathematics education. In
Proceedings of the annual conference of the Australian Association of Resear in Education.
Fremantle, West Australia. Retrieved from www.aare.edu.au/07pap/atw07600.pdf.
Atweh, B., Graven, M., & Secada, W. (Eds.) (2011). Mapping equity and quality in mathematics
education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.

Baker, D., Clay, J., & Fox, C. (1996). Challenging ways of knowing in English, maths and science.
Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Balibar, E. & Swenson, J. (2003). We, the people of Europe? Reﬂections on transnational citizenship.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Barton, B. (1995). Making sense of ethnomathematics: Ethnomathematics is making sense.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 31(1–2), pp. 201–233.
Barton, B. (1996a). Anthropology perspectives on mathematics and mathematics education. In A.
Bishop, M. A. Clements, C. Keitel-Kreidt, J. Kilpatri, & F. K-S. Leung (Eds.), International
handbook of mathematics education (pp. 1035–1053). New York: Springer Publishing.
Barton, B. (1996b). Ethnomathematics: Exploring cultural diversity in mathematics. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, the University of Auckland.
Barton, B. (1996c). Making sense of ethnomathematics: Ethnomathematics is making sense.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 31(1–2), 201–233.
Bazin, M., & Tamez, M. (2002). Math and science across cultures: Activities and investigations from
the Exploratorium. New York: The New Press.
Berlinski, D. (2000). e advent of the algorithm: e idea that rules the world . New York: Harcourt
Brace.
Bishop, A. (Ed.). (1988a). Mathematics education and culture. Dordret, e Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Bishop, A. (1988b). Mathematical enculturation: A cultural perspective on mathematics education.
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bishop, A. (2002). Mathematical acculturation, cultural conﬂicts, and transition. In G. de Abreu, A.
Bishop, & N. Presmeg, (Eds.), Transitions between contexts of mathematical practices (pp. 193–
212). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bishop, A. (2007). Values in mathematics and science education: An empirical investigation. In U.
Gellert & E. Jablonka (Eds.), Mathematisation and demathematisation: Social, philosophical, and
educational ramifications (pp. 123–139). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Boaler, J. (Ed.) (2000). Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaing and learning. Westport, CT:
Ablex.
Brown, S., & Walter, M. (2005). e art of problem posing. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum

Associates.
Burks, R. (2010). “Survivor” math: Using popular culture to enhance learning mathematics. PRIMUS:
Problems, Resources, and Issues in Mathematics Undergraduate Studies, 21(1), 62–72.
Chappell, M. & ompson, D. (2009). Math, culture, and popular media: Activities to engage middle
school students through film, literature, and the Internet. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Chronaki, A. (2005). Learning about ‘learning identities’ in the sool arithmetic practice: e
experience of two young minority Gypsy girls in the Greek context of education. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 20(1), pp. 61–74.
Civil, M., & Kahn, L. (2001). Mathematics instruction developed from a garden theme. Teaching
Children Mathematics, 7(7), 400–405.
Civil, M. (1996). Teaing mathematics to minority students: Dilemmas I face. Paper presented at
working group 22 (Mathematics, Education, Society and Culture) at the 8th International
Congress on Mathematical Education (ICME). Sevilla, Spain.
Civil, M. (2002). Everyday mathematics, mathematicians’ mathematics, and sool mathematics:
Can we bring them together? In B. Brenner & J. Moskovi (Eds.), Everyday and academic
mathematics in the classroom (pp. 40–62). Reston, VA: National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics.
Civil, M. (2008). Mathematics teaing and learning of immigrant students. A look at the key
themes from recent resear. Prepared for ICME Survey Team 5: Mathematics Education in
Multicultural 
and 
Multilingual 
Environments, 
Monterrey, 
Mexico. 
Retrieved 
from
http://math.arizona.edu/~cemela/english/content/ICME_PME/MCivil-SurveyTeam5-
ICME11.pdf.
Cline-Cohen, P. (1982). A calculating people: e spread of numeracy in early America. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Coon, T. (2010). Understanding and teaing primary mathematics. Edinburgh Gate: Pearson
Education.
D’Ambrosio, U. (1985). Ethnomathematics and its place in the history and pedagogy of
mathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics, 5, 44–48.
D’Ambrosio, U. (1987). Reﬂections on ethnomathematics. International Study Group on
Ethnomathematics Newsletter, 3(1), 3–5.

D’Ambrosio, U. (1988). Ethnomathematics: A resear program in the history of ideas and in
cognition. International Study Group on Ethnomathematics Newsletter, 4(1), 5–8.
D’Ambrosio, U. (1999). Ethnomathematics and its ﬁrst international congress. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 31(2), 50–53.
D’Ambrosio, U. (2006). Ethnomathematics. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Davis, P., & Hersh, R. (1986). Descartes’ dream: e world according to mathematics. San Diego, CA:
Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich.
Diéz-Palomar, J. (2012). Family mathematics education: Improvement performance beyond the
classroom walls. Paper presented at the American Educational Resear Association, Vancouver,
Canada.
Dominguez, D. (2012). When home came to sool: Mexican mothers and their ildren ﬁnding (and
solving) mathematical problems in their life experiences. Paper presented at the American
Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Dowling, P. (1998). e sociology of mathematics education: Mathematical myths/pedagogic texts.
Bristol, PA: Falmer Press.
Eglash, R. (1999). African fractals: Modern computing and indigenous design. New Brunswi, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
Fasheh, M. J. (2012). e role of mathematics in the destruction of communities, and what we can
do to reverse this process, including using mathematics. In Skovsmose, O. & Greer, B. (Eds.),
Opening the cage: Critique and politics of mathematics education (pp. 93–106). Roerdam, e
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Favilli, F. (Ed.) (2007). Ethnomathematics and mathematics education. Proceedings of the 10th
international congress of mathematics education, discussion group 15: Ethnomathematics. Pisa:
Tipografia Editrice Pisana.
François, K. (2007). e untouable and frightening status of mathematics. In K. Francois & J.-P.
van Bendegem (Eds.), Mathematics education library: Vol. 42. Philosophical dimensions in
mathematics education (pp. 13–39). New York: Springer.
Frankenstein, M. (1987). Critical mathematics education: An application of Paulo Freire’s
epistemology. In I. Shor (Ed.), Freire for the classroom: A sourcebook for liberatory teaing (pp.
180–210). Portsmouth, NH: Boyton/Cook.

Gates, P. (2006). e place of equity and social justice in the history of PME. In A. Gutiérrez & P.
Boero (Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of mathematics education: Past, present
and future (pp. 367–402). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Geertz, C. (1973a). Religion as a cultural system. In e interpretation of cultures (pp. 87–125). New
York: Basic Books.
Geertz, C. (1973b). i description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In e interpretation
of cultures (pp. 3–30). New York: Basic Books.
Gerardo, J. M., Guitiérrez, R., & Irving, S. (2012). Playing games to “ange the game”: Preservice
teaers learning to support Latina/o adolescents through an aer-sool mathematics club .
Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Gerdes, P. (1988). On possible uses of traditional Angolan sand drawings in the mathematics
classroom, Educational Studies in Mathematics,19(1), 3–22.
Gerdes, P. (1992). On the history of mathematics in Africa south of the Sahara. AMUCHMA
Newsletter, 9, 3–32. Maputo: Higher Pedagogical Institute.
Gerdes, P. (1994). Reflections on ethnomathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics, 14(2), 19–21.
Gerdes, P. (1996). Ethnomathematics and mathematics education. In A. Bishop, M. A. Clements, C.
Keitel-Kreidt, J. Kilpatri, & F. K-S. Leung (Eds.), International handbook of mathematics
education (pp. 909–943). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Gerofsky, S. (2001). Genre analysis as a way of understanding pedagogy in mathematics education.
In J. Weaver, M. Morris, & Peter Appelbaum (Eds.), (Post) modern science (education):
propositions and alternative paths (pp. 147–176). New York: Peter Lang.
Gerofsky, S. (2010). e impossibility of “real-life” word problems (according to Bakhtin, Lacan,
Zizek and Baudrillard). Discourse, 31(1), 61–74.
Giroux, H. A. (2011). On critical pedagogy. Bloomsbury Publishing Inc.1385 Broadway, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10018
Goble, R. (2013). Making curriculum pop: A resource sharing community for educators interested in
better practices and teaching with pop culture. Retrieved from http://mcpopmb.ning.com/.
González, N., Moll, L., & Amanti, C. (Eds.) (2005). Funds of knowledge: eorizing practice in
households, communities, and classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gorgorió, N., & Planas, N. (2001). Teaing mathematics in multilingual classrooms. Educational

Studies in Mathematics, 47, 7–33.
Govaris, C., & Antwniadou, A. (2000). Children of immigrants in a Greek kindergarten. International
Journal of the Humanities, 3(1), 113–118.
Grootenboer, P., Lomas, G., & Ingram, N. (2008). e aﬀective domain and mathematics education.
In B. Perry, T. Lowrie, T. Logan, A. MacDonald, & J. Greenlees, (Eds.), Resear in mathematics
education in Australasia 2008–2011 (pp. 23–37). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Gutiérrez, R. (2002a). Beyond essentialism: e complexity of language in teaing mathematics to
Latina/o students. American Educational Research Journal, 39(4), 1047–1088.
Gutiérrez, R. (2002b). Enabling the practice of mathematics teaers in context: Toward a new
equity research agenda. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 4(2–3), 145–187.
Gutiérrez, R. (2010). e sociopolitical turn in mathematics education. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(1), 37–68.
Gutstein, E. (2003). Teaing and learning mathematics for social justice in an urban, Latino sool.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 34, 37–73.
Gutstein, E. (2006). Reading and writing the world with mathematics: Toward a pedagogy for social
justice. London: Taylor & Francis.
Gutstein, E. (2012). Mathematics as a weapon in the struggle. In B. Greer & O. Skovsmose (Eds.),
Opening the cage: Critique and politics of mathematics education (pp. 23–48). Roerdam, e
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Gutstein, E., Lipman, P., Hernández, P., & de los Reyes, R. (1997). Culturally relevant mathematics
teaing in a Mexican American context. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 28(6),
709–737.
Gutstein, E., & Peterson, B. (Eds.) (2005). Rethinking mathematics: Teaing social justice by the
numbers. Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools.
Keitel, C., Klotzmann, E., & Skovsmose, O. (1993). Beyond the tunnel vision: Analyzing the
relationship between mathematics, society and tenology. In C. Keitel & K. Ruthven (Eds.),
Learning from computers: mathematics education and tenology (pp. 243–279). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Kirshner, D. (2004). Enculturation: e neglected learning metaphor in mathematics education. In D.
McDougall & J. A. Ross (Eds.), Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual meeting of the

International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education, North American Chapter
(Vol. 2, pp. 765–772). Toronto: OISE/UT.
Klein, R. & Showalter, D. (2012). Where’s the math? In J. Díez-Palomar & C. Kanes (Eds.), Family
and community in and out of the classroom: Ways to improve mathematics aievement  (pp.
115–122). Barcelona: Univ. Autònoma de Barcelona.
Knijnik, G., Wanderer, F., & Oliveira, C. J. (2005). Cultural diﬀerences, oral mathematics and
calculators in a teaer training course of the Brazilian Landless Movement. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, 37(2), 101–108.
Kumashiro, K. K. (2009). Against common sense: Teaing and learning toward social justice .
London: Taylor & Francis.
Leonard, J., & Martin, D. B. (Eds.) (2013). e brilliance of Bla ildren in mathematics: Beyond
the numbers and toward new discourse. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishers.
Lerman, S. (Ed.). (1994). Cultural perspectives on the mathematics classroom. Dordret, e
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Lerman, S. (2000). e social turn in mathematics education resear. In J. Boaler (Ed.), Multiple
perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 19–44). Westport, CT: Ablex.
Lerman, S. (2001). Cultural, discursive, psyology: A sociocultural approa to studying the
teaching and learning of mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 46(1–2), 133–150.
Lipka, J. (2005). Math in a cultural context: Two case studies of a successful culturally based math
project. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 36(4), 367–385.
Lipka, J., & Moha, G. V. (1998). Transforming the culture of sools: Yup’ik Eskimo examples.
Sociocultural, political, and historical studies in education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Lipka, J. Sharp, N., Adams, B., & Sharp, F. (2007). Creating a third space for authentic biculturalism:
Examples from math in a cultural context. Journal of American Indian Education, 46 (3), 94–
115.
Martin, D. B. (2000). Mathematics success and failure among African-American youth: e roles of
sociohistorical context, community forces, sool inﬂuence, and individual agency . Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Martin, D. B. (Ed.) (2009). Mathematics teaing, learning, and liberation in the lives of Bla

children. London: Routledge.
Martin, D. B. & Gohlson, M. (2012). On becoming and being a critical Bla solar in mathematics
education: e politics of race and identity. In Opening the cage: Critique and politics of
mathematics education (pp. 203–222). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Mason, J., Burton, L., & Stacey, K. (1985). Thinking mathematically. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Matthews, J. (1989). Escalante: The best teacher in America. New York: Henry Holt & Co.
Mellin-Olsen, S. (1987). e politics of mathematics education. Dordret, e Netherlands: D.
Reidel.
Mishra, V. (2012). What was multiculturalism? Melbourne: Melbourne University Publishing.
Moreira, D. (2003). A Matemática na educação familiar: Memórias escolares, ideias sobre a
Matemática e relação educativa em grupos domésticos de baixa escolaridade. adrante. Revista
de Investigação em Educação Matemática, 12(2), 3–23.
Moreira, D., & Pires G. (2012). O processo educativo das crianças ciganas e a aprendizagem da
matemática. A. I. Afonso (Ed.), Etnograﬁas com ciganos. Diferenciação e resistência cultural (pp.
71–87). Lisboa: Edições Colibri.
Moskovi, J. N. (2007). Examining mathematical discourse practices. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 27(1), 24–30.
Moses, R., & C. Cobb. (2001). Radical equations: Civil rights from Mississippi to the algebra project.
Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Mukhopadhyay, S., & Roth, W. M. (2012). Alternative forms of knowing (in) mathematics:
Celebrating diversity of mathematical practices. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Nasir, N. S., Hand, V., & Taylor, E. V. (2008). Culture and mathematics in sool: Boundaries
between “cultural” and “domain” knowledge in the mathematics classroom and beyond. Review
of Educational Research, 32, 187–240.
Nolan, K. (2009). Mathematics in and through social justice: Another misunderstood marriage?
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 12(3), 205–216.
Olin, D. (2003). Crash course: Ethnomathematics. New York Times  (February 23). Retrieved from
www.nytimes.com/2003/02/23/magazine/23CRASH.html.
Orey, D. C., & Rosa, M. (2008). Ethnomathematics and cultural representations: Teaing in highly
diverse contexts. Acta Scientiae, 10(1), 27–46.

Palhares, P. (2012).. Mathematics education and ethnomathematics. A connection in need of
reinforcement. REDIMAT-Journal of Research in Mathematics Education, 1(1), 79–92.
Pinxten, R., van Dooren, I., & Harvey, F. (1983). Anthropology of space. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Pinxten, R., van Dooren, I., & Soberon, E. (1987). Towards a Navajo geometry. Ghent, Belgium: KKI
Press.
Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Popkewtiz, T. (2004). e alemy of the mathematics curriculum: Inscriptions and the fabrication
of the child. American Educational Research Journal, 41(1), 3–34.
Popmatics. (2010). e intersection of pop culture and mathematics: Creating a generation of
mathematicians. Retrieved from http://popmatics.wordpress.com/.
Powell, A., & Frankenstein, M. (1997). Ethnomathematics: Challenging Eurocentrism in mathematics
education. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Presmeg, N. (2002). Beliefs about the nature of mathematics in the bridging of everyday and sool
mathematical practices. In G. Leder, E. Pehkonen, & G. Torner (Eds.), Beliefs: A hidden variable
in mathematics education? (pp. 293–312). Dordret, e Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Presmeg, N. (2007). e role of culture in teaing and learning mathematics. In F. Lester (Ed.),
Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 435–460). Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Radosavljevic, A. (2012). Mathematics socialization through games: Bilingual third graders aer
school. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Radtke, F. (1994). e formation of ethnic minorities and the transformation of social into ethnic
conﬂicts in a so-called multicultural society—the case of Germany. In J. Rex & B. Drury (Eds.),
Ethnic mobilisation in a multi-cultural Europe (pp. 30–37). Aldershot: Avebury.
Rosa, M., & Orey, D. C. (2011). Ethnomathematics: e cultural aspects of mathematics. Revista
Latinoamericana de Ethnomatemática, 4(2), 32–54.
Sandlin, J., Sultz, B., & Burdi, S. (2009). Handbook of public pedagogy: Education and learning
beyond schooling. New York: Routledge.

Soenfeld, A. (1991). On mathematics as sense-making: An informal aa on the unfortunate
divorce of formal and informal mathematics. In J. F. Voss, D. N. Perkins, & J. W. Segal (Eds.),
Informal reasoning and education (pp. 311–343). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Seah, W. T. (2004). Shiing the lens of inquiry into the socialization of mathematics teaers.
Nature of value diﬀerences. In I. Pu, R. Faragher, & M. McLean (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th
annual conference of the mathematics education resear group of Australasia (Vol. 2, pp. 501–
508). Townsville: James Cook University.
Skovsmose, O. (1994). Toward a philosophy of critical mathematics education. Dordret, e
Netherlands: D. Reidel.
Skovsmose, O. (2004). Critical mathematics education for the future. In Niss, M. & Emborg, E. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 10th international congress on mathematics education (ICME). Retrieved
from www.educ.fc.ul.pt/docentes/jfmatos/areas_tematicas/politica/CME_for_the_Future.pdf.
Skovsmose, O. (2011). An invitation to critical mathematics education. Roerdam, e Netherlands:
Sense Publishers.
Skovsmose, O., & Penteado, M. G. (2011). In B. Atweh, M. Graven, & W. Secada (Eds.), Mapping
equity and quality in mathematics education (pp. 77–90). Dordrecht, The Netherlands; Springer.
Sleeter, C. E., & Grant, C. (2007). Making oices for multicultural education: Five approaes to
race, class and gender. New York: Wiley.
Sleeter, C. E., & Soriano, E., (Eds.). (2012). Creating solidarity across diverse communities:
International perspectives. New York: Teachers College Press.
Stathopoulou, Ch. (2005). Ethnomathematics: Exploring the cultural dimension of mathematics and
of mathematics education. Athens: Atrapos.
Stathopoulou, Ch. (2006). Exploring informal mathematics of crasmen in the designing tradition of
‘Xysta’ at Pyrgi of Chios. For the Learning of Mathematics, 26(3), 9–14.
Stathopoulou, Ch., & Kalabasis F. (2002). Teaing mathematics to ﬁrst grade Romany ildren,
through familiar every day money dealings. In P. Volero & O. Skovsmose (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Mathematics Education and Society Conference (pp. 507–514). Helsingør, Denmark:
Danmarks Paedagogiske Universitet.
Swanson, D. (2010). Paradox and politics of disadvantage: narratizing critical moments of discourse
and mathematics pedagogy within the “glocal.” In M. Walshaw (Ed.), Unpaing pedagogy: New

perspectives for mathematics (pp. 245–263). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Swanson, D. & Appelbaum, P. (2013). Refusal as a democratic catalyst for mathematics education
d e v e l o p m e n t . Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/article/view/189.
Sykes, C. (1995). Dumbing down our kids: Why American ildren feel good about themselves but
can’t read, write, or add. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.
Tate, W. (1997). Critical race theory and education: History, theory, and implications. Review of
Research in Education, 22, 195–247.
Tate, W. F., Anderson, C. R., & King, K. (Eds.) (2011). Disrupting tradition: Pathways for resear
and practice in mathematics education. Reston, VA: National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics.
Tate, W. F., & D’Ambrosio, B. S. (Eds.) (1997, January). Equity, reform, and resear in mathematics
education, Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28(6), 650–782.
Téllez, K., Moskovi, J. & Civil, M. (2011). Latinos/as and mathematics education: Resear on
learning and teaing in classrooms and communities. Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
Trifonas, P. (2012). Learning the virtual life: Public pedagogy in a digital world. New York:
Routledge.
Valero, P. & Stentof, D. (2010). e “post” move of critical mathematics education. In H. Alrø, O.
Ravn, & P. Valero (Eds.), Critical mathematics education: Past, present and future: Festsri for
Ole Skovsmose (pp. 183–196). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Vithal, R., & Skovsmose, O. (1997). e end of innocence: A critique of “ethnomathematics.”
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 34(2), 131–157.
Walkerdine, V. (1987). e mastery of reason: Cognitive development and the production of
meaning. New York: Routledge.
Walshaw, M. (2007). Working with Foucault in education. Roerdam, e Netherlands: Sense
Publishers.
Walshaw, M. (2010). e performance of self in the art of resear. Educational Insights, 13(1).
Retrieved from www.ccfi.educ.ubc.ca/publication/insights/v13n01/articles/walshaw/index.html.
Whitin, D., & Sandra Wilde. (1995). It’s the story that counts: More ildren’s books for

mathematical Learning, K–6. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Willey, C., Lopez Leiva, C.A., & Vomvoridi-Ivanovic, E. (2012). Reconnecting with powerful, personal
resources to teach and learn mathematics: Experiences of three Latina/o preservice teachers. Paper
presented at the American Educational Research Association, Vancouver, Canada.
Zaslavsky, C. (1973a). Africa counts: Number and paern in African culture. Boston, MA: Prindle,
Weber & Schmid.
Zaslavsky, C. (1973b). Mathematics in the study of African culture. Arithmetic Teaer, 20 , 532–
535.
Zaslavsky, C. (1993). Multicultural mathematics: Interdisciplinary cooperative-learning activities.
Portland, ME: J. Weston Walch.
Zaslavsky, C. (1996). e multicultural math classroom: bringing in the world . Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Zaslavsky, C. (1998). Math games and activities from around the world. Chicago: Chicago Review
Press, 1998.
Zolkower, B. (1995). Math fictions: What really solves the problem? Social Text, 43(3), 133–162.

14 Mathematics Education and
Democracy
An Open Landscape of Tensions,
Uncertainties, and Challenges
Ole Skovsmose
Aalborg University
Miriam Godoy Penteado
Universidade Estadual Paulista
In their classic study assuming the perspective of analytical philosophy,
Benn and Peters (1959) relate democracy to notions su as justice, equality,
freedom, and responsibility. A further investigation of justice is provided by
Rawls (1971/1999), who begins his inquiry in analytic philosophy but
expands his investigations beyond this tradition. Ideas about deliberative
democracy, as for instance presented by Bohman and Rehg (1997), relate
the notion of democracy to participation, negotiation, and dialogue.
Democracy can also be related to citizenship, autonomy, human rights, and
inclusion. Together all su notions belong to an extended family of open
concepts.
Democracy is derived from the Greek: demos means “people,” and cratos
means “rule”; so, literally speaking, “democracy” means “ruled by people.”
What can be referred to as classic democracy was realized in ancient
Greece, but also criticized by prominent philosophers including Plato and
Aristotle. Democratic ideals were advocated by Loe in Two Treatises of

Government (1689/1988). Here he elaborated many topics that formed the
liberal tradition in democracy, for instance concerning representation and
private property. He also addressed slavery, whi he found possible to
justify. We ﬁnd democratic ideals suggested by Rousseau in e Social
Contract, ﬁrst published in 1762. Rousseau poses the question: Who is the
sovereign? In a monary the answer is simple: the king. According to
Rousseau, the answer is just as simple when we consider a democracy: the
people are the sovereign. is brings Rousseau to claim that in a democracy
it should be possible for people actually to participate in the governing. In
this way he shares ideas with the classic model of democracy. In Capitalism,
Socialism and Democracy (1943), Sumpeter suggests an interpretation of
democracy that is very remote from Rousseau’s. According to Sumpeter,
the role of the people in a democracy is to produce a government and only
this. us democracy has nothing to do with participation and public
decision making, except for the election of the person to be put in power.
According to Sumpeter, democracy works perfectly well in huge
societies. e democratic method simply takes the form of a “competitive
struggle,” and people’s democratic activity consists solely in casting their
votes.
Drawing on these comments, we want to stress that the apparently
straightforward notion of democracy takes us a long way round among
many other notions and ideals. Democracy can be clariﬁed only through
concepts just as complex as itself. As our departure for discussing
mathematics education and democracy, we want to recognize the openness
of democracy as well as of the extended family of related concepts.

The Dewey Harmony
Dewey’s conception of democracy is far removed from any tenocratic
interpretation as suggested by Sumpeter; it is closer to Rousseau’s
interpretation. Dewey (1966) sees democracy as a “way of life,” and in
Democracy and Education (1916), as well as in subsequent writings, he
presents visions of a profound harmony between a democratic way of life
and educational processes.
e basis for claiming this harmony is found in Dewey’s philosophic
pragmatism and in the way he sees sciences. According to him, science
must refrain from any form of dogmatism. Every issue must be investigated
without preconceptions, and inquiry processes are crucial for any su
activity: one experiences something, one questions something, one
recognizes something as a problem, one addresses the problem, one makes
experiments, one provides tentative conclusions, and one questions any
such conclusions. This way one enters an open process. One is researching.
According to Dewey (1938/1963, 1974), resear processes are similar to
learning processes, in particular when learning takes place in seings
inspired by investigative approaes. Furthermore, Dewey ﬁnds that
democratic processes can be aracterized as inquiry processes. In other
words, democracy and education share the procedures aracteristic of the
scientiﬁc method. As a consequence, an education organized in terms of
inquiry processes becomes an education for democracy. is is the principal
idea of what we refer to as the Dewey harmony.
With respect to mathematics education one ﬁnds many expressions of
this harmony. Let us just refer to one su example, whi is clearly
expressed in the title of a paper wrien by Hannaford (1998): “Mathematics
Teaing Is Democratic Education.” In this straightforward way, Hannaford
claims the existence of an intrinsic connection between mathematics
education and democracy. is is due to the very nature of, on the one

hand, a democratic way of life, and, on the other hand, the mathematical
way of thinking. In both cases, rational arguments function as the principal
tools.

An Aporetic Condition
e Dewey harmony forms part of a more general Modern Outlook, whi
claims the existence of a profound harmony between scientiﬁc thinking and
discoveries, mathematical rationality, tenological enterprises, educational
processes, democratic ways of life, welfare, and socio-political progress in
general. In particular, science and tenology has been conceptualized as
the engine of progress.1 is Modern Outlook has also been referred to as
the “grand narrative” of Modernity (Lyotard, 1979/1984).
Modernity is a broad label; it refers to the scientiﬁc revolution, the period
of Enlightenment, and it includes the scientiﬁc and tenological optimism
that prospered during the 19th century. Only in the later part of the 20th
century was this outlook broadly questioned. A basic element of this
questioning is the claim that the Modern Outlook includes a false self-
understanding: the grand narratives of Modernity represent only myths.
We cannot ignore that the most brutal forms of colonization
accompanied by racism formed part of Modernity. Racism did not operate
as a popular preconception only: during the 19th century it was assumed to
have a scientiﬁc underpinning. rough, for instance, meticulous
phrenological studies one tried to distinguish between developed and less
developed human races. Su studies were accompanied by linguistic
studies trying to trace the linguistic expression of su stipulated
differences.2 One could interpret the Holocaust as a pathological event in
Modern history, as not forming part of the history of “progress.” Contrary
to this “explaining away” of the Holocaust, Bauman (1989) emphasizes that
it was precisely modern tenology, modern bureaucracy, and modern
management that made the Holocaust function with all its devastating
eﬃciency. In fact, Modernity includes a range of examples that reveal the
grand narratives of Modernity as a false self-portrayal.
roughout Modernity, the democracy-is-not-for-them argument has

been applied again and again. As an example, Said (1979, p. 31 ﬀ.) points
out that in 1910 in the English Parliament it was explicitly stated by Arthur
James Balfour (Prime Minister 1902–1905 and Foreign Secretary 1916–1919)
in a debate addressing Egypt that democracy was not for the “Orientals.”
is democracy-is-not-for-them argument was basic to the apartheid
regime in South Africa: Blas had to be excluded. For long periods the
same argument barred woman from participating in democracy, thus
women only got the right to vote in United Kingdom in 1928, in France
1944, in Switzerland in 1971, while in Saudi Arabia they are promised to be
allowed to vote in 2015. e democracy-is-not-for-them argument has
operated as an integral part of diﬀerent Modern interpretations of
democracy.
e grand narrative of Modernity represents myths more that reality,
and the very notion of Modernity might be obsolete. Be (1986/1992, 1999)
explores the notion of the risk society, whi includes the idea that science
and tenology not only contribute to the solutions of problems, but also
formulate a part of the very production of those problems. Michael Gibbons
et al. (1994) address what they call the Mode-2 society, aracterized by the
fact that science and knowledge production in general has come to operate
under market conditions. Castells (1996, 1997, 1998), addresses the
complexity of the information age and demonstrates how modern
tenology has impacts on all spheres of life, including the processes of
globalization. All su studies point towards the closing of the so-called
Modern period.
Leaving aside the Modern self-understanding, we come to face a new
framing of the discussion of education and democracy. us, we cannot
assume the existence of any intrinsic harmony between education and
democracy in general, nor between mathematics education and democracy
in particular. We cannot assume the existence of any profound harmony
between scientiﬁc thinking, mathematical rationality, tenological

enterprises, educational processes, democracy, and progress in general. We
cannot rely on any uniform interpretation of notions belonging to the
extended family of open concepts related to democracy as, for instance,
justice, equality, and freedom. Like democracy itself, su notions do not
have any essence. Instead we have to do with contested concepts.3 ese
can be interpreted in diﬀerent ways; they can include conﬂicting
perspectives and assume particular interests. There is no general perspective
that helps to provide some universal interpretations of su concepts.
Together with su contested concepts we are operating in socio-political
contexts ﬁlled with tensions and contradictions. As a consequence, we come
to face profound uncertainty, which we refer to as an aporetic condition.4
at mathematics is also subjected to the aporetic condition is
emphasized by D’Ambrosio in the following observations:
In the last 100 years, we have seen enormous advances in our knowledge of nature and in the
development of new tenologies. […] And yet, this same century has shown us a despicable
human behavior. Unprecedented means of mass destruction, of insecurity, new terrible diseases,
unjustiﬁed famine […] are mated only by an irreversible destruction of the environment.
Mu of this paradox has to do with an absence of reﬂections and considerations of values in
academics, particularly in the scientiﬁc disciplines, both in resear and in education. Most of
the means to aieve these wonders and also these horrors of science and tenology have to do
with advances in mathematics.
(D’Ambrosio, 1994, p. 443)
Mathematics can be associated with processes that are out of democratic
control, processes that can provide wonders as well as horrors. D’Ambrosio
also refers here to mathematics education, and we recognize “mathematics
education and democracy” as an open landscape of tensions, uncertainties,
and allenges.5 As a consequence, we recognize the complexity of the
politics of mathematics education.6
In the next section, “Mathematics in Sool Practices” we explore
mathematics education for democracy in terms of diﬀerent formulations of

mathematics education for social justice. We also consider what kind of
disciplining might be exercised through the sool mathematics tradition.
Finally, we consider the possibility that dealing with these traditions may
ensure profound forms of social inclusion. Anowledging the aporetic
condition, however, we cannot expect that relating mathematics education
and democracy would lead us towards any particular educational program
or towards some curriculum guidelines. e aporetic condition is
accompanied by profound uncertainties.
However, through the notion of pedagogical imagination we rea the
constructive part of operating within an aporetic condition. In the section
“Pedagogical Imagination,” we provide a general presentation of the
notion. We also discuss two particular issues concerning the direction of
imagination: (1) mathematics in society and tenology and (2)
mathematics in students’ life-worlds. In the ﬁnal section, “An Open
Landscape,” we anowledge “mathematics education and democracy” as a
fertile ground for such imagination.

Mathematics in School Practices
e discussion of mathematics education and democracy cannot
concentrate on sool education alone. Learning mathematics can take
place in many other contexts, and in all of these contexts one can consider
what it could mean to try to pursue democratic ideals. However, in this
chapter we do concentrate on school practices.
If one assumes a Modern Outlook, the Dewey harmony also applies to
mathematics education. When properly organized, mathematics education
forms part of a democratic endeavor. Our point, however, is that one
cannot set out with any su assumption. We ﬁnd instead that mathematics
education can be performed with reference to any form of political interest.
We do not ﬁnd that mathematics education contains any particular
democratic essence.7 It could come to operate as a democratic force, but
also as a disciplining device—to use a term explored by Foucault (1991). In
sools, mathematics education operates within the aporetic condition. It
represents tensions, allenges, and uncertainties that we are able to
address only through contested concepts.
Narratives About Mathematics Education for
Social Justice
Mathematics education for social justice has been explored in several books
and articles (D’Ambrosio, 2012; Frankenstein, 2012; Gates, 2006; Gutstein,
2012a; Sriraman, 2008; and Wager & Stinson, 2012). Apparently, social
justice represents a crucial feature of democracy, as does responsiveness.
us responsive mathematics education tries to make students able to
respond to forms of domination as critical citizens. is approa has been
elaborated in depth in Culturally responsive mathematics education (Greer,

Mukhopadhyay, Powell, & Nelson-Barber, 2009). e principal idea is to
establish a mathematics education that makes students able to “respond to
authority,” which is crucial idea of deliberative democracy.
Similar perspectives have been presented by Gutstein (2006) in Reading
and writing the world with mathematics. Here he draws on ideas
formulated by Freire, who talks about “reading the world” as a metaphor
for interpreting the world, including all its forms of domination and
suppression, and about “writing the world” as an expression of anging
the world. Gutstein illustrates how su reading-writing can be developed
with reference to mathematics. One can read the world through numbers
and figures, and on this basis one might become able to write the world.
Mathematics education for social inclusion has many ramiﬁcations. ere
are studies addressing students in vulnerable social conditions (see, for
instance, Vithal, 2009) and others including students with special educational
needs, su as blind or deaf students (Healy & Fernandes, 2011; Marcone &
Penteado, 2013). e point is not to see inclusion as a one-way process of
bringing groups ba to “normality,” but as a mutual process of interaction.
Many studies have evolved around the notion of equity (see, for instance
Forgasz & Rivera, 2012), and many ethnomathematical studies address
issues like social justice and inclusion (see, for instance, D’Ambrosio, 2006).
ese studies aim at creating the possibility that all people could
participate in mathematical practices. However, we do not want to rush
towards the conclusion that su proposals ensure a mathematics education
for democracy. Any suggestion for a mathematics education for social
justice operates within the aporetic condition. is means that we cannot
provide any straightforward identiﬁcation of what socio-political functions
su an education might serve, even when applying the notion of “social
justice.” All approaes include contradictions, and the basic notions
through whi we may address these approaes are all contested. We are
really dealing with an open landscape.

The School Mathematics Tradition
Let us consider what might be called mainstream mathematics education.
One could claim that education on a grand scale is a principal democratic
concern. e overall importance of education was recognized by the
Enlightenment movement, and since then general education has been
associated with the development of democracy. Education was taken as a
deﬁning aracteristic for the development of citizenship. Literacy was
considered a democratic concern, and so was mathemacy in its diﬀerent
interpretations (see, for instance, Chronaki, 2010). Following on from this
perspective, one can see the sool mathematics tradition as a most
important foundation for ensuring democratic citizenship.
Let us, however, consider the sool mathematics tradition from a
different perspective by paying attention to some of its particular features:
(1) The activities in the classroom are first of all defined through the chosen
textbook. e teaer provides an exposition on a particular topic,
whi deﬁnes the tasks for the students. is way, the “acted out”
curriculum becomes defined through the textbook.
(2)  e mathematical exercises play a dominant role, as solving
preformulated exercises is widely considered essential for the learning
of mathematics. ese exercises demonstrate three particular
aracteristics: all the information given is exact, and should not be
questioned; all the information given is necessary for solving the
exercises, and also suﬃcient as no other information is needed; the
exercises have one and only one correct answer.
(3)  One important feature of classroom practice is to eliminate errors.
ere are many possibilities for making errors: an algorithm can be
conducted wrongly; a wrong algorithm can be applied; an exercise can
be copied incorrectly from the textbook; the wrong exercise can be

performed, etc. All forms of errors have to be eliminated, as “doing
things correctly” is considered equivalent to “learning mathematics.”
(4)  e students’ performance has to be evaluated. is can be done
through the teaer’s questioning approa; through the teaer’s
control of the students’ solutions of exercises; and through diﬀerent
forms of tests. It can also be aieved through the exams at the end of
the school year.
Considering the content of the many exercises, that deﬁne the sool
mathematics tradition, one can hardly claim that working with su
exercises provides any deeper understanding of mathematics. However,
one can pay aention not to the content, but to the form of these exercises.
ey operate as a long sequence of commands: “Construct a triangle…!”
“Solve the equation…!,” “Calculate the distance between … !,” etc. Taking a
command as given is a defining element of a logic of commands.
In this sense, the sool mathematics tradition might be seen as
providing a form of social control through a disciplining of thought, whi
in turn might serve its main functions within the given socio-economic
order of society. ese observations can be related to Foucault’s discussion
of governability. In order to be able to properly govern, the state needs to
make the population governable; mathematics education can be seen as
contributing to su disciplining, for instance by exercising a logic of
command. Su observations, then, bring us to question the existence of
any intrinsic connection between the sool mathematics tradition and
democratic ideals.
Tradition or Alternative?
Let us now consider the Algebra Project in the United States as organized
by Robert Moses. e project was expanded radically in 1982 from teaing

mathematics in one sool to, by the end of the 1990s, incorporating more
than 200 sools. Moses participated in the Bla civil rights movement,
and the Algebra Project became part of the overall struggle for human
rights. e Algebra Project tried to improve the quality of mathematics
education in poor communities. e explicit goal of the project was to
provide beer access for Bla students to further education, and Moses
saw algebra as playing a crucial role in gatekeeping. e aim of the project
was to take students who had low scores in the mathematics tests and
prepare them for college entrance by the end of high school.
e Algebra Project included many educational initiatives relating the
content of mathematics to the students’ own contexts. However, a main
aim was to ensure Bla students gained access to the established
educational system. us the aim was not to provide a new curriculum
more suited to the students’ needs as citizens, but exactly to engage the
students more successfully in the existing traditional curriculum. is
curriculum operated in a powerful way by assuming the logic of the
gatekeeper. e project was not intended to eliminate the gatekeeper, but
to beat the gatekeeper at its own game. e Algebra Project was not trying
to ange the logic of the system; the aim was instead to make Bla
students able to cope with this logic.
As suggested in the books Culturally responsive mathematics education
(Greer et al., 2009) and Reading and writing the world with mathematics
(Gutstein, 2006), mathematics education for social justice can be approaed
by exploring numbers and ﬁgures with respect to, say, salary, house prices,
and health security, potentially also providing students with an insight into
the way injustice operates. However, one can also think of the Algebra
Project as education for social justice precisely because it anowledges the
importance of the sool mathematics tradition in providing (or denying)
access to further education. In order to counteract the exclusion of
marginalized groups, it becomes important to master the very tradition that

is at the root of their marginalization. In all circumstances, the Algebra
Project illustrates the contested nature of ways of pursuing social justice
through mathematics education.

Pedagogical Imagination
We must address mathematics education and democracy within an aporetic
condition. As mentioned earlier, due to the contested nature of the concepts
we are using, we cannot expect to identify any speciﬁc program that
deﬁnes a mathematics education for democracy, and certainly not in terms
of any curriculum proposal. However, contested concepts might have other
functions than providing analytical clarity and proper justiﬁcations for
particular educational approaches.
Educational resear can take as a point of departure observations of
educational practices. One can observe what is taking place; one can
provide accurate and valid descriptions; and on this basis try to provide a
theory. eorizing, however, can also address what has not taken place, but
what could come to take place. us educational resear could address,
not only what is, but also what is not (yet). It could address educational
possibilities, and of course all of this also applies to resear in mathematics
education (Skovsmose, 2009a).
In order to explore educational possibilities, pedagogical imagination has
an important role to play. One can relate this notion to sociological
imagination, as coined by Wright-Mills (1959). By sociological imagination
he understood a conception of alternatives to what in fact is taking place.
Su imagination helps to reveal that some “sociological facts” are not
necessary facts, but contingent facts: they could be diﬀerent. A sociological
imagination is crucial for showing that socio-political alternatives are
possible. A pedagogical imagination has a similar role to play: it helps to
reveal that alternative educational practices might be possible. What could
be taken for granted, say in terms of educational traditions, are not
educational necessities, but contingencies.
A pedagogical imagination needs fuel, and su imaginations need to be
conceptualized. Contested concepts belonging to the extended family of

democracy might help us in expressing su imaginations. us we see the
open landscape of mathematics education and democracy as fertile ground
for pedagogical imagination. However, it is important to keep in mind that
pedagogical imaginations themselves will be contested.
With respect to the practices of mathematics in sool, we can think of
the diﬀerent alternative narratives of mathematics education for social
justice as expressions of pedagogical imagination. us the notion of
democracy brings us to consider diﬀerent interpretations of citizenships.
Citizenship concerns participation and autonomy, and one can think of
citizenship as including a capacity of “responding to authority.” One can
also interpret citizenship with references to “reading and writing the
world.” Certainly citizenship also means inclusion. Other very diﬀerent
contested concepts can as well be related to democracy. us Valero,
García, Camelo, Mancera, and Romero (2012) explore the notion of dignity,
and Swanson and Appelbaum (2012) consider refusal as a democratic
catalyst. All su notions are contested, but as su they can shape
pedagogical imaginations.
In the following we will explore other more particular directions of
pedagogical imagination by considering (1) mathematics in society and
technology, and (2) mathematics in the students’ life-worlds.
Mathematics in Society and Technology
As part of the Modern Outlook, mathematics was celebrated as a form of
sublime human rationality, and this celebration formed some of the “grand
narratives”: that mathematics provides a unique insight in nature, whi
means that mathematics can be considered the language of science; that
mathematics, through its broad range of applications, represents the
rationality of tenology-based progress; and that mathematics stands out

as a pure science due to its objectivity and neutrality.
Su grand narratives, however, need to be substituted by a group of
very diﬀerent and even contradictory “small narratives” about
mathematics, whi cannot be added up to a general celebration of
mathematics. Contradictory small narratives can be associated with the
many diﬀerent forms of mathematics in action. us mathematics becomes
an integral part of tenology, whi we interpret in the broadest possible
way. us, we do not only refer to tenological artifacts: washing
maines, TV sets, robots, electronic networks, etc. We also refer to forms
of automatization, procedures for ﬁnancial transactions, and forms of
surveillance and control, etc. All forms of daily practices—our life-worlds—
become continuously deﬁned and redeﬁned through mathematics in
action.8 Mathematics operates as an ongoing democratic allenge. Let us
refer to a few more particular forms of mathematics in action.
One can consider a computer as a mathematical algorithm, materialized
in an electronic format. In this sense a computer is a conglomerate of
mathematical constructs. We ﬁnd su constructs in all forms of modern
information and communication tenology. For instance, mathematics is
crucial for the functioning of the Google Page Rank System. is system is
brought in action every time one uses Google to sear for something on
the Internet. What appears on screen is not a direct result of one’s sear,
but of page rankings provided by a predesigned mathematical algorithm.
is is a speciﬁc illustration of the fact that our knowledge is now more
than ever before structured by technology.
e new possibilities for processing and circulating information, together
with new forms of communication (as illustrated by social media), bring
about new allenges for democracy. Are we dealing with a tenology
that supports individual participation and autonomy? Does the very same
tenology at the very same time open new possibilities for controlling and
suppressing?

Processes of production take new forms due to automatization and
roboing. Any production process—of cars, airplanes, washing maines—is
established through a certain balance between automatic processes,
tenical management, and manual labor. However, this balance is always
anging as new tenology makes new forms of automatization possible.
Processes of roboing are formed through mathematics: both the
construction of proper robots as well as in the combination of meanical
and manual elements in the production process. e whole scientiﬁc
structuring of production processes is a feature of a society, where science
itself has gone on the market. In this structuring mathematics in action
forms a defining element.
Processes of surveillance are formed through computing and
mathematics. It is possible to generate huge amounts of data, and the
automatic processing of data constitutes a part of any form of modern
semes of surveillance having to do the ﬁnancial transactions, security
maers, marketing strategies, etc. e so-called whistle blowers have
drawn our aention to the fact that a worldwide web of surveillance is not
only possible but is already exercised. A mathematics-based Big-Brother
negation of democratic principles has become a central feature of our time.
e hectic mathematics-based development of tenology includes many
contradictions. We are referring to powerful actions that represent horrors
as well as wonders. ey represent all sorts of human values: mathematics-
based actions can be risky, expensive, benevolent, brutal, cynical, eﬃcient,
etc. is spectrum cannot be captured by some grand narrative about
mathematics. Mathematics in action includes tensions and contradictions.
One finds all kind of narratives about horrors and wonders.
Let us consider mathematics education as taking place at universities—
not only the education of future mathematicians, but as well the education
of engineers, computer scientists, economists, etc. Expertise is needed with
reference to all forms of mathematics in action. Su expertise could be an

unreﬂective and obedient application of teniques and procedures. We
refer to this as one-dimensional expertise. All forms of expertise could turn
one-dimensional if they concentrate on speciﬁc tenical questions su as
“How do we do it?” and ignore questions like “Why do it? and “Why is it
done that way?” If we, however, explore expertise through notions like
citizenship, autonomy, and responsibility, the allenge becomes: “How do
we provide an education that is not only developing a tenical expertise
within a certain domain, but at the same time is providing a panorama of
reﬂections about the application of this domain?” Possible answers would
bring us to conceptualize a two-dimensional expertise, a reﬂective
expertise, as an important educational task.9 us we might identify a
fruitful route for pedagogical imagination along a sequence of concepts:
democracy, citizenship, participation, autonomy, responsibility, and
refection on mathematics in action.
Reﬂections on mathematics, however, do not concern the formation of
expertise only. Su reﬂection concerns all forms of mathematics education.
We live in a mathematized society, where an apparent demathematization
also plays its part (see, Gellert & Jablonka, 2009; Jablonka, 2010; and
Jablonka & Gellert, 2007). Demathematization refers to the processes of
mathematics operating in an invisible format. us the mathematics of the
Google Page Rank System do not appear in any sear processes. Notions
like democratic control, democratic access to decision making, critique of
decision procedures, and deliberation all bring fuel to pedagogical
imagination concerning how to address the mathematization and
demathematization of society. Also in this case, notions like responsiveness
and reading and writing the world can turn out to be constructive for
identifying educational possibilities.10
Mathematics in Students’ Life-Worlds

Discussions of mathematics education and democracy also concern the
students’ perspectives and their possibilities in life. (ey also concern the
life of the teaers; however, due to the limitations of space, we are not
going to address this laer issue here.) We will consider what directions
pedagogical imaginations might take when we consider these perspectives
and possibilities.
In order to explore the students’ perspectives we draw on the notion of
life-world. Husserl (1936/1970) presented this notion as an unstructured
phenomenon, representing a pure foundation for any form of structuring.
e notion of life-world, however, can be given a radically diﬀerent
interpretation as an experienced world structured by social, political,
economic, cultural, and discursive forces. We see life-worlds this way, and
we will address two features of the students’ life-worlds: their foregrounds
and their experiences of meaning.
e foreground of a person refers to opportunities and obstructions that
the social, political, economic and cultural situation provides for her or him
(Skovsmose, 2014). A foreground can be seen as a province of a life-world,
but simultaneously it reaes beyond this world by including possibilities
and hopes as well as obstructions and desolation. A foreground represents
the horizon of a life-world. Naturally, the foreground is not composed of
any well-deﬁned space of possibilities. Instead one can see the foreground
as a ﬂux of possibilities and obstructions, of hopes and despair. Horizons are
ever anging. A foreground is not just there spread out in front of a
person. It is an evolving phenomenon.
One can think of foregrounds in individual terms, but it might be more
useful to think of them in collective terms since interpretations of
possibilities are elaborated through paerns of interaction and
communication. People from the same community can be submied to the
same basic life conditions and in this sense have similar foregrounds.
Foregrounds are collective, but still include individual features. When only

desolate possibilities are experienced by a student, we talk about a ruined
foreground. A foreground can be ruined due to social, economic, political,
and cultural violence. During the apartheid regime in South Africa, the
destruction for Bla people’s possibilities was an integral part of the
system. ere is, however, a broad range of examples of foregrounds being
configured through processes of social exclusion (Baber, 2007).
We see mathematics education as playing an important role in the
formation of students’ foregrounds. Let us illustrate with the following
statement by Volmink (1994):
Mathematics is not only an impenetrable mystery to many, but has also, more than any other
subject, been cast in the role as an ‘objective’ judge, in order to decide who in the society ‘can’
and who ‘cannot’. It therefore serves as the gate keeper to participation in the decision making
processes of society. To deny some access to participation in mathematics is then also to
determine, a priori, who will move ahead and who will stay behind.
(pp. 51–52)
is is a strong statement about the role that mathematics education
exercises in shaping the students’ foregrounds in a way that might be
characterized as violent. It is such forms of violence that the Algebra Project
was trying to cope with, in the most direct way, by adding more
possibilities to the students’ foregrounds.
A radically diﬀerent formation of possibilities is expressed by Lupes, one
of Gutstein’s students:
With every single thing about math that I learned came something else. Sometimes I learned
more of other things instead of math. I learned to think of fairness, injustices and so forth
everywhere I see numbers distorted in the world. Now my mind is opened to so many new
things. I’m more independent and aware. I have learned to be strong in every way you can think
of it.
(Lupes, quoted from Gutstein, 2003, p. 37)
rough his mathematic education, Lupes came to see the world
diﬀerently. He learned about fairness and injustice. His life-world anged;

his foreground as well. We see meaning as a network of relationships
within life-worlds, but simultaneously as relationships reaing beyond.
us we ﬁnd the meaning that students might associate with learning
activities in the classroom is related to experienced relationships between
their foregrounds and these activities. We can read Lupes’s comment as an
illustration of this idea.
Notions like life-world, foreground, meaning, and possibility also belong
to the extended family of open concepts related to democracy. Let us now
see how they might help directing pedagogical imagination. We illustrate
with two examples.
As part of a project taking place in a poorer neighborhood in Rio Claro, a
city in the interior of the São Paulo state, we were teaing a group of
students considered by teaers to be the most diﬃcult in the classroom.
ey were always causing problems by being noisy, ﬁghting, and
obstructing the lessons. ey had shown no interest whatsoever in
mathematics. We met with these 12 students in the computer room. It
turned out that it was not that diﬃcult to engage them in working with
computers. For many, sool was the only place where they had the
opportunity to tou a keyboard. So what kind of activities might make
sense to them? Many! For instance, working with dynamic geometry. ey
were fascinated by the movement on the screen, dragging a corner of a
triangle here and there. ey experienced many things for the ﬁrst time,
like the magic that in any triangle the sum of internal angles results always
in 180 degrees. is kind of activity seemed to make sense to them. But
why? Again, one need not think of meaning as having to do with
familiarity. Meaning also has to do with engaging students’ foregrounds. It
has to do with reaing out towards the horizons of the students’ life-
worlds. Working with computers might bring about new imaginations of
possibilities: “This could also be for me.”11
In a public sool also located in Rio Claro, the teaer whom we were

working with wanted to introduce project work in mathematics. She asked
her students what topics they were interested in. Several proposals were
put forward, but one captured the interest of all the students: they wanted
to work with surﬁng and suroards. e teaer, however, was dubious.
She did not consider this topic would provide any relevant possibilities. e
sool aer all was located in a poor neighborhood, and Rio Claro is far
from the sea. Most likely the students would never have been to the bea
and never have seen the ocean. How could working with surﬁng make any
sense to them? If one relates meaning ﬁrst of all to the students already-
established experiences and to their bagrounds, surﬁng seems to make no
sense—it is without “real” meaning. However, meaningfulness might also
be related to the students’ foregrounds, to their hopes and aspirations.
Considering their possible horizons, elaborating a project about surﬁng
could become extremely meaningful.
Exploring the properties of a triangle and considering the mathematics of
surﬁng may indeed be meaningful to many ildren, as the experience of
meaning has mu to do with features of the horizon of students’ life-
worlds, their foregrounds. Contested notions like foreground and meaning
might encourage pedagogical imagination to consider the construction of
possibilities for students and together with students.12 Su constructions
concern the students’ horizons. ey have to do with possibilities that
intentions for learning could be directed towards, and in this way provide
meaning for the students’ activities. us one might identify a fruitful route
for pedagogical imagination along the sequence of concepts: democracy,
possibility, horizons of life-worlds, foregrounds, and meaning.

An Open Landscape
e Modern Outlook provided one framing of the discussion of
mathematics education and democracy. Within the grand narratives of
Modernity, democracy included a range of intrinsic good qualities due to
the assumed “essence” of democracy. is framing stipulated a harmony
between educational processes and democratic ideals. More generally, it
outlined the existence of an overall harmony between scientiﬁc thinking,
mathematical rationality, tenological development, educational processes,
and social progress in general.
If we, however, anowledge an aporetic condition, we cannot assume
any su harmony. We cannot assume that notions su as social justice,
equality, and freedom maintain certain universal qualities. We cannot
assume that democracy is a transparent notion; instead it could be ﬁlled
with ambiguities. In general, we recognize democracy as well as its
extended family of related notions as being contested: they can be related
to very many different, and also contradictory, interests and priorities.
is does not mean, however, that we should try to leave aside su
notions. ey have important roles to play. Although they cannot provide
universal justiﬁcations of educational projects su as “mathematics
education for social justice,” “inclusive mathematics education,” or
“mathematics education for democracy,” they can provide resources for
pedagogical imagination. Contested concepts might help formulate new
educational possibilities. As a consequence, we consider “mathematics
education for democracy” to be an open landscape ﬁlled with tensions,
uncertainties, and challenges.

Acknowledgments
To some extent this text draws on Skovsmose and Penteado (2012), and we
thank the editors for permission to do so. We also want to thank Peter
Gates, Denival Bioo Filho, Renato Marcone, Lessandra Marcelly Silva, and
Guilherme Gomes da Silva for their many helpful comments and
suggestions.

Notes
1. For a discussion of the notion of progress, see Bury (1932/1955) and Nisbet (1980).
2. A fascinated study of the intimate relationship between linguistic studies and a racist outlook is
found in Bernal (1987).
3. e notion of “essentially contested concept” has been discussed in Gallie, (1956), while the also
related notion of “explosive concepts” has been discussed in Skovsmose (2005).
4. In Ancient Greek, aporia could refer to “a question for discussion,” “a diﬃculty” or “a puzzle.”
e origin of the word is a-poria, whi means “without poria,” whi means. “without
direction.” e dialogues of the younger Plato are oen aracterized as aporetic. Here
conﬂicting interpretations of a philosophic issue are presented, but the very conﬂict remains
unsolved. For a discussion of aporia, see Part 3 in Skovsmose (2005).
5. In Aguilar and Zavaleta (2012) one ﬁnds a comprehensive review of literature concerning
mathematics education and democracy. See also Brijlall, Bansilal, and Moore-Russo (2012),
Daher (2012), Khuzwayo and Bansilal (2012), Orrill (2001), Skovsmose (1990, 1998), Skovsmose
and Valero (2001, 2002), Skovsmose and Penteado (2012), Vithal (2010, 2012), Vithal and
Skovsmose (2012), Tate (1996), and Woodrow (1997).
6. An important presentation of this area is found in Mellin-Olsen (1987). Profound explorations of
politics of mathematics education are found in Powell and Frankenstein (Eds.) (1997), Gutstein
(2012b), Valero (2002), and Vithal (2003). See also Skovsmose and Greer (eds.), (2012), whi has
the subtitle “Critique and Politics of Mathematics Education.” Further studies are found in, for
instance, Alrø, Ravn, and Valero (2010), Appelbaum (1995), Johnston and Yasukawa (2001),
Martin (2009), Pais (2012), and Vithal (1999).
7. See, for instance Mehrtens (1993) for a study of mathematics education during the Nazi period
in Germany.
8. See, for instance, Skovsmose (2012).
9. See Skovsmose, Valero, and Ravn Christensen (2009) for discussions of university education and
Skovsmose (2009b) for a discussion of “critical expertise.”
10. In these comments about mathematics in society and tenology we have not referred to
ethnomathematics interpreted as the mathematics of marginalized groups. It is, however,

important to reﬂect on all forms of mathematics. One needs to consider all forms of
ethnomathematics in action and the possible qualities of su actions: Could they be risky,
expensive, benevolent, brutal, cynical, eﬃcient, etc.? Could they include “horrors” and well as
“wonders”? Our point is that also any form of ethnomathematics is subjected to aporetic
conditions.
11. See also Penteado and Skovsmose (2009), Skovsmose and Penteado (2011, 2012).
12. e importance of addressing the students’ perspective has, also been emphasized by Martin
(2009), Mhlolo and Schäfer (2012).

References
Alrø, H., Ravn, O., & Valero, P. (Eds.) (2010). Critical mathematics education: Past, present, and
future. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Aguilar, M. S., & Zavaleta, J.G.M. (2012). On the links between mathematics education and
democracy: 
A 
literature 
review. Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Appelbaum, P.M. (1995). Popular culture, educational discourse, and mathematics. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Baber, S. A. (2007). Interplay of citizenship, education and mathematics: Formation of foregrounds of
Pakistani immigrants in Denmark. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Aalborg: Aalborg
University.
Bauman, Z. (1989). Modernity and the holocaust. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press & Blawell
Publishing.
Beck, U. (1992). Risk society. London: Sage Publications. (First German edition 1986.)
Beck, U. (1999). World risk society. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Benn, S. I., & Peters, R. S. (1959). Social principles of the democratic state. London: Allen & Unwin.
Bernal, M. (1987). Bla Athena: Afroasiatic roots of classical civilization: Vol. 1. e fabrication of
Ancient Greece, 1785–1985. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Bohman, J., & Rehg, W. (Eds.). (1997). Deliberative democracy: Essays on reason and politics.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Brijlall, D., Bansilal, S., & Moore-Russo, D. (2012). Exploring teaers’ conceptions of representations
in mathematics through the lens of positive deliberative interaction. Pythagoras, 33(2). Retrieved
from www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Bury, J. B. (1955). e idea of progress: An inquiry into its origin and growth. With an introduction
by Charles A. Bead. New York: Dover Publications. (First published 1932.)
Castells, M. (1996). e information age: Economy, society and culture: Vol . 1. e Rise of the
Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Castells, M. (1997). e information age: Economy, society and culture: Vol. 2 . e Power of
Identity). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Castells, M. (1998). e information age: Economy, society and culture: Vol . 3. End of Millennium).
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Chronaki, A. (2010). Revisiting mathemacy: A process-reading of critical mathematics education. In
H. Alrø, O. Ravn, & P. Valero (Eds.), Critical mathematics education: Past, present and future (pp.
31–49). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Daher, W. (2012). Student teaers’ perceptions of democracy in the mathematics classroom:
Freedom, 
equality 
and 
dialogue. Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
D’Ambrosio, U. (1994). Cultural framing of mathematics teaing and learning. In R. Biehler, R. W.
Solz, R. Strasser, & B. Winkelmann (Eds.), Didactics of mathematics as a scientiﬁc discipline
(pp. 443–455). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
D’Ambrosio, U. (2006). Ethnomathematics: Link between transitions and modernity. Roerdam:
Sense Publishers.
D’Ambrosio, U. (2012). A broad concept of social justice. In A. A. Wager & D. W. Stinson (Eds.),
Teaing mathematics for social justice: Conversations with mathematics educators (pp. 201–
213). Reston, VA: National Council of Mathematics Teachers.
Dewey, J. (1963). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company (First
edition 1938.)
Dewey, J. (1966). Democracy and education. New York: The Free Press (First edition 1916).
Dewey, J. (1974). On education. (R. D. Archambault, Ed.) Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Forgasz, H., & Rivera, F. (Eds.) (2012). Towards equity in mathematics education: Gender, culture,
and diversity. New York: Springer.
Foucault, M. (1991). Discipline and punish: e birth of the prison. London: Penguin Books. (First
French edition 1975.)
Frankenstein, M. (2012). Beyond math content and process: Proposals for underlying aspects of social
justice education. In A. A. Wager & D. W. Stinson (Eds.), Teaching mathematics for social justice:
Conversations with mathematics educators (pp. 49–62). Reston, VA: National Council of
Mathematics Teachers.
Gallie, W. B. (1956). Essentially contested concepts. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 56, 167–
198.

Gates, P. (2006). e place of equity and social justice in the history of PME. In A. Gutérrez & P.
Boero (Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of mathematics education: Past, present
and future (pp. 367–402). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Gellert, U., & Jablonka, E. (2009). e demathematising eﬀect of tenology: Calling for critical
competence. In P. Ernest, B. Greer, & B. Sriraman (Eds.), Critical issues in mathematics education
(pp. 19–24). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Swartzman, S., Sco, P., & Trow, M. (1994). e new
production of knowledge: e dynamics of science and resear in contemporary societies .
London: Sage Publications.
Greer, B. Mukhopadhyay, S., Powell, A. B., & Nelson-Barber, S. (Eds.) (2009). Culturally responsive
mathematics education. New York: Routledge.
Gutstein, E. (2003). Teaing and learning mathematics for social justice in an urban, Latino sool.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 34, 37–73.
Gutstein, E. (2006). Reading and writing the world with mathematics: Toward a pedagogy for social
justice. New York & London: Routledge.
Gutstein, E. (2012a). Reﬂections on teaing and learning mathematics for social justice in urban
sools. In A. A. Wager & D. W. Stinson (Eds.), Teaing mathematics for social justice:
Conversations with mathematics educators (pp. 63–78). Reston, VA: National Council of
Mathematics Teachers.
Gutstein, E. (2012b). Mathematics as a weapon in a struggle. In O. Skovsmose & B. Greer (Eds.),
Opening the cage: Critique and politics of mathematics education (pp. 23–48). Roerdam: Sense
Publishers.
Hannaford, C. (1998). Mathematics teaing is democratic education. ZDM: e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 98(6), 181–187.
Healy, L., & Fernandes, S.H.A.A. (2011). e role of gestures in the mathematical practices of those
who do not see with their eyes. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 77, 157–174.
Husserl, E. (1970). e crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology . (D. Car,
Trans.) Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (First German version 1936.)
Jablonka, E. (2010). Reﬂections on mathematical modelling. In H. Alrø, O. Ravn, & P. Valero (Eds.),
Critical mathematics education: Past, present and future (pp. 89–100). Roerdam: Sense

Publisher.
Jablonka, E., & Gellert, U. (2007). Mathematisation—demathematisation. In U. Gellert & E. Jablonka
(Eds.), Mathematization and de-mathematization: Social, philosophical and educational
ramifications (pp. 1–18). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Johnston, B., & Yasukawa, K. (2001). Numeracy: Negotiating the world through mathematics. In B.
Atweh, H. Forgasz, & B. Nebres (Eds.), Sociocultural research on mathematics education (pp. 279–
294). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Khuzwayo, H. B., & Bansilal, S. (2012). Granting learners an authentic voice in the mathematics
classroom for the beneﬁt of both the teaer and the learner. Pythagoras, 33(2). Retrieved from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Locke, J. (1988). Two treatises of government. (P. Lasle, Ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press. (First published 1689.)
Lyotard, J. F. (1984). e postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. (G. Bennington & B.
Massuni, Trans.) Manchester: Manchester University Press. (Original French edition 1979.)
Marcone, R., & Penteado, M. G. (2013).Teaing mathematics for blind students: A allenge at
university. International Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 3, 23–35.
Martin, D. B. (2009). Mathematics teaing, learning, and liberation in the lives of bla ildren.
New York: Routledge.
Mehrtens, H. (1993). e social system of mathematics and National Socialism: A survey. In S.
Restivo, J. P. van Bendegem, & R. Fisher, R. (Eds.), Math worlds: Philosophical and social studies
of mathematics and mathematics education (pp. 219–246). Albany, NY: State University of New
York Press.
Mellin-Olsen, S. (1987). e politics of mathematics education. Dordret, e Netherlands: Reidel
Publishing Company.
Mhlolo, M. K., & Säfer, M. (2012). Towards empowering learners in a democratic mathematics
classroom: To what extent are teaers’ listening orientations conducive to and respectful of
learners’ 
thinking? Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Nisbet, R. A. (1980). History of the idea of progress. New York: Basic Books.
Orrill, R. (2001). Mathematics, numeracy, and democracy. In L. A. Steen (Ed.), Mathematics and

democracy. e case for quantitative literacy  (pp. 8−20). Princeton, NJ: e National Council on
Education and the Disciplines & The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation.
Pais, A. (2012). A critical approa to equity. In O. Skovsmose & B. Greer (Eds.), Opening the cage:
Critique and politics of mathematics education (pp. 49–92). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Penteado, M. G., & Skovsmose, O. (2009). How to draw with a worn-out mouse? Searing for social
justice through collaboration. Journal for Mathematics Teacher Education, 12(3), 217–230.
Powell, A. B., & Frankenstein, M. (Eds.). (1997). Ethnomathematics: Challenging Eurocentrism in
mathematics education. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Rawls, J. (1999). A theory of justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (First published 1971.)
Rousseau, J. J. (1968). The social contract. London: Penguin Books (First French edition 1762.)
Said, E. W. (1979). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Skovsmose, O. (1990). Mathematical education and democracy. Educational Studies in Mathematics,
21, 109–128.
Skovsmose, O. (1998). Linking mathematics education and democracy: Citizenship, mathematics
araeology, mathemacy and deliberative interaction. ZDM: e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 98(6), 195–203.
Skovsmose, O. (2005). Travelling through education: Uncertainty, mathematics, responsibility .
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Skovsmose, O. (2009a). Researing possibilities. In M. Setati, R. Vithal, C. Malcolm, & R. Dhunpath
(Eds.), Researing possibilities in mathematics, science and tenology education (pp. 105–119).
New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Skovsmose, O. (2009b). Towards a critical professionalism in university science and mathematics
education. In O. Skovsmose, P. Valero, & O. Ravn Christensen (Eds.), University sciences and
mathematics education in transition (pp. 325–346). New York: Springer.
Skovsmose, O. (2012). Symbolic power, roboing, and surveilling. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 80(1), 119–132.
Skovsmose, O. (2014). Foregrounds. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Skovsmose, O., & Greer, B. (Eds.) (2012). Opening the cage: Critique and politics of mathematics
education. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Skovsmose, O., & Penteado, M. G. (2011). Gheoes in the classroom and the construction of

possibilities. In B. Atweh, M. Graven, W. Secada, & P. Valero. (eds.), Mapping equity and quality
in mathematics education (pp. 77–90). New York: Springer.
Skovsmose, O., & Penteado, M. G. (2012). Mathematics education and democracy: An on-going
allenge. In S. Kafoussi, C. Skoumpourdi & F. Kalavasis (Eds.), International Journal for
Mathematics in Education, 4, 15–29.
Skovsmose, O., & Valero, P. (2001). Breaking political neutrality: e critical engagement of
mathematics education with democracy. In B. Atweh, H. Forgasz, & B. Nebres (Eds.),
Sociocultural resear on mathematics education (pp. 37–55). Mahwah, NJ, & London: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Skovsmose, O., & Valero, P. (2002). Democratic access to powerful mathematical ideas. In L. English
(Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (pp. 383–407). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Skovsmose, O., Valero, P., & Ravn Christensen, O. (Eds.) (2009). University sciences and mathematics
education in transition. New York: Springer.
Sriraman, B. (Ed.) (2008). e Montana Mathematics Enthusiast: Monograph 1. International
perspectives on social justice in mathematics education. Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishing, Inc.
Swanson, D., & Appelbaum, P. (2012). Refusal as a democratic catalyst for mathematics education
d e v e l o p m e n t , Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from
www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Tate, W. F. (1996). Mathematizing and the democracy: e need for an education that is
multicultural and social reconstructionist. In C. A. Grant & M. L. Gómez (Eds.), Making
sooling multicultural: Campus and classroom (pp. 185–201). Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Valero, P. (2002). Reform, democracy, and mathematics education: Towards a socio-political frame
for understanding ange in the organization of secondary sool mathematics. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. Department of Curriculum Resear, e Danish University of Education,
Copenhagen.
Valero, P., García, G., Camelo, F., Mancera, G., & Romero, J. (2012). Mathematics education and the
dignity 
of 
being. Pythagoras, 
33(2). 
Retrieved 
from

www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21
Vithal, R. (1999). Democracy and authority: A complementarity in Mathematics Education? ZDM:
The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 99(1), 27–36.
Vithal, R. (2003). In sear of a pedagogy of conﬂict and dialogue for mathematics education.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Vithal, R. (2009). Researing, and learning mathematics at the margin: From “shelter” to sool. In
P. Ernest, B. Greer, & B. Sriraman (Eds.), Critical issues in mathematics education (pp. 475–484).
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Vithal R. (2010). Democratising mathematics education doctoral resear teaing and learning:
Undoing the North-South divide. In H. Alrø, O. Ravn, & P. Valero, P. (Eds.), Critical mathematics
education: Past, present and future (pp. 197–207). Rotterdam: Sense Publisher.
Vithal, R. (2012). Mathematics education, democracy and development: Exploring connections.
Pythagoras, 33(2). Retrieved from www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21.
Vithal, R. & Skovsmose, O. (Eds.) (2012). Mathematics education, democracy and development.
Pythagoras, 33(2). Retrieved from www.pythagoras.org.za/index.php/pythagoras/issue/view/21.
Volmink, J. (1994). Mathematics by all. In S. Lerman (Ed.), Cultural perspectives on the mathematics
classroom (pp. 51–68). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wager, A. A., & Stinson, D. W. (Eds.) (2012). Teaing mathematics for social justice: Conversations
with mathematics educators. Reston, VA: National Council of Mathematics Teachers.
Woodrow, D. (1997). Democratic education: Does it exist—especially for mathematics education? For
the Learning of Mathematics, 17(3), 11–16.
Wright-Mills, C. (1959). The sociological imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

15 Toward a Sociology of Mathematics
Education
Examining Democratic Access in U.S.
Schools
Celia Rousseau Anderson
University of Memphis
William F. Tate
Washington University in St. Louis
Historically, resear in mathematics education has been more closely aligned with the scientiﬁc
resear movement…. e traditional paradigmatic boundaries of mathematics education are
drawn from two ﬁelds of study—mathematics and psyology…. Most discussions related to
“democratic access” are limited to a focus on classrooms, and more speciﬁcally, individual
student cognition.
(Tate & Rousseau, 2002, p. 273)
In a previous edition of this Handbook, we observed that the focus of
resear on equity or democratic access had, to that point, been on
classrooms and individual students within those classrooms (Tate &
Rousseau, 2002). We also pointed to the paradigmatic foundations of mu
of mathematics education resear—mathematics and psyology. Since
that time, resear on equity and democratic access has begun to expand
beyond the walls of the classroom and beyond the psyological focus of
earlier solarship. In this edition of the Handbook, we take a new look at
the existing resear and recent trends related to democratic access and
propose future directions that would expand further the paradigmatic

boundaries of mathematics education.
As we have in previous editions of this Handbook, we focused our
review and analysis in this apter on social science studies conducted to
beer understand mathematics education in the United States (Rousseau-
Anderson & Tate, 2008; Tate & Rousseau, 2002). While there are certainly
similarities in the sooling conditions of various countries, we make no
claim that our review is global in nature. In fact, one of the fundamental
arguments that we make in this apter is the necessity to examine issues
of democratic access with an eye on the context. For this reason, we have
chosen to focus on democratic access in U.S. schools.
To illustrate the importance of context, we oﬀer a speciﬁc case within a
U.S. sool. e case was part of a larger study conducted by one of the
authors. We use this vignee to set the stage for the discussion of the recent
resear and to explore a framework for equity solarship in mathematics
education. We will revisit the vignee at various points throughout the
chapter.
It is important to note at the outset that this vignee is situated in a
speciﬁc context that we describe as “urban.” Moreover, we also make
repeated reference throughout the apter to resear related to the
conditions of urban sools. Because solars use the descriptor “urban” in
many diﬀerent ways, we seek here to clarify our use of the term. In the
Handbook of Urban Education (Milner & Lomotey, 2014), the editors
outline three of the primary ways used by contributors to frame “urban”
education: the size of the city, the students in the sools, and the resources
available to sools. While these three aspects of urban education are
related, we use “urban” in this apter in a manner consistent with the ﬁrst
approa—as a descriptor of a city environment, reﬂecting a dense, large,
metropolitan area. Like Milner (2012), we anowledge that even within
this framing of “urban,” there are diﬀerent realities for sools that are
related to the size, history, and resources of the city. It is, in fact, the

contextual signiﬁcance of the sool’s location that is the focus of this
apter. We concur with Small’s (2014) argument that “diﬀerences among
cities maer … To ignore heterogeneity for the sake of simpliﬁcation is to
favor convenience over common sense, to risk having a sear for a single
aretype slip our thinking into stereotype” (para 21 and 22). Whether
urban or non-urban, we assert that the issue of “place” is important for
understanding opportunity to learn in mathematics education. Using the
following vignee, we seek to illustrate how the speciﬁc urban seing
potentially shapes mathematics teaching at this school.

Urban Middle School: Classroom Vignette
ere were 16 students in the classroom: 14 African American students and
2 Latino students. ere were nine girls and seven boys. e students were
arranged into groups of four and were completing a worksheet. e
worksheet included two tables that the students were to ﬁll in with the
numbers of vertices, faces, and edges of prisms and pyramids. e students
also had a reference sheet with drawings of prisms and pyramids.
As the activity progressed, several students raised their hands to ask
questions of the teaer. In most cases, an individual student asked the
teaer a question and the teaer responded directly to that individual,
while the other students in the same small group continued working on the
task. Aer geing the same question from multiple students, the teaer
made an announcement to the entire class, “Remember that I told you not
to do questions three and six. Mark those oﬀ on your paper.” e two
questions that the teaer eliminated asked the students to use the cases
they had recorded to make a generalization about the relationships
between the vertices, faces, and edges of any prism or pyramid.
As students ﬁnished the task, several conferred with others siing next to
them to compare answers. Once students were conﬁdent that they had
completed the task, they took out other assignments, oen from a diﬀerent
class (e.g., several students pulled out novels assigned for an English class).
Students in the same group did not necessarily ﬁnish the task at the same
time. A few students were still working when the teaer announced that
class was ending. She instructed the students to turn in their worksheets and
told them that they would discuss the activity the next day. As the class
ended, she said, “One thing I noticed is that many of you are still geing
mixed up on the diﬀerence between vertices, faces, and edges. And some of
you are not clear on the diﬀerence between a prism and a pyramid. We will
go back over that tomorrow.”

An interview with the teaer aer the lesson revealed that she decided
to omit the generalization questions because she believed that they would
be too diﬃcult for her students. She said that the students would either not
know how to respond to the questions or would become frustrated and
give up. For this reason, she believed that it was beer to skip these
questions. As she explained, her main goal was for the students to identify
vertices, faces, and edges and have an idea of what diﬀerent prisms and
pyramids looked like. She thought that this was an appropriate goal for the
students in her class. She also noted that the state standardized test included
questions that only asked the students to identity whether a ﬁgure was a
prism or pyramid and the number of vertices, faces, or edges. As a result,
she thought it was more appropriate to focus on the content that was
included on the test. e students in her classes had not been successful
previously on the state standardized test. During the year prior to the
observation, only 19% of students in the sool tested at a level considered
to be “proﬁcient” or “advanced” on the test. is compared with a
statewide rate of 47% proficient or advanced for the same year.
One approa to analyzing this classroom episode is to focus on the
aracteristics of the classroom instruction and the interactions within this
classroom. From this perspective, we note immediately that, although the
classroom was organized into small groups, there was very lile
collaboration apparent among the students. Most worked independently
within their groupings. Additionally, although the task involved counting
the vertices, faces, and edges of polyhedra, the students had only two-
dimensional renderings of the prisms and pyramids for reference. An
examination of the task itself revealed that the removal of the two
generalization questions signiﬁcantly altered the nature of the task. By
removing these questions, the teaer had eﬀectively anged the level of
cognitive demand (Stein, Smith, Henningsen, & Silver, 2009) of the task,
making it a procedural task involving counting. Additionally, the teaer’s

comments at the end of class focused on the students’ identiﬁcation of the
parts of the polyhedra, rather than their understanding of relationships
among these parts.
is “ﬁrst look” at the classroom has focused on the interactions among
students, the nature of the classroom task, and the teaer’s statements to
the class. If we were to extend this line of inquiry, we might analyze further
the interactions within this class session or extend the analysis to other
classroom episodes of this teaer. However, as yet, this analysis has not
interrogated directly issues of equity or opportunity to learn. In this chapter,
we seek to illustrate an approa to the study of equity in mathematics
education. We intend to use this vignee to provide examples of the central
questions related to the nature of democratic access in this setting.

Toward a Sociology of Mathematics Education1
Several solars have noted the growing aention to equity in mathematics
education (Lubienski, 2007). For example, Gutierrez (2013) noted that “‘talk’
of equity has become more mainstream in the mathematics education
community” (p. 2). Our own review of the mathematics education literature
for this apter conﬁrmed that solarship related to equity appears to have
grown signiﬁcantly since the previous editions of this Handbook were
prepared. Moreover, recent resear related to equity has pushed the
traditional boundaries of mathematics education. According to the National
Council of Teaers of Mathematics Resear Commiee (2005), this
expansion was necessary:
For researers to contribute more fully to equity, we may need to break with tradition, expand
boundaries, and cross into ﬁelds outside mathematics education and outside education…. e
complexity of teaing and learning, and its intersection with equity and social justice issues,
demands more than the narrow confines that any one field can provide.
(pp. 96–97)
In fact, several authors writing on equity have pointed to the inﬂuences of
ﬁelds beyond mathematics education. For example, in describing the
apters in their book on equity in mathematics classrooms, Nasir and
Cobb (2007) note that the contributors employ concepts from a range of
fields outside education.
Similarly, a recent Equity Special Issue of the JRME focused on issues of
power and identity. e editors aracterized these foci as reﬂective of the
“sociopolitical turn” in mathematics education resear. According to
Gutierrez (2013), the sociopolitical turn represents the shi in theoretical
perspectives that “see knowledge, power, and identity as interwoven and
arising from (and constituted within) social discourses” (p. 4). is shi has
required 
that 
solars expand beyond traditional boundaries of
mathematics education: “Conducting resear that highlights the dynamic

nature of identity and the production of power in social interactions
requires knowing multiple literatures outside the ﬁeld of mathematics
education and ﬁnding appropriate ways to draw upon them” (Gutierrez,
2013, p. 21). Gutierrez goes on to argue that solarship reﬂecting the
sociopolitical turn has come from researers with one foot in mathematics
education and the other foot in a different discipline.
One of the common places for this “other foot” to be found is in
sociology (Martin, 2009b, 2011; Nasir & de Royston, 2013; Stinson, 2006).
Sociology is one of the primary ﬁelds identiﬁed as contributing to
solarship representing the sociopolitical turn (Gutierrez, 2013; Nasir &
Cobb, 2007; Stinson, 2006; Stinson & Bullo, 2012). Yet, while the need to
expand the boundaries of mathematics education has been argued
extensively, there is an inherent tension in doing so. Lubienski (2007)
identiﬁes this as one of the allenges of doing work that interrogates
equity in the classroom. The need to have a foot in two distinct fields can be
diﬃcult, as it requires having a simultaneous grounding, both theoretical
and methodological, in mathematics education and sociology. However, it
is in this intersection that mu of the recent resear related to equity can
be found. Since mu of our own resear has spanned these two
disciplines, we seek in this apter to explore the intersection of
mathematics education and sociology and the ways that this intersection
both reﬂects and expands upon the more recent solarship on equity in
mathematics education.
We must ﬁrst anowledge that there is an existing body of solarship
in sociology of mathematics education that has informed scholarship related
to equity (Gutierrez, 2013; Gutierrez & Dixon-Roman, 2011). Speciﬁcally,
solars have previously outlined aracteristics of a perspective on the
sociology of mathematics education that aends to social aspects of and
inﬂuences on mathematics teaing and learning. For example, Dowling
(1998) describes his book e Sociology of Mathematics Education:

Mathematical Myth/Pedagogical Texts  as focusing on “the theoretical space
… concerned with paerns of relationships between individuals and groups
and the production and reproduction of these relationships in cultural
practices and in action” (p. 1). He further describes this space as an
intersection of “social activity theory” and school mathematics.
In addition, Restivo (2007) has also outlined a perspective on the
sociology of mathematics education. Speciﬁcally, Restivo describes the
sociology of mathematics education as the sociology of the mind in relation
to mathematics teaing and learning. According to Restivo and Bauspies
(2006), the sociology of mathematics education is “transforming the
sociology of mathematics and the sociology of the mind into pedagogical
tools for mathematics educators” (p. 198).
Similarly, Mesquita, Restivo, and D’Ambrosio (2011) draw aention to
the role of the sociology of mathematics in understanding mathematics
education. In particular, they focus on the social life of mathematics to
highlight the role of power and culture in establishing the mathematics that
is valued. They connect these social processes to mathematics education.
e sociology of mathematics has had a strong inﬂuence on mathematics education. It has
revealed the role of informal and non-formal mathematics in formal mathematical practices; it
has helped to explore all mathematics as an outcome of interactions among many social facts,
including economics and political and cultural acts.
(p. 53)
us, although they do not outline a sociology of mathematics education
per se, Mesquita and her colleagues connect the sociology of mathematics
to the structure of mathematics education, highlighting the importance of
taking a sociological perspective.
While anowledging the existing solarship on the sociology of
mathematics education, our approa to conceptualizing the integration of
sociology and mathematics education diﬀers in some ways from the work
described previously. In part, this diﬀerence is likely due to the site of

origin. We conceive of a sociology of mathematics education that would
reﬂect the application of the sociology of education to mathematics
education. In contrast to drawing from sociology of mathematics or
sociology in general, this approa would build on the existing resear
from sociology of education that focuses on equity and access. We believe
that grounding a sociology of mathematics education in this manner would
allow researers to more eﬀectively build upon the theoretical
perspectives and methodologies that have been utilized within sociology of
education and create a more robust framework for examining issues of
equity and access in school mathematics.
Sociology of education as a subﬁeld of sociology is dedicated largely to
the study of how formal sooling inﬂuences individuals and the ways
society aﬀects education (both formal and informal). Four major questions
that drive research in the sociology of education are as follows:
1. How does education socialize?
2. What role does education serve in credentialing?
3. How do various entities in society influence education?
4. What role does education play in creating and maintaining social
inequality?
In the following sections, we examine ea of these questions with regard
to resear in mathematics education. In this way, we seek to outline what
a sociology of mathematics education could look like and how it builds on
existing scholarship.

Socialization
One direction of recent research related to equity and democratic access can
be seen in the 2013 Special Equity Issue of the JRME. In describing the focus
of the issue, the members of the editorial panel note that they took a
particular approa to equity by seeking work that “highlighted how
identity and power play out in mathematics teaing and learning in
sools and in broader policies and practices of mathematics education”
(D’Ambrosio et al., 2013, p. 5). is focus on identity and power reﬂects
prominent themes of recent solarship related to equity and democratic
access. Moreover, this focus also reﬂects the socialization processes of
mathematics education. In other words, this solarship addresses the
question: How does mathematics education socialize?
e aention to power in recent mathematics education solarship
provides evidence of shis in the theoretical perspectives and disciplinary
orientations of researers who focus on equity. Moving from the
psyological and classroom-focused orientation of earlier work, more
recent resear has begun to explore the ways that larger social discourses
and relations shape the socialization of students and teaers within
mathematics. In particular, several solars have oﬀered a poststructural
perspective on power, drawing on the work of Foucault (Stinson, 2013;
Valero, 2007; Walshaw, 2013). For example, Valero (2007) describes power
as distributed in social relations and happening through “the everyday
participation of actors in social practices, in the creation of their meaning,
and in the constitution of their associated practices” (p. 226). Similarly,
Walshaw (2013) asserts that power is constituted in discourse “structuring
collective life and shaping individual identity” (p. 102). ese conceptions
draw aention to “the microphysics of power in mathematics education
practices” (Valero, 2007) and demand consideration of structures operating
both in and out of schools (Nasir & Cobb, 2007).

One example of a poststructural perspective on power can be seen in
Walshaw’s (2013) examination of the experiences of a secondary sool
student and a preservice teaer. Speciﬁcally, her analysis considers the
operation of governance and agency (or la thereof) in their experiences.
She argues that this approa sheds light onto the ways through whi
“power insinuates itself into the discourses and practices of sool and
classroom life” (p. 116). In other words, this resear reﬂects the ways that
power operates to socialize both students and teachers.
In addition, as indicated in the focus of the JRME Special Issue, a
signiﬁcant portion of the recent resear related to power in mathematics
education has simultaneously focused on the development of identity.
According to Martin (2006),
Mathematics identity refers to the dispositions and deeply held beliefs that individuals develop,
within their overall self-concept, about their ability to participate and perform eﬀectively in
mathematical contexts and to use mathematics to ange the conditions of their lives. A
mathematics identity encompasses a person’s self-understanding of himself or herself in the
context of doing mathematics. It also encompasses how others ‘construct’ us in relation to
mathematics.
(p. 206)
In this way, the study of mathematics identity overlaps with the discussion
of power in mathematics education. Researers with a focus on identity
“view the math classroom as both a space where students develop a sense
of themselves as doers and learners of math and where broader issues of
power and access play out in fundamental ways” (Nasir, Hand, & Taylor,
2008, p. 206). Mathematics instruction is viewed simultaneously as shaping
students’ understanding of the social and socio-mathematical norms (Yael
& Cobb, 1996) involved in learning mathematics as well as inﬂuencing
students’ understandings of themselves as mathematics learners (Martin,
2006).
For example, Varelas, Martin, and Kane (2012) highlight this

simultaneous inﬂuence through a framework that focuses on the interplay
between content learning and identity instruction. ey assert that
“integrally connected and intertwined with content learning (CL) is identity
construction (IC)—how ildren see themselves and how others see them
vis-à-vis disciplinary knowledge and practices” (p. 323). In describing
emerging resear on African American students, they note that
mathematics identities are “strong correlates” of mathematics success or
failure. Moreover, they cite the signiﬁcance of teaers’ classroom practices
in shaping students’ identities. One example of this inﬂuence can be seen in
Berry’s (2008) study of successful African American males in mathematics.
One of the key ﬁndings of his resear involved the signiﬁcance of identity.
According to Berry, ea of the themes that emerged from his resear
involved “identity-shaping experiences that describe how these boys shape
their understandings of and persistence with mathematics” (p. 477). is
aention to identity is one example of more recent trends in equity
research in mathematics education.
Berry’s study is also an example of the intersection between emerging
resear on identity and a concomitant focus on race. According to Martin
(2009a), a small number of solars “have begun to examine issues
pertaining to the co-construction of mathematics identity and racial identity
so as to beer understand the mathematical experiences, particularly
success of African American learners through their own voices” (p. 28).
Similarly, in their review of resear on culture in mathematics, Nasir et al.
(2008) cite a focus on racialized identities in mathematics classes as one of
three lenses that researers have used to understand culture and math
learning.
For example, like Berry, Stinson (2013) examined the experiences of
successful African American male students. In the study, he considers the
ways through whi the “discourses” from the larger sociocultural context
interacted with the identity formation of the students. He argues, in fact,

that the participants’ mathematics identities “cannot be fully understood in
their complexities decontextualized from how these young men negotiated
some of the broader unjust sociocultural discourses that surround African
American male adolescents” (p. 87). In this way, the identity formation
process has both classroom-based inﬂuences (through instruction) as well as
larger societal influences related to race and racial discourses.
e importance of understanding identity development as a process that
involves experiences and discourses from within sools and the larger
culture is also highlighted in Nasir and de Royston’s (2013) work. In their
analysis of the experiences of African American students, they note the
diﬀering value placed on students’ cultural capital depending on their
context and point to the role of power in this valuation. According to the
authors, their analyses “illustrated that race and identity are an important
part of understanding the access to cultural practices and the types of
capital expressed and taken up within them” (Nasir & de Royston, 2013, p.
283). ey further argue that understanding the ways that power operates
through the ascription of value to particular cultural practices is an
important direction for mathematics education research.
In a similar manner, Nasir and Shah (2011) have examined the ways that
“racialized narratives” shape students experiences. In particular, they
identify these racial narratives as “cultural artifacts” and describe how these
narratives shape students’ perceptions of self as well as their positioning of
other students’. According to Nasir and Shah, “racialized narratives about
students’ intellectual and mathematical abilities play a central role in
processes of positioning and identiﬁcation” (p. 27). ey assert that
understanding these narratives and how they play out in sools and
classrooms is critical for making sense of African American students’
mathematical identities and engagement.
e more recent focus on the racialized experiences of African American
students in mathematics is also reﬂected in edited volumes dedicated to this

topic (e.g. Leonard & Martin, 2013; Martin, 2009a). Several apters within
these volumes focused speciﬁcally on mathematics socialization. For
example, Jason’s (2009) apter from the edited volume Mathematics
Teaing, Learning, and Liberation in the Lives of Bla Children describes
the instructional practices of a middle-sool mathematics teaer and the
role of these practices in the socialization of two African American students.
Jason also interrogates the ways that larger discourses about students
shape what happens in the classroom. According to Jason, the teaer’s
classroom “as all classrooms, was a nexus of discourses about youth, about
mathematics, and about pedagogy. e local practices were inﬂuenced by
discourses about poor ildren of color and mathematics that circulated
outside of [the sool]” (p. 195). e study provides insight into the
interactions of the local context in shaping teaers’ expectations and,
subsequently, students’ experiences.
Ea of these recent areas of focus within equity resear in mathematics
education (power, identity, and race) represents a piece of the puzzle with
regard to addressing the question: How does mathematics education
socialize? Yet, as we seek to illustrate in the next sections, the factors
associated with the socialization function cannot be separated from the
other questions that frame a sociology of mathematics education. For
example, studies related to identity (e.g., Jason, 2009; Stinson, 2013) have
pointed to the role of society and larger sociocultural discourses in shaping
the socialization process. ese results point us ba to questions related to
the inﬂuence of society and the creation of inequality. us, the questions
that we use to frame the sociology of mathematics education are
interconnected and cannot be fully addressed in isolation. However, before
exploring the other questions that comprise the framework, we return
briefly to the opening vignette.

Vignette Revisited: How Does Mathematics
Education Socialize?
To illustrate further the nature of the more recent resear and the ways
that it expands beyond prior views of mathematics teaing and learning,
we return to the vignee described at the beginning of this apter.
Previously, we described one way to approa the analysis of the observed
classroom—an analysis that focused on issues of teaer instructional
practices, task selection, and student interaction. Certainly, su an analysis
is crucial in understanding the nature of mathematics instruction. Resear
on equity in mathematics education has expanded to consider additional
aspects of mathematics teaing and learning. For example, one approa
to understanding student learning and equity in the vignee classroom
could involve an examination of student identity. Consistent with resear
by Stinson (2013) and Berry (2008), we might focus on successful students
within this mathematics classroom and seek to understand the ways that
their mathematics identity is shaped by factors both within the sool and
within the larger society, including the ways that race and racial discourses
inﬂuence identity development. is aention to race might also involve an
investigation of the role of race in shaping instruction. For example, like
Jason (2009), we could examine the role of race and racial discourses in
shaping the teaer’s beliefs and expectations. Why did the teaer view
her students as unable or unwilling to complete the “hard” questions on the
polyhedra task? What is the role of race and the larger racial discourse in
shaping these expectations? And how did the low aievement of the
sool shape these expectations? Moreover, the aievement level of the
sool might also interact with issues of power and agency. Given the
accountability in this context, what level of surveillance did the teaer
experience with regard to the curriculum? How did that surveillance shape
her teaing practice or sense of agency with regard to the curriculum?

ese are but a few of the questions that we might seek to answer about
the socialization processes that are operational in this context.

Credentialing
In addition to its socialization function, mathematics education also serves
in credentialing. Our apter in the previous edition of this Handbook
(Rousseau-Anderson & Tate, 2008) explored the diﬀerential credentialing
opportunities for both students and teaers in U.S. sools. In the apter
entitled, “Still Separate, Still Unequal: Democratic Access to Mathematics in
U.S. Sools,” we examined several diﬀerent “levels” of inequity in
mathematics education, including diﬀerential access to coursework and
teaer quality. Students’ access to speciﬁc coursework and teaers’ levels
of preparation reﬂect the credentialing function of mathematics education.
In this apter, we describe recent resear as well as shis in the landscape
with regard to the credentialing function of mathematics education.
College-preparatory courses in mathematics serve a credentialing
function for students, indicating whi students have the academic
preparation for success in postsecondary mathematics. As a result,
examining access to su courses (and the credentials they oﬀer) is crucial
from an equity perspective. In the previous edition of this Handbook, we
reviewed several studies that demonstrated that predominantly minority
sools are less likely to provide access to college preparatory courses than
sools with majority White populations. is diﬀerential access applied to
courses at several diﬀerent levels of mathematics: early Algebra I (in eighth
grade), advanced mathematics courses beyond Algebra II in high sool,
and Advanced Placement courses in high sool that oﬀer college credit. In
general, these studies revealed that sools with higher proportions of
students of color and low-income students oﬀered fewer of the courses that
serve to credential a student as being on a college-bound trajectory
(Rousseau-Anderson & Tate, 2008).
One approa to addressing credentialing diﬀerences involves reducing
access to lower-level courses and ensuring that more students take higher-

level courses. As we outlined in an earlier edition of this Handbook, past
resear has suggested that constraining the curriculum in this manner is
part of creating more equitable opportunities (Tate & Rousseau, 2002). Yet,
mu of this resear has utilized large-scale, national data sets or smaller
case studies of sools to compare sools that oﬀer diﬀerent levels of
access to credentialing courses. What happens when the goal of a more
constrained curriculum is applied as a universal policy?
Allensworth, Nomi, Montgomery, and Lee (2009) examined the
implementation of a mandated college preparatory curriculum in Chicago.
e policy established ninth grade Algebra I as a requirement, eﬀectively
eliminating lower-level remedial mathematics courses. e study by
Allensworth and her colleagues explored the eﬀects of this universal
mandate in Chicago Public Sools. e results of their study indicate that,
at least at one level, the policy was successful in equalizing opportunities for
the credential represented in Algebra I. Once implemented, the policy
eliminated racial disparities in Algebra I enrollment that existed prior to the
curriculum ange. Additionally, students in all ability groups were more
likely to earn an Algebra I credit by the end of ninth grade, a credential that
students in the lower-level ability groups had been denied previously.
However, the results also indicated that simply mandating a constrained
curriculum might not be an eﬀective means to aieve the goals of
promoting access to advanced mathematics and further credentialing.
Despite the improved access to ninth grade Algebra I, students were no
more likely to obtain credits in upper-level mathematics or aend a four-
year college (Allensworth et al., 2009). According to Allensworth and her
colleagues, “most of the beneﬁts of the ‘College Prep for All’ policy
suggested by the extant resear were unrealized” (p. 383). e eﬀort to
improve the credentialing of students in mathematics through constraining
the curriculum met with limited success. While the researers suggested
several potential reasons for the limited impact, one of the issues that they

raised involves the preparation of teaers and the quality (as opposed to
the content) of instruction. e policy implemented in Chicago addressed
initially the content of instruction without intervening on the quality by
providing additional professional development for teachers.
Another approa to eliminating the problem of access to higher
mathematics education credentials is to raise state-mandated math
graduation requirements. Since the release of recommendations found in A
Nation at Risk (National Commission on Excellence in Education, 1983),
there has been a near-universal commitment at the state level to demand
more mathematics and science content of all high sool students in the
United States. To aieve this goal states have increased their course
graduation requirements (CGR) for the high sool diploma. Raising CGRs
is thought to improve the intellectual preparedness of graduates for
postsecondary education. Very lile aention has been paid to the intended
and unintended consequences of this policy strategy on the credentialing
function of sools. Plunk, Tate, Bierut, and Grucza (2014) examined the
eﬀects of raising mathematics and science CGRs in 44 states on high sool
students’ rates of sool dropout, beginning college, and obtaining any
college degree. Using logistic regression with Census and American
Community Survey data (n = 2,892,444), they found that high sool
dropout rates increased as states mandated more math and science CGRs,
reaing 11.41% when students were required to take six math and science
requirements, compared to 8.6% for students without a requirement. Results
also varied by gender and race, with the dropout rate for some
demographic groups increasing by as mu as ﬁve percentage points. eir
resear suggests that many sools were ill-prepared to support students
for the tougher mandated graduation standards. In addition, for students
exposed to higher math and science graduation requirements who do
graduate, there was no across-the-board increase in college enrollment or
college degree aainment. Diﬀerences in subgroups based on sex and

race/ethnicity included higher CGRs being associated with a decrease in the
likelihood of Bla women and Hispanic men and women enrolling in
college aer graduating from high sool. However, higher CGRs were
associated with an increase in the likelihood that Hispanics and
nonmigrant2 Black women who enrolled in college would earn a degree.
Plunk et al. (2014) argued that the negative eﬀect of increasing math and
science CGRs on high sool dropout paerns extends beyond the
credentialing function. For example, Loner and Morei (2001) estimated
that a 1% reduction in the national high sool dropout rate would have
resulted in 400 fewer murders and 8,000 fewer assaults, and that a 1%
reduction for all men ages 20–60 would save the United States as mu as
$1.4 billion per year in reduced costs from crime incurred by victims and
society at large. ese cost-beneﬁt estimates highlight the relevance of the
math and science CGR eﬀect on high sool dropout. In addition,
Carnevale, Rose, and Cheah (2011) estimated that over a 40-year career,
earning a high sool diploma adds 33% more to lifetime earnings, whi
translates to almost $9,000 per year. ere is a signiﬁcant economic penalty
for individuals who do not complete high sool. us, student
credentialing maers because there are individual and societal
consequences.
Moreover, the importance of credentialing also extends to teaers. e
preparation and credentialing of teaers have been demonstrated as a
critical predictor of student aievement and learning. It is also one of the
key factors in any examination of equity and democratic access. “In the
United States, teachers are the most inequitably distributed school resource”
(Darling-Hammond, 2010, p. 40). As we outlined in the previous edition of
this Handbook, teaer quality in U.S. sools varies greatly by the students
served. Students of color and students from low-income bagrounds are
more likely to have less-qualiﬁed teaers, as measured by certiﬁcation
status, degree, and teaing experience (Rousseau-Anderson & Tate, 2008).

Moreover, these diﬀerences in teaer quality are related to diﬀerences in
aievement. According to Darling-Hammond (2010),“studies have found
that, at the sool, district, and even state levels, the proportion of teaers
who are inexperienced, underprepared, or uncertiﬁed has a signiﬁcant
negative eﬀect on student aievement aer controlling for student
aracteristics like poverty and language baground” (p. 49). us, the
issue of teaer credentialing is crucial for any understanding of the nature
of inequity in U.S. sools. In order to beer understand issues related to
teaer credentialing, we examine resear related to teaer shortages,
teacher turnover, and alternative pathways to teaching.
According to Ingersoll and Perda (2009), “contemporary educational
thought holds that one of the pivotal causes of inadequate sool
performance is the inability of sools to adequately staﬀ classrooms with
qualiﬁed teaers, especially in ﬁelds su as mathematics and science” (p.
1). ey note that primary causes commonly associated with this shortage
are teaer retirement and inadequate production of new teaers.
However, in a study of national data on teaer staﬃng, they found that,
while the perception of a shortage was accurate, the reasons behind the
shortage were inconsistent with the conventional wisdom. Of the sool
subjects included in the study, mathematics experienced the most serious
hiring and recruitment problems (Ingersoll & Perda, 2009). e results
indicated that 54% of secondary sools had job openings for mathematics
teaers and about 41% of these indicated serious diﬃculties ﬁlling these
openings. In other words, 22% of all secondary sools in the national
sample had diﬃculties ﬁlling mathematics positions with qualiﬁed teaers.
e researers also found that, contrary to popular belief, the reasons for
this shortage were not an inadequate production of new teaers to keep
pace with retirements. Even in mathematics, the number of new teaers
produced from teaer preparation programs exceeded retirements. Rather,
the shortage appeared to occur when preretirement turnover was taken

into account. Speciﬁcally, new teaer production does not keep pace with
the number of teaers leaving before retirement. “Turnover is a major
factor behind the problems that many schools have staffing their classrooms
with qualiﬁed mathematics, science, and other teaers” (Ingersoll &
Merrill, 2013 p. 23).
Moreover, the turnover is not equitably distributed across states, districts,
or sools within districts. According to Ingersoll and Merrill (2013), 45% of
teaer turnover of all public sools in 2004–2005 took place in just 25% of
sools. High-poverty, high-minority, urban, and rural sools had the
highest rates of turnover. Similar results on the distribution of teaer
turnover have been found in other studies. For example, in a study by
Frankenberg (2006) of over 1,000 teaers, 61% of teaers in sools with
the lowest shares of Bla and Latino students reported that they are not at
all likely to leave teaing in the next few years, while less than half (40%)
of teaers in high-minority sools expressed similar conﬁdence that they
will be teaing in three years. Similarly, in a study of Georgia public
sools, Freeman, Scaﬁdi, and Sjoquist (2005) found that teaer turnover
(speciﬁcally, White teaer turnover) was mu greater in sools with
higher percentages of Black students.
Why are higher rates of teaer turnover in high-minority and high-
poverty sools an equity concern? In part, the unequal distribution of
teaer turnover is a concern due to its relationship to teaer experience.
Given the association between teaer experience and aievement (Fetler,
1999), the higher levels of teaer turnover and lower levels of teaer
experience point to diﬀerent opportunities in high-minority and low-
income sools. However, additional resear suggests that the impact of
teaer turnover on aievement may go beyond teaer experience and
may also vary by context. A study by Ronfeldt, Loeb, and Wyoﬀ (2013)
of students in New York City conﬁrms the negative impact of teaer
turnover on student aievement. e results indicate that, while some of

the negative impact of teaer turnover is explained by anges in the
distribution of teaer experience, a substantial amount remained
unexplained by longevity. Even in cases in whi teaers of comparable
levels of experience replaced the teaers leaving the system, student
aievement was lower. In addition, Ronfeldt and colleagues noted that
even the aievement of the students whose teaers did not leave was
worse in years of higher turnover, and this eﬀect was found mostly in
lower-performing sools. “Results suggest that teaer turnover has a
signiﬁcant and negative impact on student aievement in both math and
ELA. Moreover, teaer turnover is particularly harmful to the
aievement of students in sools with larger populations of low-
performing and Bla students” (Ronfeldt et al., 2013, p. 30). us, one of
the equity considerations with regard to teaer credentialing involves the
inequitable distribution of teacher turnover.
One strategy for addressing turnover and the subsequent teaer
shortfall in hard-to-staﬀ sools and districts has been to provide
alternative pathways to teaing. ese pathways reduce the requirements
for initial entry to teaing, allowing teaers to begin teaing before
completing all of the requirements for licensure (Clark et al., 2013; Darling-
Hammond, Holtzman, Gatlin, & Heilig, 2005; Heilig & Jez, 2010). One of the
primary examples of these alternative pathways is Tea for America
(TFA). Founded in 1990, Tea for America is a national organization that
recruits, selects, trains, and supports new teaers (Clark et al., 2013).
According to its Web site (www.teachforamerica.org), the organization
serves 48 sites, including several of the nation’s urban sool districts. e
organization typically recruits individuals directly from undergraduate
programs. e Tea for America “corps members” need not have
completed any previous teaer preparation training. ey participate in a
ﬁve-week training program over the summer before beginning full-time
teaing. ey commit to tea for two years and participate in additional

training toward licensure during those two years. While the overall number
of Tea for America corps members is small, relative to the larger
population of U.S. teaers, the expedited pathway to teaing represented
by TFA and the concentration of the program in high-minority, low-income
sool districts makes TFA a noteworthy entity in any discussion of teaer
credentialing and democratic access in mathematics education in U.S.
schools.
Some resear suggests that TFA corps members may be making a
positive impact on mathematics teaing and learning in the high-needs
sools that they serve. A recent report prepared for the Institute of
Education Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education (Clark et al., 2013)
compared TFA corps members to teaers who either entered teaing
through a traditional teaer preparation program or through another
alternative certiﬁcation program. e results of this study indicated that, in
mathematics, TFA teaers were more eﬀective than teaers with whom
they were compared. Students of TFA corps members outperformed
students of traditionally licensed teaers on end-of-year mathematics
assessments at a statistically signiﬁcant level. ey also scored higher than
teachers from other alternative licensure programs.
Similarly, Kane, Rooﬀ, and Staiger (2008) compared TFA corps
members with uncertiﬁed teaers and traditionally licensed teaers in
New York City sools. ey also found that students in the classrooms of
TFA corps members scored higher relative to traditionally certiﬁed
teaers, controlling for years of experience and students’ prior
aievement. However, the TFA corps members exhibited signiﬁcantly
lower retention rates than teaers entering through other routes. e ﬁve-
year retention rate for traditionally certiﬁed teaers in the population was
approximately 50%, compared to only 18% for TFA corps members.
Despite the positive results in some studies, the picture with respect to
the eﬀectiveness of TFA corps members and other alternatively licensed

teaers is not completely straightforward. For example, in a longitudinal
study of the Houston, Texas, sool district, Darling-Hammond et al. (2005)
found that the eﬀectiveness of TFA corps members varied. TFA corps
members who had completed the requirements to aieve a standard
certification performed at a level equivalent to other certified teachers, after
controlling for several factors, including experience. However, over the
period covered by the study, researers found that TFA corps members
were less and less likely to have aieved certiﬁcation and their overall
eﬀectiveness anged. “When compared to less well qualiﬁed teaers, TFA
teaers appeared to have a neutral or positive eﬀect. When compared to a
pool of teaers who were on average beer qualiﬁed, TFA teaers
appeared to have a negative eﬀect” (p. 22). Similarly, Darling-Hammond
and her colleagues note that other large, well-controlled, longitudinal
studies have shown similar results. “Teaers who entered teaing without
full preparation … were signiﬁcantly less eﬀective when they started than
fully prepared beginning teaers working with similar students” (p. 47).
Yet, the gap in eﬀectiveness closed once alternatively licensed teaers,
including TFA corps members, had completed the certification process.
us, the picture with regard to the eﬀectiveness of TFA is not entirely
clear. It is beyond the scope of this apter to provide a more
comprehensive review of the resear literature related to TFA or to
aempt to reconcile the diﬀerences in results. Our purpose in highlighting a
portion of the resear on TFA is to suggest that the landscape of teaer
credentialing is complex and context dependent. Based on the body of
existing resear, we would argue that the optimal scenario regarding
teaer credentialing would be a fully certiﬁed teaer with a degree in
mathematics and longevity in the classroom (Darling-Hammond, 2010;
Rousseau-Anderson & Tate, 2008). at optimal scenario, however, does
not reﬂect the teaer pool in many urban districts and low-income sools.
Darling-Hammond et al. (2005) note that TFA operates in districts that hire

many uncertiﬁed teaers. “Our analyses suggest that in contexts where
many teaers have lile preparation and where there is high turnover,
TFA may make a positive contribution” (Darling-Hammond et al., 2005, p.
21). As Darling-Hammond and her colleagues suggest, because TFA corps
members make a two-year commitment, they can actually provide more
stability than the existing teaer pool in some urban districts. Similarly,
Kane et al. (2008) anowledged the mu higher turnover rate of TFA
corps members over ﬁve years, but argued that the relative eﬀectiveness of
TFA teaers potentially oﬀsets this turnover. In both cases, these
conclusions point to the importance of understanding teaer credentialing
in context. Although TFA is only one example of the alternative pathway
programs operating in U.S. sools, it is instructive as a case insofar as it
highlights the various factors involved in teaer staﬃng and credentialing.
e interplay of teaer shortages, teaer turnover, and the strategies that
are employed to address those shortages, particularly in the sools serving
low-income students and students of color, contribute to a complex picture
with regard to teacher quality, credentialing, and equity in mathematics.
Vignette Revisited: Mathematics Education and
Credentials
e issue of the credentialing process (particularly, teaer credentialing) is
also relevant to understanding the classroom described in the vignee. e
teaer in the classroom vignee was in her third year of teaing at the
time of the observation. She held an alternative certiﬁcation, whi
reﬂected the fact that she had not completed a teaer education program
prior to beginning a full-time teaing position. At the time of the
observation, she was in the process of completing the requirements for
regular licensure. However, she did not hold a degree in mathematics and

was in the process of completing a generalist middle-grades teaer
preparation program (not specific to mathematics).
Moreover, her level of credentialing was not unique within the school. Of
the nine mathematics teaers in the sool, only two had more than three
years of experience. Only two of the nine teaers had completed a teaer
education program prior to their ﬁrst year of full-time teaing–and only
three of the nine held a regular teaing license. e remaining six were
teaing through an alternative certiﬁcation process (i.e., teaing full-time
prior to completing a teaer preparation program). Moreover, four of the
six were TFA corps members. We assert that understanding our
observations in the vignee classroom requires aention to these factors of
teaer quality and credentials. Yet, as noted in the previous section, the
picture with respect to teaer credentialing in this context is complex. It
would be tempting to view the credentials of the teaers as a primary
contributor to the low aievement of the sool, due to la of prior
training and limited experience. Moreover, other resear points to the
importance of sustained opportunities to participate in professional
development and build professional community in order to transform
instruction and improve student learning (Gamoran et al., 2003; Horn &
Lile, 2009). e teaers at the vignee sool had not experienced the
beneﬁts of this type of long-term participation in a professional community.
However, as Darling-Hammond et al. (2005) suggest, the TFA corps
members and teaers from other alternative certiﬁcation programs might
actually be more eﬀective and have greater longevity than the general
teaer pool in an urban district, like that of the vignee sool, in whi
many uncertified teachers are hired.
Similarly, the picture with respect to student credentialing is equally
complicated. Approximately 40% of eighth graders at the sool complete
Algebra I, with the remainder completing Algebra I in the ninth grade. Yet,
as in the study of Allensworth et al. (2009) of reform in Chicago, this early

algebra credential has not translated into signiﬁcant numbers of students
obtaining higher-level credentials in mathematics. Fewer than 5% of the
12th graders at the vignee sool enroll in Advanced Placement Calculus.
us, while the sool curriculum includes no remedial mathematics
courses, students are not completing the most advanced courses in
signiﬁcant numbers. As is the case with teaer credentialing, the process of
student credentialing is not entirely straightforward. We see part of the
picture, but are nevertheless missing some crucial pieces that are likely
related to the other questions that comprise our framework. For example,
how might the socialization process relate to the failure of the sool to
“pump” students to the highest levels of mathematics? And how does this
lack of student credentialing contribute to ongoing inequity?

Maintaining Inequity and the Role of Society: A
Geospatial Perspective
While the resear reviewed in the preceding sections sheds light on
processes related to democratic access, we assert that our understanding of
mathematics education in classrooms and sools is incomplete without
attending to the role of society and the perpetuation of inequity through the
system of mathematics education. In recent years, several solars in
mathematics education have grappled with these questions with regard to
U.S. sools. For example, Tate (2008) has explored the intergenerational
impact of poor teaer quality in mathematics, highlighting the ways that
the system perpetuates inequity in mathematics education. Similarly,
multiple contributions to the recent Special Equity Issue of JRME raised
questions with regard to the role of mathematics education in the
maintenance of inequity (Gutierrez, 2013; JRME Equity Special Issue
Editorial Panel, 2013; Martin, 2013).
However, we take a slightly diﬀerent approa to the examination of
these questions regarding the role of mathematics education and the impact
of society. As indicated in the previous sections and the discussion of the
vignee, the operation of these systems (e.g., with regard to teaer
credentials) oen involves dynamics that are shaped at a local level (e.g.,
teaer shortages in particular sools and districts). As a result, we argue
the need for an approa that takes various levels of context into account.
A geospatial perspective on the study of equity and opportunity to learn
offers a lens to examine layered context.
Geospatial perspective calls for the addition of a geographic lens that focuses on place and space
as important contextual variables. A geospatial view increases our understanding of education,
health, and other social variables by framing resear in the context of neighborhoods,
communities, and regions.
(Tate, Jones, Thorne-Wallington, & Hogrebe, 2012, p. 426)

Su a perspective interrogates the inﬂuence of context on issues of access
and opportunity. In particular, a geospatial perspective can help us to beer
understand why space and location are predictors of mathematics
understanding and aainment. is perspective bridges the macro and the
micro by considering the larger factors that shape opportunity at a local
level. In contrast to large-scale analyses that use national, regional, or
statewide data sets, a geospatial perspective anowledges the diﬀerences
among locations and spaces within the same state or region.
is approa has been used to interrogate the factors that shape
mathematics learning in urban spaces. For example, Hogrebe and Tate
(2012) examined relationships between Algebra I performance and a
variety of district-level variables with the goal to understand whether these
relationships diﬀered by location. eir results indicate that, in fact, the
relationships between Algebra I scores and several variables (free-and-
reduced lun percent; minority percent; discipline incident rate; master’s
degree percent; and local revenue percent) tended to be stronger around
the larger urban metropolitan areas of the state. ese relationships were
obscured in larger statewide analyses. According to the authors, the
ﬁndings “suggest that resear on the equity movement in mathematics
education … must take local context into account…. While some variables
may not appear to be strongly related to Algebra I performance when
examined globally across a state, signiﬁcant relationships existed
regionally” (p. 22). ey conclude that “place maers” in the study of
equity in mathematics education.
Although not taking an explicitly geospatial perspective, other studies
related to mathematics education have gone beyond the reporting of global
diﬀerences to consider the underlying geography of opportunity that might
contribute to those diﬀerences. For example, Hill and Lubienski (2007)
studied a large sample of teaers in California. Using a measure of
mathematics knowledge for teaing, they found a relationship between

the teaers’ mathematics knowledge for teaing and the sool
population. “Sools enrolling larger number of low-income and minority
students employed teaers who had, on average, slightly less
mathematical knowledge for teaing than their counterparts in more
aﬄuent sools” (p. 764). Hill and Lubienski then push beyond this more
global result to highlight previous ﬁndings that teaers oen tea in
sools near those that they aended as a student (Loeb & Reininger, 2004).
ey note the cycle that this creates: “Sools that fail to adequately
prepare teaers, in terms of mathematical knowledge, may suﬀer the
consequences when these students return to teach in later years” (p. 765). At
this point, the global ﬁnding of inequitable opportunity in the form of
teaer quality is translated into a local cycle of intergenerational
reproduction of poor content knowledge. Hill and Lubienski then note that
universities in these areas have a role in breaking this cycle. “By
strengthening the amount and quality of [content and methods] course
work for teaers, particularly in institutions whose graduates migrate
largely to high-minority, high-poverty sools, teaer educators might
substantially reduce educational inequities by lessening disparities in the
distribution of knowledgeable teaers” (p. 766, emphasis added). In this
way, the focus on the contextual factors that shape paerns of unequal
opportunity leads to tangible strategies that can be proposed at a local level.
Vignette Revisited: Three Rivers and a Geospatial
Perspective
To illustrate how “place maers” in the understanding of equity in
mathematics education, we return again to our opening vignee. e
sool described in the vignee serves a community that we will call
“ree Rivers.” ree Rivers is an incorporated area of approximately

40,000 residents within a larger U.S. city. e community is served by three
high sools. e graduation rates of these sools for the 2012–2013 sool
year were 58%, 41.6%, and 84.1%. Only one of the three sools approaed
the statewide graduation rate of 87.2%. ese relatively low graduation
rates are also reﬂected in postsecondary aainment. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, in the zip code that encompasses most of ree Rivers, only
45% of the population of residents 25 years or older hold a high sool
diploma, and only 7.1% of residents hold a Baelor’s degree or
graduate/professional degree. On the other end of the educational
spectrum, less than one-third of eligible presool-age ildren aend
school prior to kindergarten.
Moreover, the struggles of the ree Rivers sools are not reﬂected
only in the relatively low graduation rates. Under the current accountability
system within the state, sools with aievement levels that put them in
the boom 5% statewide are subject to takeover. During the 2012–2013
sool year, 83 sools in the state were identiﬁed in the boom 5%. Of the
83 sools, 12 were located in the ree Rivers community. us, although
ree Rivers represents only about 0.6% of the state population, its sools
made up over 14% of those in the lowest-performing braet. In fact, 12 out
of the 18 sools located in ree Rivers were in the boom 5% of sools
statewide.
Yet, in addition to the educational outcomes, a geospatial perspective
would also consider other neighborhood and community factors that are
not typically considered in mathematics education resear. For example,
over a period of several years, the ree Rivers area has suﬀered from the
loss of large plants that provided blue-collar jobs for many in the
community. Currently, the unemployment rate in the community is 17%;
and six out of 10 ildren in the community of over 40,000 live within the
federal deﬁnition of poverty (Waters, 2012). Additionally, the area has led
the state in subprime mortgages and foreclosures for the past decade. e

high rate of foreclosures has led to a substantial number of vacant homes
and has contributed to signiﬁcant drops in property values (Moore, 2013).
Aggregate home values in the area dropped from $667 million in 2005 to
$332 million in 2010 (Waters, 2012).
In addition to the economic factors, there are several health-related
indicators that are relevant for understanding the community and its
sools. 
According 
to 
the 
U.S. 
Department 
of 
Agriculture
(www.ers.usda.gov), several areas of the community are considered “food
deserts”—a designation that reﬂects la of access to grocery stores or
supermarkets. e community also has the highest rate of teen pregnancies,
low-birth-weight babies, and infant mortality in the county (Warren, 2011;
Waters, 2012). ese non–sool-based factors have important implications
for cognitive and academic performance (Tate et al., 2012).
We wish to be clear on one point: e purpose of constructing this
picture of the context is not to suggest that these factors operate in a
deterministic manner (i.e., that the task of aieving equity is impossible
due to the conditions in the community). Rather, the goal in describing this
case and the geospatial context is to suggest that our understanding of
mathematics teaing and learning is severely limited when we focus only
on the classroom (or even the sool) as the locus of interest. is focus
potentially restricts our understanding of the factors that shape teaing
and learning in the seing (e.g., issues of teaer quality and experience,
aievement levels in surrounding sools from whi many students are
transferring, curricular pressure related to the accountability status of the
sool, etc.). Yet, in addition to limiting our understanding of the factors
that inﬂuence teaing and learning, an analysis that is not situated spatially
limits the quality of our intervention decisions.
As we have argued elsewhere, we must, at some point, move beyond
analysis to the design of more equitable opportunities for traditionally
underserved students (Tate & Rousseau, 2007). Arguably, it is in this design

stage that the geospatial perspective takes on its most important role. We
are not suggesting that the analyses described earlier with regard to this
sool are not potentially important for understanding equity and access.
Understanding the nature of classroom interactions provides insight into
opportunity to learn at this site. Investigating the socialization process and
examining the credentialing function are crucial. But a viable design for
improving teaing and learning in this seing requires aention to
location.
For example, given the relatively low presool aendance rate, an
approa to improving equity in this context would focus potentially on
early ildhood education (Tate et al., 2012). Given the high levels of
teaer arition and the proportion of TFA corps members, strategies
focused on teaer retention become relevant with aention to the context.
Another target might focus on eﬀorts to mitigate the eﬀects of summer
learning loss that is likely to impact students in this low-income
community. Health-related issues, su as ensuring access to nutritious
high-quality foods at sool, are potential components of an intervention
that considers the context. Parental education programs to help parents and
guardians beer support their ildren academically also become a priority
in a context in whi high sool graduation rates and postsecondary
completion rates are low. Similarly, the low levels of postsecondary
aainment in the community are reﬂected in the small number of teaers
who reside in the community. is suggests the need to connect the sool
to the surrounding neighborhoods and to increase opportunities for teaer
preparation for persons from the community. In addition to more
traditional interventions, a design approa that is situated in a geospatial
perspective would take into account the community context—not simply to
note this as baground to the study but as an integral consideration in the
intervention design. Su a perspective takes into consideration not only
the ways that society inﬂuences mathematics education but also the ways

that mathematics education contributes to inequity. is approa has the
potential to interrupt the intergenerational cycle of low mathematics
achievement and educational attainment.

Conclusion
As noted at the beginning of the apter, the vignee was based on
ongoing observations of a sool in an urban sool district. Since the time
of the observation represented in the vignee, two of the nine mathematics
teaers in the sool (including the teaer described in the vignee) have
resigned. Both teaers le their positions in the middle of the sool year.
e sool replaced one teaer with a licensed teaer with three years of
experience. e other teaer was replaced by a ﬁrst-year Tea for
America corps member. Before the replacements arrived, the students in
the two classrooms had uncertiﬁed substitute teaers for almost one
month.
We share this epilogue to the vignee because we view it as illustrative
of the complex and dynamic allenges of U.S. mathematics education,
particularly in urban sools. It also reﬂects the complexity that we, as
researers, must be able to address in any eﬀort to make sense of
mathematics teaing and learning in sools su as the one described in
the vignee. In our earlier solarship related to equity we have described
several variables associated with greater opportunity to learn in
mathematics education: professional development, instructional time,
curriculum, quality of curricular materials, etc. (Rousseau-Anderson, 2007;
Tate & Rousseau, 2007). An examination of the vignee sool considering
these factors reveals the complexity of the picture with regard to access and
opportunity to learn. On one hand, the sool provides substantially greater
instructional time in mathematics than other sools in the community. e
curricular materials used by the sool are (what we consider to be) high
quality and were selected to align with national standards. The mathematics
teaers receive approximately 60 hours of professional development
during the sool year, speciﬁcally on mathematics content and pedagogy.
A substantial number of eighth graders take and pass Algebra I—and the

sool-level aievement in mathematics is higher than nearby sools in
the community. On the other hand, the teaer turnover rate (particularly
in mathematics) is high. Overall, the mathematics teaers are relatively
inexperienced, with few credentials. Few students matriculate through the
most advanced mathematics courses—and the sool-level aievement in
mathematics is well below the state average. Moreover, the vignee
classroom reﬂected several paerns observed in the classrooms of other
mathematics teaers at the sool (e.g., limited cognitive demand of tasks,
procedural focus of instruction, limited student discourse, ineﬀective or
limited use of cooperative learning, etc.). So, what sense can we make of
mathematics teaing and learning in this seing? How does democratic
access in this seing relate to larger resear ﬁndings in mathematics
education? ese are, in part, the allenges that bring us to the framework
we have outlined in this chapter.
If we are to understand and to address eﬀectively the issues represented
in the vignee example, we must expand even further beyond the
paradigmatic boundaries of mathematics education. In particular, we argue
for a sociology of mathematics education that draws from sociology of
education. In fact, the growth and development of sociology of education as
a subdiscipline of sociology has a potential parallel to the need for a
sociology of mathematics education. In describing the growth of sociology
of education as a ﬁeld within sociology, Hallinan (2000) noted that there
emerged a need to develop theoretical frameworks that went beyond those
available in sociology. General sociological theories failed to account for the
unique environment and population of sools and did not account for
“causes and consequences of interinstitutional and intrainstitutional
variation in sooling processes” (p. 3). Sociologists of education were in
need of theories that would explain the social processes that occur in
sools and distinguish sools from other social institutions (Hallinan,
2000). According to Hallinan, sociology of education turned to other areas

for theoretical ideas about sools. In mu the same way, it is clear from
our review of more recent literature that mathematics educators,
particularly those focused on issues of democratic access, have seen the
need to make a similar turn in order to understand the social and
institutional influences on mathematics education.
Another parallel between the development of sociology of education and
sociology of mathematics education can be found in the need to engage
simultaneously analyses at multiple levels. In addition to theories that took
into account the operation of educational institutions as distinct from other
social institutions, sociologists of education have noted a need for micro-
level and macro-level analyses. For example, Cohen (2000) argued that
resear on equality of educational opportunity engages two sets of
inequalities simultaneously at both the societal and institutional level and
the classroom level. She argued that:
Resear on equality of educational opportunity at the societal or regional level alone will
neglect the experiences of students within classrooms and sools. ese experiences are the most
proximate causes of educational success or failure…. Similarly, work with the concept of equal
opportunities only at the level of the classroom will neglect the big picture of the social location
of that classroom in relationship to inequalities in the larger society and in the organization of
the sool. Moreover, inequalities at the societal level interpenetrate inequalities at the classroom
level in complex ways.
(p. 265)
In many ways, this need for integration of individual and contextual
analyses is the same allenge facing researers in mathematics education.
In the previous edition of this apter, we examined resear that had, at
that time, been conducted at the classroom level (Rousseau-Anderson &
Tate, 2008). We noted two primary themes in the classroom-based resear:
(1) students can be unintentionally marginalized in the classroom as a result
of unstated norms and power structures; and (2) the factors that shape
participation are not limited to conditions inside the classroom. Other

inﬂuences are operational (e.g., socioeconomic status, culture, language,
grouping practices, and so on). ese ﬁndings suggested to us that
investigations of access cannot be limited to the mathematics classroom, but
must take into consideration broader factors. In the same apter, we also
examined resear at a structural level that involved paerns of diﬀerential
opportunities across sools, districts, etc. We noted, at that time, the need
for solarship that engaged multiple levels of analysis and sought to
understand beer the ways that the macro-level forces shape what happens
at a micro-level in classrooms.
What we have seen develop in the mathematics education literature in
recent years is a shi toward resear that considers this interplay. is is
illustrated in the “sociopolitical turn” in mathematics education (Gutierrez,
2013). It can also be seen in some of the more recent solarship that traces
the impact of larger discourses and structures in the development of student
identity (Berry, 2008; Nasir & de Royston, 2013; Stinson, 2013) and
instructional practices within the classroom (Jackson, 2009).
Yet, despite this apparent shi, we assert that we are still in need of a
sociology of mathematics education that could serve mu the same role as
sociology of education does as a subdiscipline of sociology. Speciﬁcally, a
sociology of mathematics education would expand on the existing
sociopolitical turn by developing and adapting theoretical models that take
into account the speciﬁc conditions that shape equity in mathematics
education. ese models would engage resear from sociology of
education, while simultaneously considering how equity concerns in
mathematics education might operate diﬀerently than other disciplines.
Further, the aention to macro- and micro-level factors directs us to take a
geospatial perspective on equity in mathematics education. We assert that
this geospatial perspective oﬀers one way to understand more fully the
interplay of the macro- and micro-levels in the education of traditionally
underserved students. is focus on the importance of context is a theme

that recurred in our review of recent resear. A truly geospatial
perspective would take into account multiple factors at the local level that
might be related to educational aievement and aainment. ese factors
would include, but not be limited to, employment and other economic
indicators, presool education, prenatal care, access to health care,
postsecondary opportunities and aainment, etc. ese factors are well
beyond the scope of traditional mathematics education solarship—yet
aention to these factors is necessary to understand the nature of
democratic access at a local level and to design interventions that are likely
to be successful.
One example of the signiﬁcance of a geospatial perspective can be seen
in the resear of Mesquita, Restivo, and D’Ambrosio (2011) in Brazil.
According to the authors, the study sought to “make sociological sense of
lived mathematics experiences” of “asphalt ildren” in São Paulo. eir
approa took into account the geographical, historical, social, cultural, and
policy dynamics of the urban seing of São Paulo and the speciﬁc
conditions of the ildren involved in the study. In so doing, they create a
picture of the “multiple, systemic, and complex interdependencies” related
to mathematics experiences of this population.
us, this study is an example of the use of a sociological lens that
considers the multiple factors shaping mathematics and mathematics
education in a speciﬁc geospatial location. As su, it provides insight into
the type of research that we submit is important for mathematics education.
We should note, however, that the resear by Mesquita et al. (2011)
focused on the mathematics knowledge and experiences of ildren in
nonsool seings. In particular, they aended to the “la of links between
the sool knowledge-making and the knowledge-making in use” (p. 118)
and concluded that the academic environment engaged in ronic omission
of the mathematics “knowledges” of asphalt ildren. e type of resear
that we call for would engage in a similar analysis of the role of location,

history, economics, policy, and culture in shaping opportunities for ildren.
However, we assert the need for a parallel line of resear situated within
and around sools in order to beer understand how to create more
equitable opportunity to learn through schooling.
Resear on equity and democratic access in mathematics education has
made a “turn” in recent years away from a strict focus on mathematics and
psyology. We submit that this move to go beyond the traditional
paradigmatic boundaries is a positive step toward understanding the nature
of inequity and access in mathematics education in the United States.
However, in places su as ree Rivers, the next (urgent) steps require
design—and this design involves a geospatial perspective that considers all
the factors that shape equity and access in a neighborhood and engages all
of the entities that can intervene in that community. We will know that we
have aieved some measure of success with respect to equity and
democratic access when the zip codes of places like ree Rivers no longer
have predictive value with regard to mathematics education and
achievement.

Notes
1. We use the indeﬁnite article a in describing our view of sociology of mathematics education to
anowledge that there are other existing approaes that integrate sociology and mathematics
education and that these approaches differ substantively from the framework we are using.
2. “Nonmigrant” refers to students who were born in the state in which they attended high school.

References
Allensworth, E., Nomi, T., Montgomery, N., & Lee, V. (2009). College preparatory curriculum for all:
Academic consequences of requiring Algebra and English I for ninth graders in Chicago.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 31, 367–391.
Berry, R. (2008). Access to upper level mathematics: e students of successful African American
middle school boys. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 39, 464–488.
Carnevale, A. P., Rose, S. J., & Cheah, B. (2011). e college payoﬀ: Education, occupations, lifetime
earnings. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce.
Clark, M., Chiang, H., Silva, T., McConnell, S., Sonnenfeld, K., Erbe, A., & Puma, M. (2013). The
eﬀectiveness of secondary math teaers from Tea for America and the Teaing Fellows
programs (NCEE 2013–4015). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Cohen, E. (2000). Equitable classrooms in a anging society. In M. Hallinan (Ed.), Handbook of the
Sociology of Education (pp. 265–283). New York: Kluwer.
D’Ambrosio, B., Frankenstein, M., Gutierrez, R., Kastberg, S., Martin, D., Moskovi, J., Taylor, E.,
& Barnes, D. (2013). Introduction to the JRME Equity Special Issue. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(1), 5–10.
Darling-Hammond, L. (2010). e ﬂat world and education: How our commitment to equity will
determine our future. New York: Teachers College Press.
Darling-Hammond, L., Holtzman, D., Gatlin, S. J., & Heilig, J. V. (2005). Does teaer preparation
maer? Evidence about teaer certiﬁcation, Tea for America, and teaer eﬀectiveness.
Education Policy Analysis Archives, 13(42), 1–51.
Dowling, P. (1998). e sociology of mathematics education: Mathematical myths/pedagogical texts
London: Routledge.
Fetler, M. (1999). High sool staﬃng aracteristics and mathematics test results. Education Policy
Analysis Archives, 79(9), 1–22.
Frankenberg, E. (2006). e segregation of American teaers. Cambridge, MA: e Civil Rights
Project at Harvard University.
Freeman, C., Scaﬁdi, B., & Sjoquist, D. (2005). Racial segregation in Georgia public sools, 1994–

2001: Trends, causes, and impact on teaer quality. In J. Boger & G. Orﬁeld (Eds.), School
resegregation: Must the South turn ba? (pp. 143–163). Chapel Hill, NC: University of North
Carolina Press.
Gamoran, A., Anderson, C., iroz, P., Secada, W., Williams, T., & Ashmann, S. (2003).
Transforming teaing in math and science: How sools and districts can support ange . New
York: Teachers College Press.
Gutierrez, R. (2013). e sociopolitical turn in mathematics education. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(1), 37–68.
Gutierrez, R., & Dixon-Roman, E. (2011). Beyond gap gazing: How can thinking about education
comprehensively help us (re)envision mathematics education? In B. Atweh, M. Graven, W.
Secada, & P. Valero (Eds.), Mapping equity and quality in mathematics education (pp. 21–34).
London: Springer.
Hallinan, M. (2000). Introduction: Sociology of education at the threshold of the twenty-ﬁrst
century. In M. Hallinan (Ed.), Handbook of the sociology of education (pp. 1–12). New York:
Kluwer.
Heilig, J. V., & Jez, S. J. (2010). Tea for America: A review of the evidence. Boulder, CA & Tempe,
AZ: Education and the Public Interest Center & Education Policy Research Unit.
Hill, H., & Lubienski, S. (2007). Teaers’ mathematics knowledge for teaing and sool context: A
study of California teachers. Educational Policy, 21(5), 747–768.
Hogrebe, M., & Tate, W. (2012). Place, poverty, and algebra: A statewide comparative spatial analysis
of variable relationships. Journal of Mathematics Education at Teachers College, 3, 12–24.
Horn, I., & Lile, J. (2009). Aending to problems of practice: Routines and resources for professional
learning in teaers’ workplace interactions. American Educational Resear Journal, 47, 181–
217.
Ingersoll, R., & Merrill, L. (2013). Seven trends: e transformation of the teaing force .
Philadelphia, PA: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
Ingersoll, R., & Perda, D. (2009). e mathematics and science teaer shortage: Fact and myth .
Philadelphia, PA: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
Jason, K. (2009). e social construction of youth and mathematics: e case of a ﬁh-grade
classroom. In D. Martin (Ed.), Mathematics teaching, learning, and liberation in the lives of Black

children (pp. 175–198). New York: Routledge.
JRME Equity Special Issue Editorial Panel. (2013). Addressing racism. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44, 23–36.
Kane, T., Rooﬀ, J., & Staiger, D. (2008). What does certiﬁcation tell us about teaer eﬀectiveness?
Evidence from New York City. Economics of Education Review, 27, 615–631.
Leonard, J., & Martin, D. (Eds.). (2013). e brilliance of Bla ildren in mathematics: Beyond the
numbers and toward new discourse. Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Loner, L., & Morei, E. (2001). e eﬀect of education on crime: Evidence from prison inmates,
arrests, and self-reports (No. w8605). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Loeb, S., & Reininger, M. (2004). Public policy and teaer labor markets: What we know and why it
matters. East Lansing: Education Policy Center at Michigan State University.
Lubienski, S. (2007). Resear, reform, and equity in U.S. mathematics education In N. Nasir & P.
Cobb (Eds.), Improving access to mathematics: Diversity and equity in the classroom (pp. 10–23).
New York: Teachers College Press.
Martin, D. (2006). Mathematics learning and participation as racialized forms of experience: African
American parents speak on the struggle for mathematics literacy. Mathematical inking and
Learning, 8(3), 197–229.
Martin, D. (2009a). Liberating the production of knowledge about African American ildren and
mathematics. In D. Martin (Ed.), Mathematics teaing, learning, and liberation in the lives of
Black children (pp. 3–35). New York: Routledge.
Martin, D. (2009b). Researing race in mathematics education. Teaers College Record, 111(2),
295–338.
Martin, D. (2011). What does quality mean in the context of White institutional space? In B. Atweh,
M. Graven, W. Secada, & P. Valero (Eds.), Mapping equity and quality in mathematics education
(pp. 437–450). London: Springer.
Martin, D. (2013). Race, racial projects, and mathematics education. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(1), 316–333.
Mesquita, M., Restivo, S., & D’Ambrosio, U. (2011). Asphalt ildren and city streets: A life, a city,
and a case study of history, culture, and ethnomathematics in São Paulo. Boston, MA: Sense
Publishers.

Milner, H. (2012). But what is urban education? Urban Education, 47, 556–561.
Milner, H., & Lomotey, K. (Eds.)(2014). Handbook of urban education. New York: Routledge.
Moore, L. (2013, April 6). [ree Rivers] homeowners suﬀer greatest property value losses in
reappraisal. The Commercial Appeal.
Nasir, N., & Cobb, P. (Eds.). (2007). Improving access to mathematics: Diversity and equity in the
classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.
Nasir, N., & de Royston, M. (2013). Power, identity, and mathematical practices outside and inside
school. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 264–287.
Nasir, N., Hand, V., & Taylor, E. (2008). Culture and mathematics in sool: Boundaries between
“cultural” and “domain” knowledge in the mathematics classroom and beyond. Review of
Research in Education, 32, 187–240.
Nasir, N., & Shah, N. (2011). On defense: African American males making sense of racialized
narratives in mathematics education. Journal of African American Males in Education, 2(1), 24–
45.
National Commission on Excellence in Education. (1983). A nation at risk: e imperative for
educational reform. Washington, DC: United States Department of Education.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics Resear Commiee. (2005). Equity in sool
mathematics education: How can resear contribute? Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 36(2), 92–100.
Plunk, A., Tate, W., Bierut, L., & Grucza, R. (2014). Intended and unintended eﬀects of state-
mandated high sool science and mathematics course graduation requirements on educational
attainment. Educational Researcher, 43(5), 230–241.
Restivo, S. (2007). Theory of mind, social science, and mathematical practice. In B. van Kerkhove & J.
P. van Bendegem (Eds.), Perspectives on mathematical practices: Bringing together philosophy of
mathematics, sociology of mathematics, and mathematics education (pp. 83–106). Dordret:
Springer.
Restivo, S., & Bauspies, W. (2006). e will to mathematics: Minds, morals, and numbers.
Foundations of Science, 11, 197–215.
Ronfeldt, M., Loeb, S., & Wyoﬀ, J. (2013). How teaer turnover harms student aievement.
American Educational Research Journal, 50(1), 4–36.

Rousseau-Anderson, C. (2007). Examining sool mathematics through the lenses of learning and
equity. In G. Martin & M. Strutens (Eds.), e learning of mathematics: 2007 yearbook (pp.
97–113). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Rousseau-Anderson, C., & Tate, W. (2008). Still separate, still unequal: Democratic access to
mathematics in U.S. sools. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in
mathematics education (2nd ed., pp. 299–318). New York: Routledge.
Small, M. L. (2014, Mar 17). No two gheos are alike. e Chronicle Review. Retrieved from
http://m.chronicle.com/article/No-Two-Ghettos-Are-Alike/145301 (August 1, 2014).
Stein, M. K., Smith, M., Henningsen, M., & Silver, E. (2009). Implementing standards-based
mathematics instruction: A casebook for professional development (2nd ed.). New York: Teaers
College Press.
Stinson, D. (2006). African American male adolescents, sooling (and mathematics): Deﬁciency,
refection, and achievement. Review of Educational Research, 76(4), 477–506.
Stinson, D. (2013). Negotiating the “white male myth”: African American male students and success
in school mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 69–99.
Stinson, D., & Bullo, E. (2012). Critical postmodern theory in mathematics education resear: A
praxis of uncertainty. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80, 41–55.
Tate, W. (2008). e political economy of teaer quality in sool mathematics: African American
males, opportunity structures, politics and method. American Behavioral Scientist, 51(7), 953–
971.
Tate, W., Jones, B., orne-Wallington, E., & Hogrebe, M. (2012). Science and the city: inking
geospatially about opportunity to learn. Urban Education, 47, 399–433.
Tate, W., & Rousseau, C. (2002). Access and opportunity: e political and social context of
mathematics education. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics
education (pp. 271–299). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tate, W., & Rousseau, C. (2007). Engineering ange in mathematics education: Resear, policy,
and practice. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and
learning (Vol. 2, pp. 1209–1246). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Valero, P. (2007). A socio-political look at equity in the sool organization of mathematics
education ZDM: The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 39, 225–233.

Varelas, M., Martin, D., & Kane, J. (2012). Content knowledge and identity construction: A
framework to strengthen African American students’ mathematics and science learning in urban
elementary schools. Human Development, 55, 319–339.
Walshaw, M. (2013). Post-structuralism and ethical practical action: Issues of power and identity.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 100–118.
Warren, B. (2011, September 2). County’s infant mortality rate stirs plea. The Commercial Appeal.
Waters, D. (2012, December 2). [ree Rivers] community becomes lab for do or die experiment. The
Commercial Appeal.
Yael, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in
mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458–477.

16 Mathematics Learning In and Out of
School
Towards Continuity or Discontinuity?
Guida de Abreu
Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK
Sarah Crafter
Institute of Education, London, UK

Introduction
Globalization and unprecedented levels of migration were partly
responsible for the expansion of resear on mathematical learning in and
out of sool, including a focus on multicultural seings within Western
societies. is new focus oen falls under the umbrella of resear on
home-sool mathematics (e.g. Andrews & Yee, 2006; Civil & Andrade,
2002; Civil & Menéndez, 2011; Hughes & Pollard, 2006). In many Western
countries, immigration is substantially anging the ethnic and cultural
composition of the sool population. is diversity within sools poses
major allenges to systems of education developed to serve the needs of
homogeneous monocultural groups (Abreu & Elbers, 2005; Cole, 1998).
estions around the experiences and aievements of students from
diﬀerent cultural, ethnic, social, economic, and linguistic groups in-sool
mathematics became salient and in need of discussion (Abreu, 2014; Civil,
2008; Gorgorió, Abreu, Cesar, & Valero, 2005).
is apter revisits resear on the relationship between mathematical
practices in and out of sool. It traces the evolution of resear from an
examination of the cultural nature of sool and out-of-sool
mathematical practices, to current resear that aempts to understand the
experiences of the person as a participant in these practices. A focus on
practice (i.e. the activity, how it is organized, how it is understood, and its
speciﬁc purposes) initially contributed to mapping the diﬀerences between
in- and out-of-sool mathematics, and subsequently oﬀered insight into
the diversity of sool mathematical practices in diﬀerent seings. For
example, sool mathematics in a sool seing is a diﬀerent practice from
sool mathematics in the home seing. Or, for immigrant students, sool
mathematics in the host country is a diﬀerent practice from their home
country. A focus on the person—su as a student, a teaer, a parent—as a
participant gives insight into the way they experience and negotiate

diﬀerences between mathematical practices. Our major interest resides in
examining the implications of these processes to the understanding of
sool mathematical learning. What makes mathematical practices
experienced as continuous or discontinuous between in-sool and out-of-
school settings?
is review begins with an historical baground on how developments
in (cross-) cultural psyology contributed to our understanding of the
cultural nature of mathematical cognition, learning, and practices. is is
followed by a review of resear that explores mathematical learning as a
socio-culturally mediated process, considering processes of cultural
mediation (the role of cultural tools, both mental and physical) and social
mediation (the role of institutions, social interactions and other types of
social processes). e ﬁnal section focuses on the person as a participant in
multiple social and cultural practices, and covers recent studies on
multicultural seings (the role of the individual in the reconstruction of the
cultural and the social at the psychological level).
e structure of the apter reﬂects the movement in the cultural
psyology of mathematics education: from an understanding of the
mathematics of particular cultural and social groups to the understanding of
the person as a participant in sociocultural practices. is movement also
reﬂects diﬀerent perspectives on the examination of the role of culture on
psyological development (Abreu, 2014). e initial work in this area
examined mathematics in everyday life (Carraher, Sliemann, & Carraher,
1988; Rogoﬀ & Lave, 1984) and focused on the shared cultural practices of
groups and communities. is body of resear illustrated fundamental
diﬀerences between in- and out-of-sool mathematics, su as diﬀerent
systems of mathematical knowledge (e.g. measurement systems used in and
out of sool), strategies used to solve problems, and social norms
regulating mathematical practices. “Cultural discontinuity” emerged as an
explanatory concept to explain diﬀerences and mismates between

learning and uses of mathematics in and out of school.
More recent work recognizes the “discontinuities” of mathematical
practices both at cultural and social levels. However, discontinuity is not the
center of the analysis, but the “point of departure” (de Haan & Elbers, 2008)
or point of rupture in the way a person experiences transitions between
practices (Abreu, Craer, Gorgorió, & Prat, 2013). is perspective
examines dynamic aspects of culture, i.e., the way a person experiences
participation and transitions in multiple mathematical practices, su as his
or her experiences of home-sool mathematics and how this impacts on
the construction of knowledge, meaning, and identities (Abreu, 2014;
Anderson & Gold, 2006; Cobb & Hodge, 2002; Chronaki, 2005; Gorgorió &
Abreu, 2009; Nasir & Cobb, 2002). is provides a complementary analysis
exploring what contributes to experiencing continuities and discontinuities
across diﬀerent mathematical practices, su as home and sool
mathematics.

Perspectives on the Cultural Nature of
Mathematics Learning in Out-of-School Practices
Insights into the nature of mathematics learning in out-of-sool practices
were initially data driven, grounded in ethnographic-type descriptions, and
linked to diﬀerent disciplines. For example, two disciplines that have
approaed the problem from a sociocultural stance are ethnomathematics
education (D’Ambrosio, 1985) and developmental psyology (Nunes,
Sliemann, & Carraher, 1993). As illustrated in Table 16.1, studies along
these lines provided complementary perspectives in the analysis of
mathematics learning outside school.
Table 16.1  Two perspectives on outside school mathematics.
Ethnomathematics education
(D’Ambrosio, 1985)
Developmental psychology
(Nunes et al., 1993)
Level of
analysis
Sociogenetic level: Historical
and anthropological analysis
of the mathematics of
different sociocultural
groups.
Ontogenetic level:
Analysis of the
individual’s
psychological
processes involved in
learning and using
mathematics in
specific sociocultural
contexts.
Focus of
analysis
Relationship between social-
political order and individual
learning: How the value
social groups attribute to
certain forms of
mathematics mediates its
transmission and
Relationships between
culture and cognition:
How specific cultural
tools mediate
mathematics
cognition.

appropriation.
ese previously distinct foci of enquiry are now overlapping to some
extent, as researers seek to ﬁnd ways to look at the intersection of micro
and macro contexts of mathematical practice. us, a psyological analysis
at the ontogenetic level, as for example, how a learner develops
understanding of basic arithmetic sums (e.g. adding and subtracting), also
requires the understanding of the sociogenetic level, i.e., for example, what
type of strategies and resources are socially valorized and promoted in
educational settings (e.g. using number lines to solve sums).
Cultural Psychology and Mathematical Cognition
Eﬀorts to understand the relationship between mathematical thinking and
culture can be traced to the interest of Western science in testing the
universality of cognitive development and to the expansion of Western
style of sooling in other societies (Cole, Gay, & Gli, 1968). e laer
included mathematics as one of the key subjects in the elementary
curriculum. Cole (1977, 1995) recounted his ﬁrst task in cross-cultural
resear as being “to ﬁgure out why Liberian ildren seemed to
experience so mu diﬃculty learning mathematics” (Cole, 1995, p. 23). He
also noted that his “graduate training was in the tradition of American
mathematical learning theory, whi at that time entailed the use of
algebra and probability theory to provide a foundation for discovery of
presumably universal laws of learning.” is happened about 40 years ago,
and as he confessed, he “knew almost nothing about the teaing of
mathematics, and even less about Liberia” (Cole, 1995, p. 24). Cole and his
collaborators soon grew skeptical about their own knowledge and methods.
In the course of a classiﬁcation study, whi required participants to sort
objects, it was observed that the Liberians tended to use diﬀerent groupings

depending on the way the task was presented to them.
Cole’s observations at ﬁrst glance exposed the inadequacy of resear
procedures that were drawn from his training as a psyologist in the
United States and subsequently applied to other cultural contexts. However,
as cautioned by Rogoﬀ and Lave (1984), this does not allow us to jump to
the conclusion that variation between cultural groups could be explained
solely in terms of inadequacies of resear procedures, either in tests and
tasks or in the diﬃculties of communication between researers and
participants. ese explanations would reduce the diﬀerences in
performance to diﬀerences in “display” (Shweder, 1990) and presuppose
that in ideal testing circumstances the diﬀerences should disappear. Cole
and his colleagues observed that diﬀerences could be linked to the tools
used as mediators to practice. To their surprise, the diﬀerences were not
only linked to a tool being available, but also to a more complex
organization of the tool itself. Hand spans and foot lengths were tools used
both in the United States and by the Kpelle of Liberia. When Cole and his
colleagues tested both Americans and Kpelle in tasks that required
estimating length with hand spans and foot lengths, the Americans
performed beer despite the familiarity of both groups with the tools.
Further analysis revealed that although both groups were familiar with
these length measures, the Kpelle did not relate diﬀerent measures in a
system, thus making the task more diﬃcult to accomplish. In contrast, the
Americans were familiar with well-articulated systems, su as ines, feet,
and yards that enabled them to translate between the measures.
Observations of this kind revealed the need for a shi from studying
products to studying processes. is shi is at the heart of the movement
from cross-cultural to cultural psychology (Cole, 1995).
A basic claim shared by the principal proponents of cultural psyology
(see Stiegler, Shweder, & Herdt, 1990) is that the adoption of su a
perspective oﬀers the possibility of accounting for diversity in human

psyological functioning. Of course, understanding variations between
groups and individuals has been at the core of psyology, but the
mainstream approach searches for its sources in the universality of the mind
and the presence or absence of capacities, properties, traits, and so forth.
Cultural psyology seares for the sources of diversity in socioculturally
speciﬁc experiences. Proponents of cultural psyology approaes share
the view that understanding diversity requires aention to the interplay
between the individual, society and culture.
ese insights marked the starting of a new era in psyological
approaes to mathematics learning outside sool. e revised theoretical
and methodological foundations led to the emergence of new resear
programs, su as the series of “street mathematics” studies carried out by
Nunes and her colleagues in Brazil in the 1980s (Carraher et al., 1988; Nunes
et al., 1993). Resear in “everyday cognition,” “situated cognition,” and
“mathematics learning in and out of sool” ﬂourished in the 1980s with
seminal resear works being published (see, for instance, Lave, 1988;
Rogoﬀ & Lave, 1984; Saxe, 1991). A major inﬂuence on psyologists
working in this area has been Vygotsky’s (1978) notion of cultural
mediation. is notion was applied to understanding the role of tools or
artifacts in mediating mathematical action and thinking in speciﬁc social
practices (Resnick, Pontecorvo, & Säljö, 1997).
ere were two distinct phases in the investigation of cultural inﬂuences
on mathematics learning in out-of-sool contexts. In the ﬁrst phase,
solars traveled to other countries to investigate the mathematical
thinking and learning of foreign people. Although not always made explicit,
this traveling was oen politically motivated. e second phase involved
the researers’ return to their home countries. is also had a politically
motivated dimension, coming from the researers themselves, who
realized that the lessons learned abroad could throw light on the learning of
diverse groups in their own country.

Studies of Out-of-School Mathematics in Non-Western Cultures
Some of the pioneering studies of mathematics in out-of-sool contexts
were carried out in non-Western cultures (Brenner, 1983; Gay & Cole, 1967;
Lave, 1977; Peito & Ginsburg, 1982; Saxe, 1982; Saxe & Posner, 1983).
ese studies can now be considered landmarks in view of the realization
of psyologists that cultural diﬀerences are not necessarily associated with
deep cognitive diﬀerences. ey also persuaded psyologists to rethink
their resear methodology. Instead of taking sool knowledge as the
reference and formulating tasks from this perspective to see whether
individuals transfer to other seings, the researers engaged in
ethnographic observations in outside-sool contexts. In these studies one
can see—along with some traditional cross-cultural concepts—the
emergence of new constructs su as apprenticeship, distinct arithmetic
systems, and strategies that mark a new era of resear in out-of-sool
mathematics. One also can see how unexpected ﬁndings have allenged
views about key constructs that have been used to explain mathematical
thinking and learning in and out of sool. Among the key constructs
allenged were the notion of transfer and the concrete versus abstract
diotomy (ideas linked to a universalistic, culture-free, view of
mathematical cognition and learning) (Nunes, 1992b).
Out-of-sool 
practices 
in 
non-Western 
cultures 
provided 
an
environment suitable for empirical testing of the power of transfer of
sool-related skills. In these seings, researers could easily ﬁnd people
with diﬀerent degrees of exposure to sooling, from none to advanced
levels. is situation also meant that the learning of mathematical skills
required for speciﬁc cras and professions were oen embedded in the
apprenticeship. Within the same group it was possible to ﬁnd people who
varied both in terms of levels of skill in the profession and in terms of their
levels of sooling. Various researers took advantage of these naturally

occurring situations to disentangle the eﬀects of sooling on cognitive
development (Greenfield & Lave, 1982).
A classic example is the work of Jean Lave among the tailors of
Monrovia, Liberia. As an anthropologist, she spent several months
observing the work of master and apprentice tailors. is enabled her to
gain access to the arithmetic tailors used, su as estimating size, in ines,
of the waistbands of pairs of trousers. Lave then used this knowledge to
develop a strategy to study the impact of sooling and tailoring on
mathematical skills. Her strategy consisted of devising arithmetical tasks
that varied according to their degree of familiarity with tailoring or
sooling practices. She then applied the tasks to tailors who also varied in
two dimensions: (1) none to 10 years of sooling; and (2) a few months to
25 years of tailoring experience. Lave observed speciﬁc eﬀects. Sooling
contributed more to performance in sool-oriented tasks and tailoring to
the tailoring-oriented tasks. On the basis of these ﬁndings, Lave concluded
that “It appears that neither sooling nor tailoring skills generalize very far
beyond the circumstances in whi they are ordinarily applied” (Greenﬁeld
& Lave, 1982, p. 199). is study was only a starting point for a allenge of
the view that sooling has general cognitive eﬀects that would transfer
and generalize across practices (Lave, 1988).
Resear that followed an ethnographic approa allenged the notion
of cognitive transfer and demonstrated that inclusion of cultural practices in
analyzing mathematical cognition is complex. Saxe (1982, 1991) illustrated
the impact of cultural practices on cognition by studying the Oksapmin, an
indigenous community in Papua New Guinea, who used a 27-body-part
counting system. Saxe’s analysis showed that the introduction of Western-
style practices su as sooling and currency impacted on mathematical
cognition. For example, he found that people with lile participation in
commercial activities continued to use traditional counting systems based
on body parts, whereas the others who actively participated in economic

exchanges had adopted a hybrid counting system combining body parts and
numerical representation. His return to the Oksapmin community 20 years
later (Saxe & Esmonde, 2005) further supports the initial results showing
that anges in cultural practices, i.e. economic exange, are associated
with new forms of mathematical cognition. e shi in the meaning of the
concept fu is an example, as the word anged from being used as an
intensive quantiﬁer meaning “a complete group of plenty” to being used as
“double a numerical value.” Saxe’s work is unique in demonstrating the
interrelationship between participation in organized cultural practices and
development of mathematical cognition. One can hypothesize that, to some
degree, Saxe’s observations may be replicated when learners are exposed
to sool practices that are diﬀerent from their everyday outside sool
practices. However, it is very likely that the most common methodological
approaes based on standardized measurements make “invisible cognitive
adaptations that individuals create to local conditions” (Saxe, 2012, p. 235)
Everyday Mathematics in the Context of Western Societies
e insights gained into non-Western cultures have encouraged outside
sool resear in the researers’ own cultures (Andrews & Yee, 2006;
Baker, Street, & Tomlin, 2006; Carraher, Carraher, & Sliemann, 1982;
Lave, 1988; Masinglia, 1994; Murtaugh, 1985; Scribner, 1984; Winter,
Salway, Yee, & Hughes, 2004). Lave’s seminal piece of work on the Adult
Maths Project, conducted in the United States, showed distinct contrasts
between, for example, performance on a sool-like test (average 59%
correct answers) and arithmetical performance in the supermarket (98%).
According to Lave (1988), the key issue is the interpretation of “everyday.”
She distinguished between a functionalist view in whi “the label
‘everyday’ is heavy with negative connotations emanating from its
deﬁnition in contrast to scientiﬁc thought” (p. 14) and a practice theory

view, in whi “the everyday world is just that: what people do in daily,
weekly, monthly cycles of activity” (p.15). In Lave’s perspective “sool” is
one type of everyday seing, and as in any other seing, success and failure
in mathematical tasks might best be understood in terms of relations
between persons, their activities, and contexts rather than solely in terms of
cognitive strategies.
Arcavi’s (2002) examination of the concept of “everyday” asked the
question “Everyday for whom?” (p. 13). He suggested that “everyday”
depends on the context and practice within whi the mathematics takes
place. Sometimes, because of the context, the activity may not be
recognized as one that is mathematical. He also suggests that we can bridge
contexts of “everydayness” by also seeing the “everyday” in academic
mathematics seings and “realistic” mathematization (su as problem
solving).

Cultural Mediation of Mathematical Thinking and
Learning
Different Tools in Different Practices
Having established that performance in a mathematical task was linked to
the context of the practice, su as in-sool versus out-of-sool context,
resear moved on to explore the cognitive and social processes associated
with diﬀerent performances. For example, Terezinha Nunes and her
colleagues (Carraher et al., 1982, Nunes, 1992a; 1992b; Nunes & Bryant,
1996), while investigating the mathematics of street ildren in Brazil,
reﬂected on the processes that explained: “How is it that the same ildren
oﬀered two diﬀerent performances in problems apparently similar,
depending on their use of oral or wrien strategies?” eir careful
examination of “oral” and “wrien” arithmetic revealed key diﬀerences
between the two forms. us, oral arithmetic: (i) Preserves the relative
value of number; (ii) proceeds in the order we speak, from large to small
numbers; (iii) allows diﬀerent types of manipulation, su as dealing with
diﬀerent values and then adjusting; and (iv) preserves the meaning of the
situation. Wrien arithmetic: (i) sets the relative value of number aside; (ii)
usually follows the opposite order in whi we speak; (iii) given numbers
are strictly adhered to in problem solving; and (iv) sets the meaning of the
situation aside. Nunes’s analysis highlighted the fact that common errors in
both wrien and oral calculations were linked not only to the functioning
of the mind, but were also inherently linked to speciﬁc organizations of
systems of representations—to the tool that mediated the person’s
mathematical action. Cultural practices provide tools that both expand and
impose limits on the mathematical operations the person can carry out
(Nunes, 1992b; Nunes & Bryant, 1996).
Bose and Subramaniam’s (2011) ongoing studies in India show that this

approach is still very important in understanding the different performances
of the same people in diﬀerent practices. In their studies they explore and
aracterize the nature and extent of everyday mathematics knowledge
and involvement in economic activities amongst middle-grade students
from sools located in a large low-income area in Mumbai. eir ﬁndings
show that the students developed sound knowledge of currency handling in
“everyday mathematics,” including doing arithmetic operations on the
currency involving multidigit numbers (Bose & Subramaniam, 2011).
However, similarly to the studies carried out in Brazil (e.g. Nunes et al.,
1993), the students’ ability to handle oral strategies was beer than their
aempts at wrien approaes. ese ﬁndings are supported by a study in
Lebanon with street vendors who, even when faced with formal sool-like
tests, aempted to inject everyday meaning into the ﬁgures to try and
make sense of them (Jurdak & Sharhin, 1999).
Another ﬁnding from Subramaniam and Bose (2012) is that in everyday
household-based activities, the use of a diverse modes and units of
measurement is evident. In contrast, they report that in “modern Indian
sool mathematics textbooks this diversity is not found and only standard
units are taught using standard measuring instruments like a ruler or
weighing balance” (p. 1982). ey suggest that the concept of
“demathematization” can explain why mathematics used in informal
practices in out-of-sool contexts are not part of the sool curriculum. In
both examples (i.e. currency and measurement), it is apparent that the
everyday context exposes the students to diﬀerent cultural tools. e
authors anowledge that in their studies the implications for the way the
students experience the transition between their everyday and their sool
mathematics remains to be explored. However, in their view, the restricted
view of measurement in current sool textbooks may make it diﬃcult for
the students to see the connection between what they learn in sool and
their rich experiences of measurement outside school.

is type of evidence allows for a connection between the analysis of
empirical data and Vygotsky’s notion of cultural mediation of psyological
functioning. Within this perspective a central focus of the studies has been
on understanding what are the tools or artifacts used in speciﬁc social
practices and their role in mediating mathematical action and thinking.
Systems of representations, su as mental tools, can be seen as sharing
some properties with tools used to operate in the physical environment. For
instance, using a bike as a means of transport compared with using a car
shapes the action in diﬀerent ways. Similarly, using oral arithmetic as
means to solve a mathematical problem shapes the action diﬀerently from
using written arithmetic.
Unique Appropriation of Cultural Tools
Most of the theoretical advances mentioned earlier have resulted from
studies conducted within traditional out-of-sool practices, su as street
vending, farming, and carpentry. ere was also a tendency in these studies
to describe paerns that applied to the whole community. is means that
there is still a need to explain how individual diversity can emerge. Abreu
explored this issue, reﬂecting on her study with sugarcane farmers.
Between 1995 and 1998, she carried out an investigation into the use and
understanding of mathematics by sugarcane farmers in the northeast of
Brazil (Abreu, 1998b, 1999). Her motive to engage in this particular project
was to gain an understanding of why the farmers had diﬃculties in
appropriating modern tenology. Both theoretically and methodologically,
Abreu’s study was informed by the so-called everyday cognition approa
(Rogoﬀ & Lave, 1984), and by a Vygotskian view of mathematics learning
as the internalization of sociocultural tools.
e ethnographic approa led Abreu (1998b, 1999) to describe the

particular mathematics used by the farmers, whi diﬀered from sool
mathematics. For instance, they had speciﬁc length and area measures,
formulas to calculate areas, and a variety of oral strategies to solve sums
that involved both additive and multiplicative structures. In addition, the
ﬁndings from the interviews about the strategies used by the farmers
revealed the way their experiences with the use of speciﬁc tools mediated
their cognition. By concentrating on the similarities of tool use among
farmers, evidence that showed unique appropriation of the tools was
overlooked and the meanisms behind this were not explored. e
analysis did not address development at the level of the individual.
Nevertheless, this laer type of analysis may well clarify the origins of
diversity among individuals in similar cultural practices.
Looking retrospectively at the data, one can see two distinct paerns of
the farmers’ reconstruction of cultural knowledge. For instance,
reexamining their procedures for calculating the areas of quadrilateral and
triangular plots of land, one can see more than one paern. In the most
prevalent paern, farmers followed a convention. For example, the area of
a triangular plot of land was found by multiplying the average of the two
opposite sides by one half of the length of the remaining side {Area = [(a +
b) / 2] × (c / 2)}. For those following this paern, it is as if personal
knowledge mirrored the conventional cultural knowledge, a truly
Vygotskian account of a reconstruction of the social at a psyological level.
A less-common paern seems to indicate a more complex process. For
instance, instead of following the conventional procedure, one of the
farmers multiplied one of the sides by half the length of the smaller side of
the triangle {Area = [b × (a / 2)]}. When asked why he had not averaged the
“opposite sides,” he said that could not be done and went on to explain that
the largest side was discounted because it can be seen as equivalent to the
diagonal of a quadrilateral. us, using it in the formulae would result in
overestimating the area of the triangle (Abreu, 1998b). In this paern, there

was an indication of uniqueness: personal knowledge was grounded in
cultural knowledge, but it was not a copy of it. e reference to the
diagonal of a triangle also suggests that the unique solution could be a
hybrid form that combines pieces of knowledge from farming practices
with pieces from sool practices. is paern is in agreement with Saxe’s
observations of the impact of being exposed to new practices on cognition.
The Use of Tools in Transitions between Practices
Evidence that what one person learns in one practice does not always
translate to other practices makes it possible to question traditional
explanations of transfer in terms of an automatic cognitive process. It is also
the case, however, that people move between practices and that some
overlapping between uses of knowledge has been observed. Some
researers have argued that it is important to explain these movements by
using a developmental dimension in the investigations (Abreu, 1998a; Saxe,
1991; Van Oers, 1998). Saxe (1991) addressed developmental issues in his
investigations among Brazilian candy sellers (boys aged between 6 and 15
years). His study involved ethnographic observations in whi the speciﬁc
mathematics of candy selling was described and demonstrated through
structured interviews. One example examined how ildren decided the
price of candies for retail sale. Saxe observed that younger ildren were
more likely to rely on other people (wholesale store clerks, parents, or
colleagues) while the older ones did the calculations themselves. Among
the ildren who did the calculations, he observed that they predominantly
made use of practice-linked strategies. He also observed, however, that
some ildren used sool-linked strategies, whi in fact involved the
appropriation of both practice and sool-based mathematics. Saxe’s
developmental approa provided two new insights into the way

transitions between out-of-sool and in-sool mathematical practices
may be conceptualized. e ﬁrst is to regard these transitions as a
constructive developmental process taking shape over time through a
progressive appropriation and specialization of forms of knowledge. e
second is to regard these transitions as a socially supported process.
Saxe’s insights can be applied to understanding learners in transition
between diﬀerent sool mathematical practices, as is the case of many
immigrant sool students. e socio-developmental nature of transition
processes were observed in our case study analysis of Felipe, an immigrant
student in a secondary sool in Catalonia (Abreu et al., 2013). In Chile,
Felipe used to like mathematics and was considered a good student doing
well in the subject. is was the self-image he continued having of himself
in Catalonia until the moment he failed his sool mathematics
assessments. At this stage he was surprised to ﬁnd, like many other
immigrant students, that mathematical operations and strategies were not
the same as he had experienced in Chile. Trying to make sense of what
happened to him when interviewed, he talked about the importance of time
(developmental process) and signiﬁcant others (socially supported process).
Looking ba, Felipe stressed the importance of time in two ways: ﬁrst, the
time it took him to become aware of what was happening and how it
aﬀected his sool career. His grades in mathematics make it seem
impossible for him to pursue his oice of university degree. Second, he
talked about the way parents and teaers could have played a role in
helping him become aware of the diﬀerences and addressing issues at an
earlier stage.
e focus on the use of cultural tools for people who experience
transitions between mathematical practices shows that (i) participation in
diﬀerent mathematical practices has implications for mathematical
cognition, as the participant may, for example develop new hybrid
strategies; (ii) that these practices are socially organized and that signiﬁcant

others play a role in the way a person appropriates mathematical
knowledge; (iii) that shis in mathematical cognition occur as constructive
developmental processes; and (iv) that sool mathematics is beer
conceptualized as a variety of speciﬁc “sool mathematical” practices that
are distinctive depending on their contexts. is last point allow us to draw
on the insights of resear on out-of-sool mathematics to understand
mathematical learning in current globalized and multicultural societies,
where it is common that learners experience transitions between diﬀerent
sool mathematical practices—for example, transitions between sool
mathematics at sool and sool mathematics at home, and transitions
between sool mathematics of the home country and sool mathematics
of a host country.

Social Mediation of Mathematical Learning
As described earlier, studies on out-of-sool mathematics arose from
cross-cultural psyology and this seems to have shaped the way the
impact of the social was initially explored. First, the studies carried out on a
variety of out-of-sool practices in diﬀerent cultures pointed to links
between the uses of mathematical tools and sociocultural and institutional
contexts. Second, the notion that the tools with one uses to think are
cultural generated interest in a particular type of asymmetric social
interaction: between someone who is more knowledgeable and someone
who is less knowledgeable, su as parent-ild, teaer-pupil, or master-
apprentice. We ﬁrst review some key studies under these two foci and then
explore the impact of changes on the macro-social level.
The Mediating Role of Social Institutions
In the sequence of out-of-sool studies that suggested the use of tools was
linked to the context of the practices, researers explored the applicability
of these ideas to formal institutional contexts. Resear on cultural aspects
has addressed context-speciﬁc cognition related to activities (e.g., tailoring,
sooling, selling), while resear on social aspects has addressed issues
related to the social institutions where these activities take place. Examples
of su studies are Säljö and Wyndhamn (1993) and Subauer-Leoni
(1990). Both investigated the applicability of the ideas to diﬀerent contexts
within sool by comparing performance inside and outside the
mathematics classrooms. Säljö and Wyndhamn found that Swedish
students, when asked to solve postage problems, called on diﬀerent
strategies according to the context in whi the task was presented. In the
context of a mathematics lesson, 57% of the students aempted some type

of calculation. In a social studies lesson, however, only 29% used
calculations. In this context most of the students found the solution by
reading the postage table. Subauer-Leoni and collaborators (Subauer-
Leoni, 1990; Subauer-Leoni and Perret-Clermont, 1997) found that 8- and
9-year-old Swiss ildren used diﬀerent solutions to addition problems
according to the context in whi they were tested. Only three out of 34
pupils used conventional arithmetical notation when tested outside the
classroom, compared with 17 out of 39 pupils when tested in the classroom.
Because the cultural artifacts available were similar, one can hypothesize
that diﬀerences in the solution were related to “multitude of genres”
(Mini, Stone, & Forman, 1993). Mathematics, like language, provided
diﬀerent uses that emerged as a function of the ways tasks are interpreted.
e institutional place where the activities were presented to the ildren
provided diﬀerent frames for the interpretation of the task and allowed
them a oice of tools. ese ﬁndings add another dimension to the
understanding of continuities and discontinuities in the use of mathematical
knowledge across practices. ey suggest that institutional discursive
practices (Walkerdine, 1988) regulate uses of mathematical knowledge, and
consequently, patterns of development.
The Mediating Role of Social Interactions
Although the inﬂuence of social interactions in learning is one of the main
lines of investigation in sociocultural theory, most of the empirical resear
in mathematics learning has been conducted either in controlled
experimental situations or in classrooms (Cobb, 1995; Forman,
Larreamendy-Joerns, Stein, & Brown, 1998; Subauer-Leoni & Perret-
Clermont, 1997). us analyses of social interactions speciﬁc to the
transmission and appropriation of mathematical knowledge in out-of-

sool practices are scarce (Hyde, Else-est, Alibali, Knuth, & Romberg,
2006; Saxe, 1996; Vandermaas-Peeler, Nelson, Bumpass, & Sassine, 2009).
Saxe, Guberman, and Gearhart (1987) introduced detailed analysis of
social interactions in out-of-sool mathematics by researing number
practices in White families living in Brooklyn, New York. ey sampled
families from both working- and middle-class groups with young ildren
aged 2.5 to 4 years. Previous resear had revealed that ildren of this age
developed some basic mathematical knowledge, but the enculturating
processes through whi these ildren acquired this knowledge had not
been addressed. By conducting in-depth interviews with the mothers, Saxe
et al.’s resear revealed the social structuring of early number practices at
home. ese practices had been organized taking into account age and class
diﬀerences. For instance, the younger ildren tended to be engaged in less-
complex activities, while the older ildren engaged in more-complex
activities. Furthermore, analyses of mother-ild videotaped interactions
revealed the dialectical nature of the process: “mothers were adjusting their
goal-related directives to their ildren’s understandings and task-related
accomplishments and ildren were adjusting their goal-directed activities
to their mothers’ efforts to organize the task” (Saxe, 1996, p. 292).
Further support that families play a part in the structuring of practices
that contribute to the ild’s development of mathematical cognition
outside sool was obtained in Guberman’s (1996) study with Brazilian
families. Children from working-class families in Brazil oen engage in
commercial transactions. Taking this into consideration, Guberman
observed and interviewed parents of Brazilian ildren aged 4 to 14 years.
He explored how parents structured their ildren’s learning of
mathematics by varying the degree of responsibility assigned to the ild in
purasing tasks. His ﬁndings revealed four levels of engagement in
purase tasks that were related to increasing arithmetical complexity. For
instance, at Level 1, the ild is given the exact amount of money needed

for the purase. At Level 2, the ild is not given an exact amount and is
told to wait for the ange. At Level 3, the ild is required to e the
ange. At Level 4, the ild is expected to calculate the cost of the
purase. Identiﬁcation of currency and the requirement to make
calculations varied in complexity from Levels 1 to 4. Guberman concluded
that “even in activities distal from direct verbal interaction with parents,
children learning often is regulated by parents” (p. 1621).
e types of mathematical competencies studied by Saxe and Guberman
have oen been referred to as informal mathematics. Furthermore, some
authors assert that “mu of this informal mathematics can develop in the
absence of adult instruction; indeed, many adults are quite surprised to
learn how mu their young ildren or students know in this area”
(Ginsburg, Choi, Lopez, Netley, & Chao-Yuan, 1997, p. 165). Saxe and
Guberman’s ﬁndings do, however, suggest that the absence of formal
instruction cannot be confused with la of socially organized activities that
support a ild’s development of mathematical concepts. In fact, in the
same way that adults would not oen deﬁne their uses of mathematics in
outside sool activities as mathematical, they would likewise not deﬁne
their ildren’s practices as mathematical (see also O’Toole & Abreu, 2005).
e mediating role of adults and more expert peers in structuring and
supporting the new generations in their local practices, however, is revealed
when explored in systematic research.
e need for basic resear exploring parent-ild interactions associated
with mathematics learning in the home is noted in the literature. Hyde et al.
(2006), for example, argue that “Parents are a largely untapped resource for
improving the mathematics performance of American ildren” (p. 136).
e importance of home mathematical practices and of a socio-cultural
approa in their study was applied to predominantly White mothers,
whi the authors anowledge as a limitation of their study, as ethnic
minority parents may diﬀer. However, their main ﬁndings actually reﬂect

those from studies with other cultural groups; i.e., the way mothers interact
with their ildren is impacted by their mathematical knowledge and by
their self-conﬁdence. In our studies we have opted for referring to self-
confidence as part of mathematical identities, a concept that better reflects a
socio-cultural approa to mathematics learning (see for example, Abreu,
1995; Craer & Abreu, 2010). Indeed, a recent study by Newton and Abreu
(2014) exempliﬁes how the concept of identity can oﬀer new insights on the
way parents interact with their ildren. Using a dialogical self approa,
Newton’s analysis suggested that the parent’s mathematical identity, in the
form of positioning the “self” (the parent) and “other” (the ild) was seen
to inﬂuence mathematical activities during parent-ild interaction. In his
study, how the parent perceived the mathematical identity of their ild
was more important in determining mathematical activity than the parent’s
own mathematical identity. is was seen in the way parental practice
reﬂected: 
ildren’s 
feelings and emotions regarding mathematics,
ildren’s perceived competencies at mathematics, and ildren’s aitude
towards mathematical activity.
The Impact of Macro-Social Change
In current societies, with increasing levels of cultural ange, new
communication tenologies, and the unprecedented levels of traveling and
migration, it is likely that both adults and ildren frequently experience
exposure to ange and coexisting practices. Sociocultural approaes to
mathematics learning, in particular those based on initial interpretations of
Vygotsky and apprenticeship models, are recognized as providing a limited
account of the impact of the societal anges on learning (Forman, Mini,
& Stone, 1993; Goodnow, 1990). Studies of interactions following a
Vygotskian approa were criticized for providing “descriptions of perfectly

orestrated dyads” (Litowitz, 1993, p. 187) and for a la of consideration
of the inﬂuences of the wider social structure (Stone, 1993). We revisit
Abreu’s resear with the sugarcane farmers (Abreu, 1998b) to illustrate
how a ange on the macro-cultural impacts on an individual participant.
At the time of Abreu’s ﬁeld work in the farming community, the farmers
were in the midst of coping with one of these external demands. Changes
in the Brazilian economy at a macro level led the government to impose
new criteria for the payment of sugarcane.
e ﬁrst impact of the ange was that it required a type of
mathematical knowledge most of farmers did not have. Traditional
mathematics (Abreu, 1999) enabled the farmers to grasp some
understanding of the new system, su as when comparing whether they
were making or losing money, but it was limited when they had to read
and interpret tables combining diﬀerent variables and when they were
required to understand concepts su as percentages, decimals, and positive
and negative numbers. e second type of impact was on the farmers’
identities. e anges made them experience loss of control, it brought
uncertainty, and it threatened their standing. ey were not sure where
they stood, whether they could contract services, whether they could
borrow money from the bank, and perhaps more importantly, whether
they could survive in business. e third impact was that exposure to
tenological innovation and modern institutions (e.g., sools, banks) over
time raised the farmers’ awareness that some forms of knowledge are more
powerful than others, and also that some are more accepted than others.
For the person, anges in macro-social structures can have diﬀerent types
of impact, whi can be linked both to mathematical knowledge itself, and
to the way knowledge influences identities.
e insights gained from the farmers can be applied to explore the
impact of anges in sool mathematical curriculum on parents. Our
studies in England have shown the crucial impact that the introduction of a

National Numeracy Strategy had on the relationship between home and
sool mathematics. e mathematics that ildren are learning in today’s
primary sools is diﬀerent from the parents own sool mathematics.
Several studies with the parents revealed that these anges had an impact
on the way they try to make sense of new mathematical knowledge (e.g.
understanding new strategies, understanding a number line), on their
identities (in terms of how parents feel able to support their ildren), and
in their relationship with their ildren (who oen resist the parents’
knowledge as diﬀerent from the sool). Despite sools’ aempts to help
the parents to cat up with curriculum anges, su as running
workshops for parents, it was apparent many parents still struggled (see for
example, Craer, 2012; McMullen & Abreu, 2011; Newton & Abreu, 2012).
is is an area that needs further resear as there are gaps in the
understanding of the impact of parental involvement in their ildren’s
school mathematics.
Another key example of the impact of societal anges is the
examination of practices, su as peer collaboration, that may have worked
in monocultural classrooms but do not necessarily work in multicultural
classrooms. is is exempliﬁed by Elbers and de Haan (2005). ey
examined the construction of word meaning by students in a multicultural
mathematics classroom at a Dut primary sool. e sool where they
worked had 80% of the students from a minority baground, mainly
Moroccan and Turkish, and the teaers followed a pedagogy that
promoted peer collaboration. Elbers and de Haan recorded and examined
the way students deal with language problems in mathematical tasks that
originate from minority students’ unfamiliarity with speciﬁc Dut words
and expressions. e initial expectation was that clarifying cultural
meanings of Dut words was crucial for the students to overcome their
language problems—but their analysis pointed out something diﬀerent.
eir study showed that minority students: (1) do not ask for clariﬁcation of

word meaning during teaer-fronted classroom instruction; (2) do raise
problems with word meanings when working in groups, but their
conversations about word meaning are restricted to their collaborative
group activities. e clariﬁcation of meaning was made part of the
mathematical discourse, even in groups with Dut ildren who
potentially did have access to the wider cultural discourse. When providing
explanations the Dut students did not elucidate the meaning of the
unfamiliar words in broad cultural terms but gave minimal information,
whi was suﬃcient for minority students to solve the task. ese ﬁndings
suggest that the institutional practices take for granted the students’ access
to cultural meanings. Peer collaboration in the classroom investigated by
Elbers and de Haan required the Dut students to take on the role of
helping classmates from a diversity of cultural and linguistic bagrounds.
is is a completely new allenge that required them to engage in forms
of interaction unfamiliar to them. Future resear has to address the
development and promotion of new forms of interaction and classroom
communication that beer support access to the mathematical curriculum
cultural meanings (Abreu & Elbers, 2005; Elbers & de Haan, 2005).

From Cultural and Social Mediation to the Person
as Participant in Multiple Mathematical Practices
e insights from the resear outlined earlier contributed to the
development of socio-cultural approaes to mathematical learning that
apply to all learners. ese insights oﬀered a new lens to explore the
learning of ildren from home cultures diﬀerent from their sool culture.
e evidence that ildren and young people (su as the Brazilian street
ildren) developed competence in out-of-sool mathematics begged for
an explanation as to why they were failing in their sool mathematics.
Along the same lines researers working with immigrant and minority
communities started exploring relationships between home–sool
mathematics (e.g. the work of Marta Civil in the United States, see Civil,
2008). Initially, the notion of home mathematics underlying these studies
was based on engagement with informal working activities (e.g., street
vending, farming, dressmaking).
Over time the notion of home mathematics evolved to include a wider
range of “everyday” practices including both implicit (spontaneous)
numeracy practices su as playing games, cooking, and baking, and more
explicit numeracy practices su as counting, using money, and sool
mathematics at home. e need to distinguish between these diﬀerent
types of numeracy at home has been recognized as crucial to the
understanding of the impact of outside-sool mathematics on sool
mathematics learning (Craer & Abreu, 2011; LeFevre et al., 2009;
Vandermaas-Peeler et al., 2009). is is a sign that the notion of home
numeracy practices is starting to be recognized as mainstream and relevant
to the understanding of the mathematical learning of all ildren. We
would argue, however, that an understanding of home–sool mathematics
needs more than a description of the numeracy practices; it needs a clear
account of the ways the key actors (ild, parent, and teaer) participate in

and experience these practices.
Children’s Participation in Home Mathematics
Observations from Abreu’s studies with soolildren in Brazil and
Portugal (Abreu, 1995; Abreu, Bishop, & Pompeu, 1997) revealed a new
angle on how they participated in outside-sool mathematical practices.
Instead of a common paern of enculturation into home practices, evidence
of heterogeneity emerged. Shopping activities related to the everyday life
of the family—for example, feting bread, fruit, or vegetables—were
common practices among the ildren in Abreu’s studies. Interviews with
ildren engaged in similar practices revealed diﬀerences in what the ild
was in arge of: (i) some of the ildren just did the shopping, and adults
took responsibility for economic exanges (that is, they fully accepted the
vendor’s sums and ange or their parents took responsibility for that); (ii)
some of the ildren shared the responsibility with their parents or with
other adults; and (iii) some of the ildren described themselves as being in
arge of the economic decisions involved. e manner in whi the
ildren experienced this situation seemed to inﬂuence the extent to whi
they used mathematics in the home practices. At a ﬁrst glance, these forms
of engagement can be seen as developmental. Indeed, it is not diﬃcult to
see some resemblance with Guberman’s (1996) levels of engagement.
However, in-depth comparative case study analysis suggested that the
diversity could be linked to the way parents supported their ildren’s
engagement in out-of-sool practices, including other factors than the
ildren’s developmental level. For instance, ildren’s accounts suggested
that not all the families engaged their ildren in the use of traditional
home mathematics.
It seems common understanding that diversity in participation results in

diﬀerent degrees of mastery of knowledge. However, the way people gain
an understanding of the social world around them involves other social
processes. Children and young people develop an understanding of the
valorization of coexisting mathematical practices and associated social
identities, whi make them active agents in the way they participate in the
practices (Abreu & Cline, 2003) Drawing on Tajfel (1978), participating in
mathematical practices results in two key processes: First it results in the
process of social categorization, i.e., “the ordering of the social environment
in terms of groupings of persons in a manner whi makes sense to
individuals” (Tajfel, 1978, p. 61). Second, social comparison emerges from a
human tendency to evaluate the ordering within the system of values of a
society. ese processes contribute to an individual’s development of social
identities: i.e., how a membership in particular community of practice
contributes to an understanding of who they are and where they stand.
e ﬁndings from Abreu and her colleagues’ studies indicated that
ildren had developed ways of categorizing some practices of their
community as involving uses of mathematics and others as not involving
them. For instance, in the farming community in Brazil (Abreu, 1995), it
was more likely that ildren would categorize working in an oﬃce as a
practice in whi people use mathematics than working on a sugarcane
farm. In England (Abreu & Cline, 2003), few ildren categorized driving a
taxi as a practice that requires the use of mathematics, but they could see
shopping as one that does. ey also associated performances in sool
mathematics with given social identities. For instance, for tasks in whi
they had to oose adults who might have been good or bad at sool, the
ildren ose more adults in white-collar professions (oﬃce workers) as
possibly having been the best in sool mathematics; conversely ildren
ose those in blue-collar professions and other low social status practices
as possibly the worst.
We argue that these social-psyological processes are key to explain

processes of mathematical learning as intersecting with processes of
identity development. Studies in cultures where home mathematics is
distinct from sool mathematics (Abreu, 1995), and studies with immigrant
and minority students, illustrated that ildren and young people become
aware of the diﬀerences between their home and their sool practices (see
Abreu, Bishop, & Presmeg, 2002a; Abreu & Elbers, 2005). In addition, some
of these studies have shown that students talked about these diﬀerences in
relation to how they perceived their home cultural identities as intersecting
with their sool mathematical learning. Gorgorió, Planas, and Vilella
(2002) clearly illustrated this intersection when they reported the case of
Saima, a 15-year-old Indian girl, who expressed the feeling of being
displaced in the Catalonian mathematical classroom. As she said, “Miss, I’m
wrong in your class … I do the same mathematics as boys, but I will not do
the same work … I do not want to be a meanic. Please, can I do
mathematics for girls?” (p. 44). Saima’s positioning was constructed at the
intersection of her gender identity, her cultural identity, and her identity as
a mathematical learner.
Craer and Abreu (2010) also found evidence of a similar developmental
process in her study with learners in multiethnic mathematical classrooms
in England. ey examined the case of Monifa, a 10-year-old daughter of a
Nigerian family, who developed awareness that the diﬀerences between
the mathematical practices of her father and her teaer were linked to
their cultural identities. As Monifa explained: “Sometimes they just explain
it diﬀerently…. Because my dad would have done it diﬀerently and it’s
where we come from because my dad was taught in Nigeria, and he taught
in Nigeria. And Miss Durham has been here. So, they do it in diﬀerent
ways.” When recounting an event where the teaer tried to convince her
that her father’s solution was not appropriate, she said: “I wasn’t too keen
but I understand my dad’s more so I went with my dad. But she is my
teaer in sool, so…. .” Monifa’s view was that the best way of coping for

her would be to sti to ea mathematical practice according to the
context. But, as she explained, the practices of the sool and home oen
made requests on her that made her feel as if she were “two people”: “It’s
like I’m two people at the same time and it’s just hard.” Case studies su
as Saima’s and Monifa’s illustrate that some students develop awareness of
the signiﬁcance of their cultural identity in their sool mathematical
learning, experienced in this case, as a discontinuity. ey also suggest that
to cope with discontinuity these students have engaged with complex
identity work, whi requires them to articulate the impact of diﬀerences
between home and school mathematical practices in relation to identities.
Parents Participation in Their Children’s School
Mathematics
Observations su as those outlined earlier motivated our inclusion of
parents in resear investigating how ildren experience the relationship
between their home and sool mathematics. It seemed likely that parents
were playing a key role in the diversity among ildren in their
reconstruction of the cultural systems of knowledge of the home practices.
It also seemed likely that they were playing a part (sometimes
unintentional) in the way the ildren were developing their identities as
mathematical learners. But the dynamics through whi their inﬂuences
operated were unclear. Were their own valorizations of the coexisting
mathematical practices the crucial factor? Or was their inﬂuence shaped in
interactions (and perhaps negotiations) with the ildren themselves (i.e., a
joint construction)? To explore these issues, the resear strategy adopted
with the Brazilian soolildren (Abreu, 1995) was expanded to include a
parental perspective. e new studies were conducted in multiethnic
primary sools in England (Abreu & Cline, 1998; Abreu, Cline, & Shamsi,

2002b; Abreu & Cline, 2005; O’Toole & Abreu, 2005).
For the initial studies, sools with representative numbers of ildren
from Bangladeshi (Abreu & Cline, 1998) and Pakistani families living in
England were selected (Abreu et al., 2002b; Abreu & Cline, 2005). e
paerns of aievement of ildren in these multiethnic sools had some
similarities to the sools in Brazil. Children of Bangladeshi and Pakistani
origin, on average, underaieved in English sools (OFSTED, 1999).
Nonetheless, as in Brazil, within any single-year group, there was variation
in performance among the ildren from the same home group, whi
included both high and low aievers. It was also likely that there were
diﬀerences between ildren’s home and sool mathematics because their
parents experienced a diﬀerent culture and a diﬀerent sool system
through having gone to sool in their country of origin. erefore, it was
possible to follow the original question: “Do the ildren who succeed [in
sool mathematics] establish a diﬀerent relationship with their home
knowledge than the ones who fail?” (Abreu, 1995, p. 124), by incorporating
a parental perspective. at is, if ildren establish a diﬀerent relationship
do parents play a role and, if so, what does that role involves?
Parents’ more vivid accounts of their engagement in helping the ildren
with mathematics at home were related to sool mathematics. It was also
in these accounts that both ildren and parents made explicit the
diﬀerences between the way mathematics was taled in the ild’s sool
and at home (Abreu & Cline, 2005; Abreu et al., 2002b). Accounts from the
parents showed that diﬀerences between home and sool mathematics
could be experienced in terms of:
e content of sool mathematics and in the strategies used for
calculations (examples included diﬀerences in algorithms for
subtraction and division);
e methods of teaing and the tools used in teaing (for example,

methods for learning times tables, use of calculators);
e language in whi they learned and felt conﬁdent doing
mathematics.
Apart from the diﬀerences related to language, the ﬁrst two diﬀerences
applied to both groups studied, i.e., White-British and Asian-British parents.
ey seem to be linked to the parents’ experience of a diﬀerent sool
system (immigrant parents) and or to anges in the curriculum over time
in England. is meant that in both ethnic groups, if parents (relatives)
were to support the ild at sool properly, they had to ﬁgure out the
necessary process of transition between their own mathematical practices
and the ones the child was experiencing (Abreu et al., 2002b).
Diﬀerences within the same ethnic group emerged when we focused the
analysis on (i) the inﬂuences of the parents’ positions in the way they
taled the diﬀerences, and (ii) a comparison between information obtained
from the parent and their ild regarding representations, experiences, and
negotiations of diﬀerences between home and sool mathematics (Abreu
& Cline, 2005). ere was some evidence that the way parents structured
their support to their ildren was likely to be colored by their own
positions about whi form of knowledge they valued more. For instance,
they took positions regarding the language by whi mathematics was
communicated, or regarding the importance of knowing the times tables by
heart.
Abreu and her colleagues’ (2002b) examination of the paerns of
interaction between the ild and the parent’s experiences oﬀered further
insight into the emergence of within group diversity. Comparative case
study analysis highlighted some possible links between paerns of
interaction and ildren’s performances. Comparison of two Pakistani
ildren, both in Year 2, and in the same mathematics class, showed that for
the low-aieving ild, there was a discontinuity between the ild’s

preferences and the way the parents were trying to support him in learning
sool mathematics. His parents were not aware that the transition exposed
the ild to diﬀerences between the way they taught mathematics to him at
home and the way he was learning at sool. e ild’s accounts revealed
that he believed the teaer knew beer than his mother did and that he
preferred the English language. At home, however, his parents were
teaing him in Urdu, and did not show any awareness that the ange in
language at sool could cause him diﬃculties. is seemed a case in whi
the parents’ representations of primary sool mathematics were still
associated with their own sooling. Diﬃculties in communication with the
sool might have reinforced their representation. By contrast, in the case
of the high aiever, there was continuity in the way diﬀerences in
methods, language, and identities were negotiated. In this case, the parents
—in particular the mother—had developed representations of home and
sool learning that included a theory of how her ild might experience
the transition. For this ild, the diﬀerences between the mother and his
teaer’s mathematics did not mean that home practices had “inferior
status.” Like the low achiever, he also preferred the English language, but in
this case the mother was prepared to help the ild bridge the gap between
the two languages.
A basic distinction between the low aiever and the high aiever was
seen in the parents’ awareness of the existence of diﬀerences in their own
ways of doing mathematics and those that their ild was being taught at
sool. e parent of the high aiever also showed more awareness of the
ild’s preferences. e success was then aieved through sensitive
interactions, in whi the mother learned from the ild and then adjusted
her strategies to ﬁt with his needs and preferences. A case study with a
White-British parent, however, showed that being aware of the diﬀerence
was not enough to support a ild. In this case, the mother had developed
an acute sense of the diﬀerences between her methods and those of the

ild, but was experiencing it as a burden. erefore, interactions conducive
to success seemed to require awareness of diﬀerences, ﬂexible adjustment,
and specialized mathematical knowledge. In sum, including the perspective
of parents revealed the intersection of the social, cultural, and individual. It
showed that parents did not just recreate their own mathematical
baground for their ildren. ey deliberately selected some forms of
knowledge from those available in their culture as appropriate to transmit
to their ildren and rejected or hid other forms. Finally, the actions of
some parents seemed to take into account the active role of the child.
is area was further investigated using the concept of cultural models
and resources to give insight into how parents make sense of their ild’s
mathematics learning (Craer, 2012). Cultural models are paerns and
meanings that help us make sense of our experiences. When faced with
new experiences parents would need to draw on existing cultural models to
make sense of those. In whi case, what resources do parents draw on
during the process of this sense making? Interviews with 28 parents
revealed that the type of resources used to make sense of home-sool
mathematics depended on what parents were focusing on. For example,
when trying to understand the ild’s aievement, parents would look
towards the teaer, exam results, and their own models of ild
development to incorporate new information into existing cultural models
(Craer, 2012). e use of resources to expand one’s understanding of
home-sool mathematics was precarious. Parents oen misunderstood the
messages teaers gave them about their ild’s aievement, the way
exam results were reported were hard for parents to understand, and
parents’ understandings of ild development (and therefore the
expectations for what a ild can perform at a particular age) did not
always mat the sool’s. Using the ild as a resource for completing
mathematics homework could be more problematic for parents whose
ildren did not understand the mathematics or who were generally

resistant to completing it.
e question of what counts as mathematics in culturally diverse homes
also warrants some aention. For example, some parents were skilled at
explicitly undertaking activities that the ild may, or may not, be aware
involves learning mathematics. Or, parents know that an activity like
cooking explicitly uses mathematics but they do not know how to make
this activity into one involving calculation. Equally, mathematics may be
implicit in home activities without parents being aware that they are doing
mathematics (Craer & Abreu, 2013). Vandermaas-Peeler et al. (2009) also
argue that distinguishing diﬀerent types of parents’ home numeracies is
important to understand ildren’s mathematical development. In their
study they distinguish “ socio-cultural numeracy exanges, explaining the
use and value of money or numbers in routine activities such as shopping or
cooking, and mathematical exanges, including counting, quantity or size
comparisons” (p.67, our emphasis).
To sum up, the need to distinguish between diﬀerent types of parental
numeracy practices is now gaining wider acceptance and is being advocated
as a potential avenue to understand the impact of parents on their ild’s
sool mathematical learning (see for example, LeFevre, et al., 2009). Socio-
cultural studies suggest complex ways of exploring these practices taking
into account the intricate relationships between knowledge construction
and identities.

Concluding Thoughts
In conclusion, we would like to reﬂect on the extent that accounts of how
learners ‘experience relationships between mathematical learning in and
out of sool are emphasizing continuity or discontinuity between these
practices. ere is not a simple explanation for this relationship. We
discerned distinct phases on the research to elaborate our thinking.
Resear since the 1970s on out-of-sool mathematics has followed the
same direction as that of Vygotsky’s theory on the impact of culture in the
mind. According to Mini et al. (1993), Vygotskian resear of the late
1970s and early 1980s tested the plausibility of the theoretical framework. It
was one-dimensional and focused on a discussion around the relationship
between cognition and cognitive tools. is is reﬂected in the initial studies
on out-of-sool mathematics that explored the cultural nature of
mathematical tools, su as counting systems, and how these were
appropriated and used as cognitive tools. e emphasis on this initial work
was on the diﬀerences between out-of-sool and in-sool mathematics. It
was apparent that there was discontinuity between the practices, as
competence in one practice did not predict performance in the other
practice. is applied in both directions. One could be competent in out-of-
sool mathematics and also having diﬃculties at sool. In the same vein,
one could be competent in sool mathematics and not perform well in
out-of-school mathematics (e.g. see Nunes et al., 1993).
Following this period, during the late 1980s and 90s the framework was
broadened to pay aention to processes of social mediation. e aention
to social institutions and social interactions became apparent when resear
in out-of-sool mathematics shied from cross-cultural comparisons to
social practices within the Western societies. Contrasting out-of-sool and
in-sool mathematics took another turn here. It became clear that both
institutions and participants in social interactions played a part in the

continuity and discontinuity between the practices. Social representations of
what counts as sool mathematical knowledge and about the learning
process can be seen as inﬂuencing the continuity and discontinuity. us,
for example, the representation that certain forms of out-of-sool
mathematics are poorly valued at sool may contribute to discontinuity.
is also applies to the representation of sool mathematical practices
over time, as for example, in the context of societal anges, parents’ sool
mathematics can be represented as “old fashioned.” From a social
perspective, participation in mathematical practices becomes a process of
understanding and construction of social and cultural identities (Abreu,
1995; Abreu & Cline, 2003; Craer & Abreu, 2010). e issues of continuity
and discontinuity become both issues of connecting mathematical concepts,
tools, understandings, and issues of identity. Connecting out of-sool and
in-sool mathematics also involves dialogue and negotiation between
identity positions of the self and signiﬁcant others. ese insights
contributed to a third turn in this ﬁeld of resear that focuses on the
person as a participant in multiple mathematical practices. From this
perspective, discontinuity is a starting point. Resear explores trajectories
of participation, aempting to make sense of the processes that result in a
person experiencing discontinuity in practices over time and across
practices, and the processes that enable change and facilitate continuity.
As far as educational policy is concerned, there has been very lile
ange in the last decade. Resear in out-of-sool contexts as well as in
mathematical learning in multicultural sools suggests that in situations
where home bagrounds diﬀer markedly from sool bagrounds,
ildren might beneﬁt from an approa that helps them bridge gaps and
cross boundaries (Abreu et al., 2002a). is is still far from being the way
curricular reforms are implemented in England. e numeracy framework
in England emphasizes the need for parents and communities to be
involved in their ildren’s mathematics education to ensure aievement

(Abreu & Cline, 2005; Brown, Askew, Baker, Denvir, & Millet, 1998). e
parents’ involvement, however, is not seen in terms of helping the ildren
to integrate home and sool numeracies (Abreu & Cline, 2005). It is
instead portrayed in unidirectional terms, in whi the parents are expected
to support sool numeracies, but no aention is given to home numeracy
practices. Although these policies are in line with representations of
teaers and parents, who view the sool mathematics as the relevant one
for the ild’s success in today’s society, they might fail to take into account
the actual experiences of the developing child (Abreu & Cline, 2005).
Resear on the development of immigrant ildren does suggest that
successful pathways are associated with transcultural identities that
promote a creative acquisition of competencies from the culture(s) of origin
and the host culture (Suárez-Orozco & Suárez-Orozco, 2001). e case
studies reported in the previous section suggest that mathematics education
is far from understanding how to design classroom practices that enable
ildren to see distinct mathematical practices as part of their transcultural
identities. e social and cultural basis of representations from teaers,
parents, and curriculum planners need to be understood along with an
examination of their impact on the way learners experience transitions
between their school and out-of-school mathematical practices.

References
Abreu, G. de (1995). Understanding how ildren experience the relationship between home and
school mathematics. Mind, Culture and Activity: An International Journal, 2(2), 119–142.
Abreu, G. de (1998a). e mathematics learning in sociocultural contexts: e mediating role of
social valorisation. Learning and Instruction, 8(6), 567–572.
Abreu, G. de (1998b). Reﬂecting on mathematics in and out of sool from a cultural psyology
perspective. In A.O.A.K. Newstead (Ed.), PME—e International group for the psyology of
mathematics education (Vol. 1, pp. 115–130). Stellenbosh, South Africa: PME.
Abreu, G. de (1999). Learning mathematics in and outside sool: Two views on situated learning. In
J. Bliss, R. Saljo, & P. Light (Eds.), Learning sites: Social and tenological resources for learning
(pp. 17–31). Oxford: Elsevier Science.
Abreu, G. de (2014). Cultural diversity in mathematics education. In Encyclopedia of mathematics
education (pp. 125–129). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Abreu, G. de, Bishop, A., & Pompeu, G. (1997). What ildren and teaers count as mathematics. In
T. Nunes & P. Bryant (Eds.), Learning and teaing mathematics: An international perspective
(pp. 233–264). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Abreu, G. de, Bishop, A., & Presmeg, N. (2002a). Transitions between contexts of mathematical
practices. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Abreu, G. de, & Cline, T. (1998). Studying social representations of mathematics learning in
multiethnic primary schools: Work in progress. Papers on Social Representations, 7(1–2), 1–20.
Abreu, G. de, & Cline, T. (2003). Sooled mathematics and cultural knowledge. Pedagogy, Culture
and Society, 11(1), 11–30.
Abreu, G. de, & Cline, T. (2005). Parents’ representations of their ildren’s mathematics learning in
multiethnic primary schools. British Educational Research Journal, 31(6), 697–722.
Abreu, G. de, Cline, T., & Shamsi, T. (2002b). Exploring ways parents participate in their ildren’s
sool mathematical learning: Case studies in a multi-ethnic primary sool. In G. de Abreu, A.
Bishop, & N. Presmeg (Eds.), Transitions between contexts of mathematical practices (pp. 123–
147). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Abreu, G. de, Craer, S., Gorgorió, N., & Prat, M. (2013, February). Understanding immigrant

students’ transitions as mathematical learners from a dialogical self perspective. CERME 8.
Antalya, 
Turkey. 
Retrieved 
from
http://cerme8.metu.edu.tr/wgpapers/WG10/WG10_de_Abreu.pdf
Abreu, G. de, & Elbers, E. (2005). Introduction: e social mediation of learning in multiethnic
schools. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 20(1), 3–11.
Anderson, D. D., & Gold, E. (2006). Home to sool: Numeracy practices and mathematical
identities. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 8(3), 261–286.
Andrews, J., & Yee, W.C. (2006). Children’s ‘funds of knowledge’ and their real life activities: Two
minority ethnic ildren learning in out of sool contexts in the UK. Educational Review, 58(4),
435–449.
Arcavi, A. (2002). e everyday and the academic in mathematics. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 11, 12–29.
Baker, D. A., Street, B. V., & Tomlin, A. (2006). Navigating sooled numeracies: Explanations for
low aievement in mathematics of UK ildren from low SES baground. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 8(3), 287–307.
Bose, A., & Subramaniam, K. (2011). Exploring sool ildren’s out of sool mathematics. In
Proceedings of the 35th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 177–184).
Brenner, M. (1983). e practice of arithmetic in Liberian sools . Paper presented at the American
Anthropological Association, Chicago.
Brown, M., Askew, M., Baker, D., Denvir, H., & Millet, A. (1998). Is the national numeracy strategy
research-based? British Journal of Educational Studies, 46(4), 362–385.
Carraher, T., Carraher, D., & Sliemann, A. (1982). Na vida, dez; na escola, zero. Os contextos
culturais da aprendizagem da matematica. Cadernos de Pesquisa, 42, 76–86.
Carraher, T. N., Sliemann, A.D., & Carraher, D. W. (1988). Mathematical concepts in everyday life.
In G. Saxe & R. M. Gearhart (Eds.), Children’s mathematics: New directions in child development
(pp. 71–88). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Chronaki, A. (2005). Learning about “learning identities” in the sool arithmetic practice: e
experience of two minority gypsy girls in the Greek context of education. European Journal of
Psychology of Education, 20(1), 61–74.

Civil, M. (2008, July). Mathematics teaing and learning of immigrant students: A survey of recent
research. Manuscript prepared for the 11th International Congress of Mathematics Education
(ICME) Survey Team 5: Mathematics Education in Multicultural and Multilingual
Environments, Monterrey, Mexico.
Civil, M., & Andrade, R. (2002). Transitions between home and sool mathematics: rays of hope
amidst the passing clouds. In G. de Abreu, A. Bishop, & N. Presmeg (Eds.), Transitions between
contexts of mathematical practice (pp. 149–169). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Civil, M., & Menéndez, J. M. (2011). Impressions of Mexican immigrant families on their early
experiences with sool mathematics in Arizona. In R. Kiten & M. Civil (Eds.), Transnational
and borderland studies in mathematics education (pp. 47–68). New York: Routledge.
Cobb, P. (1995). Mathematical learning and small group interaction: four case studies. In P. Cobb &
H. Bauersfeld (Eds.), e emergence of mathematical meaning (pp. 25–129). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cobb, P., & Hodge, L. L. (2002). A relational perspective on issues of cultural diversity and equity as
they play out in the mathematics classroom. Mathematical inking and Learning (Special
Issue, “Diversity, Equity and Mathematical Learning”), 4 (2–3), 249–284.
Cole, M. (1977). An ethnographic psyology of cognition. In P. N. Johnson-Laird & P. C. Wason
(Eds.), Thinking (pp. 468–482). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1995). Culture and cognitive development: From cross-cultural resear to creating systems
of cultural mediation. Culture & Psychology, 1, 25–54.
Cole, M. (1998). Can cultural psyology help us to think about diversity? Mind, Culture and
Activity, 5(4), 291–304.
Cole, M., Gay, J., & Gli, J. (1968). Some experimental studies of Kpelle quantitative behaviour.
Psychonomic Monograph, 2(10).
Craer, S. (2012). Making sense of homework: Parental resources for understanding mathematical
learning in multicultural seings. In E. Hjörne, G. van der Aalsvoort, & G. de Abreu (Eds.),
Learning, social interaction and diversity—Exploring identities in sool practices (pp. 53–68).
Sense Publications.
Craer, S., & Abreu, G. de (2010). Constructing identities in multicultural learning contexts. Mind,
Culture and Activity, 7(2):102–118.

Craer, S., & Abreu, G. de (2011). Teaers’ discussions about parental use of implicit and explicit
mathematics in the home. Seventh Conference of the European Society for Resear in
Mathematics Education (9–11 February, Rzeszow, Poland). Working Group 10.
Craer, S., & Abreu, G. de (2013). Exploring parents’ cultural models of mathematical knowledge in
multiethnic primary sools. In G. Marsico, K. Komatsu, & A. Iannaccone (Eds.), Crossing
boundaries: Intercontextual dynamics between family and sool (pp. 209–228). Charloe, NC:
Information Age Publication.
D’Ambrosio, U. (1985). Socio-cultural basis for mathematics education. Campinas, Brasil: Unicamp.
de Haan, M., & Elbers, E. (2008). Diversity in the construction of modes of collaboration in
multiethnic classrooms. In B. van Oers, W. Wardekker, E. Elbers, & R. van der Veer (Eds.) The
transformation of learning: advances in cultural-historical activity (pp. 219–241). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Elbers, E., & de Haan, M. (2005). e construction of word meaning in a multicultural classroom.
Mediational tools in peer collaboration during mathematics lessons. European Journal of
Psychology of Education, 20(1), 45–59.
Forman, E., Larreamendy-Joerns, J., Stein, M. K., & A. Brown. (1998). “You’re going to want to ﬁnd
out whi and prove it”: Collective argumentation in a mathematics classroom. Learning and
Instruction, 8(6), 527–548.
Forman, E. A., Mini, N., & Stone, C. A. (Eds.). (1993). Contexts for learning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gay, J., & Cole, M. (1967). e new mathematics and an old culture: a study of learning among the
Kpelle of Liberia. New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Ginsburg, H. P., Choi, Y. E., Lopez, L. S., Netley, R., & Chao-Yuan, C. (1997). Happy birthday to you:
Early mathematical thinking of Asian, South American, and U.S. ildren. In T. Nunes & P.
Bryant (Eds.), Learning and teaching mathematics (pp. 163–207). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Goodnow, J. J. (1990). e socialization of cognition: What’s involved? In J. W. Stiegler, R. A.
Shweder, & G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural psyology (pp. 259–286). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Gorgorió, N., & Abreu, G. de (2009). Social representations as mediators of practice in mathematics
classrooms with immigrant students. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 72(1), 61–76.

Gorgorió, N., Abreu, G. de, César, M., & Valero, P. (2005). Issues and allenges of researing
mathematics education in multicultural settings. Paper presented at the CERME 4 — e Fourth
Conference of the European Society for Resear in Mathematics Education, Sant Feliu de
Guixols, Spain.
Gorgorió, N., Planas, N., & Vilella, X. (2002). Immigrant ildren learning mathematics in
mainstream schools. In G. de Abreu, A. Bishop, & N. Presmeg (Eds.), Transitions between contexts
of mathematical practice (pp. 23–52). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Greenﬁeld, P., & Lave, J. (1982). Cognitive aspects of informal education. In D. A. Wagner & H. W.
Stevenson (Eds.), Cultural perspectives on child development. San Francisco: Freeman.
Guberman, S. R. (1996). e development of everyday mathematics in Brazilian ildren with
limited formal education. Child Development, 67, 1609–1623.
Hughes, M., & Pollard, A. (2006). Home-sool knowledge exange in context. Educational Review,
58(4), 385–395.
Hyde, J. S., Else-est, N. M., Alibali, M. W., Knuth, E., & Romberg, T. (2006). Mathematics in the
home: Homework practices and mother—ild interactions doing mathematics. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 25(2), 136–152.
Jurkak, M., & Sharhin, I. (1999). An ethnographic study of the computational strategies of a group of
young street vendors in Beirut. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 40, 155–172.
Lave, J. (1977). Cognitive consequences of traditional apprenticeship training in West Africa.
Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 8(3), 177–180.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
LeFevre, J. A., Skwaruk, S. L., Smith-Chant, B. L., Fast, L., Kamawar, D., & Bisanz, J. (2009). Home
numeracy experiences and ildren’s math performance in the early sool years. Canadian
Journal of Behavioural Science, 41(2), 55–66.
Litowitz, B. E. (1993). Deconstruction in the Zone of Proximal Development. In E. Froman, N
Mini, & C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning (pp. 184–185). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Masinglia, J. O. (1994). Mathematics practice in carpet laying. Anthropology & Education arterly,
25, 430–461.
McMullen, R., & Abreu, G. de (2011). Mothers’ experiences of their ildren’s sool mathematics at

home: The impact of being a mother-teacher. Research in Mathematics Education,13(1), 59–74.
Mini, N., Stone, C. A., & Forman, E. A. (1993). Integration of individual, social, and institutional
processes in accounts of ildren’s learning and development. In E. A. Forman, N. Mini, & C.
A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning (pp. 3–16). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Murtaugh, M. (1985). e practice of arithmetic by American grocery shoppers. Anthropology and
Education Quarterly, 16(3), 186–192.
Nasir, N. S., & Cobb, P. (2002). Diversity, equity, and mathematical learning. Mathematical Thinking
and Learning, 4(2 & 3), 91–102.
Newton, R., & Abreu, G. de (2012). Parents as mathematical facilitators: analyzing goals in parent-
ild mathematical activity. In F. J. Diez-Palomar and C. Kanes (Eds.), Family and the
community in and out of the classroom: Ways to improve mathematics aievement . Barcelona:
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Servei de Publicacions.
Nunes, T. (1992a). Cognitive invariants and cultural variation in mathematical concepts.
International Journal of Behavioral Development, 15(4), 433–453.
Nunes, T. (1992b). Ethnomathematics and everyday cognition. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of
research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 557–574). New York: Macmillan.
Nunes, T., & Bryant, P. (1996). Children doing mathematics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Nunes, T., Sliemann, A., & Carraher, D. (1993). Street mathematics and sool mathematics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
OFSTED. (1999). Raising the aainment of minority ethnic pupils. Sool and LEA responses: Oﬃce
of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Schools.
O’Toole, S., & Abreu, G. de (2005). Parents’ past experiences as a mediational tool for understanding
their ild’s current mathematical learning. European Journal of Psyology of Education, 20(1),
75–89.
Peito, A. L., & Ginsburg, H. P. (1982). Mental arithmetic in Africa and America: Strategies,
principles, and explanations. International Journal of Psychology, 17, 81–102.
Resni, L. B., Pontecorvo, C., & Säljö, R. (1997). Discourse, tools and reasoning. In L. B. Resni, C.
Pontecorvo, R. Säljö, & B. Burge (Eds.), Discourse, tools and reasoning: Essays on situated
cognition (pp. 1–20). New York: Springer and NATO Scientific Affairs Division.
Rogoﬀ, B., & Lave, J. (Eds.). (1984). Everyday cognition: Its development in social context.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Säljö, R., & Wyndhamn, J. (1993). Solving everyday problems in the formal seing. An empirical
study of the sool as context for thought. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (Eds.), Understanding
practice: Perspectives on activity and context (pp. 327–342). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Saxe, G. B. (1982). Culture and the development of numerical cognition: Studies among the
Oksapmin of Papua New Guinea. In C. G. Brainerd (Ed.), Children’s logical and mathematical
cognition (pp. 157–176). New York: Springer Verlag.
Saxe, G. B. (1991). Culture and cognitive development: studies in mathematical understanding.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Saxe, G. B. (1996). Studying cognitive development in sociocultural context: e development of a
practice based approa. In R. Jessor, A. Colby, & R. Shweder (Eds.), Ethnography and human
development (pp. 275–303). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Saxe, G. B. (2012). Approaes to reduction in treatments of culture-cognition relations: Aﬀordances
and limitations. Commentary on Gauvain and Munroe. Human Development, 55, 233–242.
Saxe, G. B., & Esmonde, I. (2005). Studying cognition in ﬂux: A historical treatment of Fu in the
shifting structure of Oksapmin Mathematics. Mind, Culture & Activity, 12(3–4), 171–225.
Saxe, G. B., Guberman, S. R., & Gearhart, M. (1987). Social processes in early number development.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 52(2), 1–137.
Saxe, G. B., & Posner, J. (1983). e development of numerical cognition: Cross-cultural perspectives.
In H. P. Ginsburg (Ed.), e development of mathematical thinking (pp. 291–317). London:
Academic Press.
Subauer-Leoni, M. L. (1990). Ecritures additivies en classe ou en dehors de la classe: Une aﬀaire de
contexte. Resonances, 6, 16–18.
Subauer-Leoni, M.-L., & Perret-Clermont, A.-N. (1997). Social interactions and mathematics
learning. In T. Nunes & P. Bryant (Eds.), Learning and teaing mathematics: An international
perspective (pp. 265–283). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Scribner, S. (1984). Cognitive studies of work. e arterly Newsleer of the Laboratory of Human
Cognition, 6 (Special Issue), 1–50). San Diego: University of California.
Shweder, R. A. (1990). Cultural psyology—What is it? In J. W. Stiegler, R. A. Shweder, & G. Herdt

(Eds.), Cultural psychology (pp. 1–43). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stiegler, J. W., Shweder, R. A., & Herdt, G. (Eds.) (1990). Cultural psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Stone, C. A. (1993). What is missing in the metaphor of scaﬀolding? In E. A. Forman, N. Mini, &
C. A. Stone (Eds.), Contexts for learning: Sociocultural dynamics in ildren’s development (pp.
169–183). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Suárez-Orozco, C., & Suárez-Orozco, M. M. (2001). Children of immigration. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Subramaniam, K., & Bose, A. (2012). Measurement units and modes: The Indian context. Proceedings
of the 12th International Congress on Mathematical Education (ICME-12) (Vol. 1983).
Tajfel, H. (1978). Social categorisation, social identity and social comparison. In H. Tajfel (Ed.),
Diﬀerentiation between social groups: Studies in social psyology of intergroup relations (pp.
61–76). London: Academic Press.
Vandermaas-Peeler, M., Nelson, J., Bumpass, C., & Sassine, B. (2009). Numeracy-related exanges in
joint storybook reading and play. International Journal of Early Years Education, 17(1), 67–84.
Van Oers, B. (1998). From context to contextualising. Learning and Instruction, 8(6), 473–488.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: e development of higher psyological processes . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason. London: Routledge.
Winter, J., Salway, L., Yee, W.C., & Hughes, M. (2004). Linking home and sool mathematics: e
home school knowledge exchange project. Research in Mathematics Education, 6(1), 59–75.

17 Perspectives on Complex Systems in
Mathematics Learning
Brent Davis
University of Calgary, Canada
Elaine Simmt
University of Alberta, Canada
Over the past two decades, interest in complex systems has emerged in the
mathematics education community among both researers and
practitioners, appearing as calls to move from hierary-based to network
thinking (Burton, 1999), to be aentive to nested and intertwining complex
learning systems (Davis & Simmt, 2003), and as a source for new topics of
study. In this paper we provide an overview of complexity and point to its
presence and impact in the field.

What Is Complex?
Perhaps the most frequently encountered statement in reviews of complex
systems resear is there is no uniﬁed deﬁnition of su key terms as
complex and complexity among researers. Rather than opening with a
one-size-ﬁts-all description, then, accounts of complexity resear tend to
begin by invoking some manner of Aristotle’s observation that “the whole
can be greater than the sum of the parts.” Complexity researers, that is,
are interested in those phenomena that do not reveal themselves—and that,
in fact, might disintegrate—under the reductive scrutiny of analytic science.
is is not to say that complex systems researers are uninterested in
constituent parts or governing laws. e point, rather, is that some
phenomena manifest traits and capacities that cannot be predicted or
explained in terms of components and rules, in part because those complex
phenomena ange over time. Invoking principles that are more reliant on
Darwin than Newton, complex systems researers investigate both how
interacting parts enable systems’ global behaviors and how those systems
relate to and interact with other phenomena in their environments. Su
emphases are clearly not “new.” Indeed, the ﬁrst major development in the
emergence of complexity resear was the recognition that there is a class
of phenomena that cannot be understood in terms of simple cause–eﬀect
dynamics. In the Western world, that recognition was formally announced
in the 1800s through the work of Darwin and his contemporaries, but it
took more than a century for the sensibility to percolate to and through
other branches of academic inquiry.
With that slow percolation, complexity resear only cohered as a
discernible movement in the physical and information sciences in the
middle of that 20th century, with the social sciences and humanities joining
in its development in more recent decades. To a mu lesser (but noticeably
accelerating) extent, complex systems resear has been embraced by

educationists whose interests extend across su levels of phenomena as
genomics, neurological processes, subjective understanding, interpersonal
dynamics, cultural evolution, and global ecology.
Our thesis is that complex systems resear is itself an example of what
it studies: an emergent phenomenon in whi similar but nonetheless
diverse elements coalesce into a coherent, discernible unity that cannot be
appreciated as a sum of its constituents. A sense of its internal diversity
might be gleaned from some of the varied terms for complex systems that
have arisen in diﬀerent ﬁelds, including complex adaptive systems
(physics), nonlinear dynamical systems (mathematics), dissipative structures
(emistry), autopoietic systems (biology), healthy organisms (health care),
organized complex systems 
(information 
science), social 
systems
(sociology), and simply systems (cybernetics) (Mitell, 2009). is range of
titles and interests is both boon and bane. On the positive side, it oﬀers a
sense of the breadth of phenomena and diversity of interest that are
addressed within discussions of complexity. On the negative, it points to the
reason why there is no readily comprehensible, uniﬁed description of
complexity: researers tend to structure deﬁnitions around their particular
research interests.
Instead of lamenting this tendency toward diverse deﬁnitions, we use it
to structure this apter. Embracing the fact that there is no simple
consensus, this writing is organized around varied responses to the question,
“What is complexity?” In the process, we describe and illustrate some of the
ways complexity discourses have been (and, in some cases, might be) taken
up in mathematics education resear, how particular interpretations of
complexity tend to be tethered to speciﬁc researer interests, and why
engaging with emergent topics and interpretations might maer for
projects within mathematics education. Speciﬁcally, the apter is
developed around the following four perspectives on complexity:

Complexity as an historical discourse—i.e., complexity is an instance of
what it describes, a self-organizing, emergent, evolving coherence.
Complexity as a disciplinary discourse—i.e., complexity is a digitally
enabled, modeling-based branch of mathematics.
Complexity as a theoretical discourse—i.e., complexity is the study of
learning systems.
Complexity as a pragmatic discourse—i.e., complexity is a means to
nurture emergent possibility.
We use this organizational strategy not merely as a means to categorize foci
of discussion and resear contributions. It is also used to anowledge the
noncompressibility of complexity discourses. As with most academic
domains, debates have opened up among proponents, as some argue for the
necessity of rigorous evidence and mathematical model-ability, while
others contend that standards derived from complexity resear in other
domains (in particular, physics) cannot be imposed on phenomena that are
specific to education.

Complexity as an Historical Discourse
It is useful to be aware of some of the varied aitudes toward complex
systems resear that are present among mathematics education
researers. To that end, we oﬀer some brief historical notes on the
evolution of diﬀerent sensibilities among complexivists, starting with the
domain-deﬁning realization that there exist many self-organizing, self-
maintaining phenomena, and complexity is itself one of them.
When we speak of complexity resear as an historical discourse we are
suggesting that as a phenomenon it is an embodiment of its own history.
at is, complexity resear is a phenomenon that has arisen and continues
to co-dependently arise with/in its grander ecosystems of the academic,
social, and more-than-human worlds. It has emerged from the interaction
of theorists and theories in time, space, and discourse domains. It is a
system that deﬁnes and is deﬁned by its own history but is coupled with its
environment that enables and constrains possibilities for its evolution
(Maturana & Varela, 1992). More concisely, it is an example of what it
describes, a self-organizing, emergent coherence that is self-modifying in
relation the medium in which it exists.
is point might be illustrated through an abridged account of the
emergence and evolution of the domain. As historians note, any su
undertaking entails a series of arbitrary selections—and, among
complexivists, one of the most common of these is the practice of starting
su histories in the middle of the 20th century (see, e.g., Waldrop, 1992;
Mitell, 2009). is decision is well justiﬁed in the fact that it was at that
point that interdisciplinary discussions began to gain some momentum. At
the same time, it can obscure the fact that many of the movement’s
orienting insights and interpretive tools had already been developed in
diﬀerent disciplines. For example, as already mentioned, evolutionary
theory is key to complexity discourses. Of comparable importance were

developments in mathematics su as Poincaré’s resear into the inﬁnite
complication that can arise in “simple” nonlinear systems. Developed more
than a century ago, his “qualitative dynamics” has been central in the
mathematical theory of dynamical systems.
Many other contributing moments could be identiﬁed prior to the mid-
20th-century moment of shared realization among researers across
several disciplines that they were interested in a similar sort of unruly
phenomenon. Dubbed complexity theory by proponents, studies associated
with the nascent movement were focused mainly on description. e major
accomplishment of complexity resear of the time—or Complexity 1.0,
one might say—was a cross-disciplinary recognition of a class of
nonreducible, emergent phenomena that would not surrender their secrets
to the tools of classical, analytic science. Infusing this movement was a new
set of images and metaphors to describe these diverse phenomena. Images
based in Euclidean geometry and dynamics framed by classical physics
were gradually replaced by images drawn from fractal geometry (e.g., scale
independence, unexpected detail) and the structural dynamics of biology
(e.g., ecosystemic organizations, dynamic interdependencies). A principal
visual metaphor at the time was that of nested systems (see Figure 17.1a.),
reﬂecting the important insights that systems were both irreducible (i.e.,
they must be studied at the levels of their emergence) and comprised
similarly complex systems.
As more and more phenomena were recognized as complexly emergent
and more and more ﬁelds of inquiry came to be involved in the project of
complexity resear, the focus of study was elaborated beyond description
of complex dynamics into analyses of the similar roots, structures, and
consequences of these dynamics. is “Complexity 2.0” phase roughly
spanned 1980 through 2000, and was marked in the ﬁeld with a shi in self-
reference from “complexity theory” to “complexity science.” It was
aracterized by increasing use of su notions of recursive processes

within cycles of development and growth (see Figure 17.2b for one of the
principal visual metaphors of the time), with the notion of “living systems”
prevailing in comparisons of complex and not-complex entities. It was a
time of explosive growth in complexity resear, spurred by developments
in mathematical modeling that aﬀorded a means to test hypotheses without
impacting sensitive ecologies. Indeed, as evidenced by the recipients of
Nobel Prizes in physics, medicine, emistry, and economics, it was the
coming of age of complexity. e winners in 1980 might be retroactively
interpreted in terms of complexity theory, but few were explicitly aligned
with the movement. By 2000, all of the winners were clearly and explicitly
complexivist.
Figure 17.1 Three important visual metaphors within complexity research corresponding to the
major emphases within three phases of the movement—(a) nested systems, (b) entangled dynamics,
and (c) decentralized networks.
Since the turn of the century, complexity resear has become decidedly
more pragmatic in its emphases. Elaborating its ongoing interests in
description and analysis, a strongly articulated component of the current
work is on occasioning the emergence of complex phenomena—that is, not
just identifying them, not just beer understanding what makes them go,
but more deliberate eﬀorts to trigger them into being, to support their
development, and to sustain their existence. As might be expected, the foci

of discussions have shied to reﬂect this concern with pragmatics, and are
now largely organized around maers of scale-free connective networks
(see Figure 17.1c) and the way that these networks enable learning systems.
Mu of this hands-on work is highly speculative, and a more tentative
emphasis is reﬂected in a tendency to refer to the ﬁeld as complexity
research (or simply complexity) rather than complexity theory or
complexity science.
With this shi toward pragmatics and the combined notions of nested,
co-entangled, and networked learning systems, complexity/systems
resear has reaed a place where it can be of great use to mathematics
educators. As a review of the contents of the current issue of any leading
journal in the ﬁeld will reveal, the ﬁeld of mathematics education has
grown to encompass a broad range of interests, greatly elaborated from the
psyological and epistemic foci that dominated only a few decades ago.
Researers are currently concerned with multiple levels of organization
(e.g., individual learners, classrooms, sools, sool districts, disciplinary
knowledge, society), co-specifying dynamics (e.g., between teaers and
learners, between knowledge and action) and complex associations (e.g.,
among people, among ideas). Across the diversity of these interests,
mathematics education resear remains an explicitly pragmatic enterprise.
It is arged with the tasks of supporting the wellness and possibility of
individuals while supporting the maintenance and evolution of society.
“Complexity 3.0” enables this work.
Of course, and reemphasizing the central point of this section, a complex
system is one that embodies its own history. Emergent mindsets within the
moment, then, do not replace prior emphases. ey are elaborations. While
diﬀerent mindsets occasionally exist in tension, all three foci—on
description, analysis, and pragmatics—are well represented in current
complexity resear. is point should become clearer over the next three
sections of this chapter.

Complexity as a Disciplinary Discourse
While complexity resear spans many domains, for the purposes of
understanding its relevance to mathematics education, it can be useful to
focus on that part of the movement that is properly a strand of
mathematical study. Indeed, the nested, emergent, and networked—that is,
complex—aracter of mathematics itself is brought in sharp relief when
the discipline is seen as both nesting and nested in complexity resear. We
endeavor to develop this point in this section, as we explore complexity as
a disciplinary discourse in mathematics education, a domain concerned with
the ways that social conditions, cultural tools, and mathematics content
interact in the evolution of the curriculum and teaing approaes (see
Ernest, 2011).
Two illustrations of the emergence of complexity in mathematics are
useful: the ﬁrst is one that traces the mathematical study of complex
dynamic systems from the time of Newton to the present; the second is one
that illustrates the emergence of a new bran of mathematics and a
deﬁning element of complexity—namely, network theory. Together these
two instances illustrate the evolution of complexity in mathematics and
provide critical insights into complex systems.
Prior to the advent of rapid and inexpensive computational power, the
modeling of systems was largely focused on those dynamics that could be
studied through diﬀerential linear equations. Poincaré was notable among
those who examined nonlinear dynamical systems, doing so from a
theoretical perspective. However, while it is now clear that he understood a
number of features of aotic and dynamical systems, at the time his
insights were regarded as qualitative, speculative, and largely unproven
(Bell, 1937). e computational power of digital tenologies in the second
half of the 20th century opened up the possibility of working on the
problems of systems numerically, at whi time the investigation of

dynamical systems began to ﬂourish. Computing power brought about
possibility of doing “experimental mathematics” 1 (Borwein & Devlin, 2008)
and numerical analysis, triggering a rebirth of the modeling of nonlinear
dynamical systems.
Importantly, digital computing provided not only a means of computing
extremely large data sets and iterating functions through hundreds of
thousands of repetitions, it also provided means for converting numerical
data to visual representations, enabling the generation of new insights and,
consequently, new forms of mathematics. is work is evident in applied
mathematics and central to computing science and maine learning
(Mitell, 2009). e mid-20th century brought about many insights into
features of nonlinear dynamical systems that had not previously been
observed or constructed, including notions of fractal dimension, aos,
phase space, aractors, and sensitivity to initial conditions. More recently,
graph theory as introduced by Euler in the 18th century has been taken up
and elaborated in the study of networked systems. In particular, the
realization that a decentralized network structure is the ﬁngerprint of a
complexity system garnered intense interest from various disciplines in the
natural sciences and the human sciences. e temporal gap between graph
theory and network theory was in large part due to the diﬀerence in
possibilities in analytical approaes to graphs and the aﬀordances that
computers created for modeling systems. A similar story involves the
modeling of iterative and nonlinear dynamical systems.
It is important to emphasize that what is most critical here was not the
rapid increase in mathematical knowledge that accompanied the rise of the
digital era; it was the clear and sudden elaboration in how mathematics was
conducted. Su analyses of the history of mathematics underscore the
realization that the discipline of mathematics evolves over time (Bell, 1937;
Fauvel & Grey, 1987), inﬂuencing and inﬂuenced by social and cultural
interaction (Ernest, 1994; Cohen and Stewart, 1995). Contemporary

mathematics is steeped in its history and emerges out of it—and at the same
time is in a constant state of ange. As Foote (2007) illuminates, even those
mathematical systems that are based on simple axiomatic foundations lead
to entirely unexpected “macroscopic” outcomes, including implications and
applications that rea well beyond their historical beginnings. at is,
mathematics is a complex system. In a similar sense, sool mathematics
can be argued to be a complex system, with practices, purposes,
entailments, and consequences that extend well beyond its initial foci and
intentions.
On this maer, a frequent criticism of sool mathematics is its curricula
are a poor ﬁt for contemporary circumstances. For the most part, the
contents of sool mathematics have anged lile over recent centuries
and continue to reﬂect the needs and obsessions of 16th- and 17th-century
Europe, when publicly funded and mandatory education spread across the
continent to address the emergent knowledge requirements of an
industrialized society. At that time, only a small proportion of pupils moved
on to the equivalent of today’s high school. That curriculum was set to meet
the needs of the elite student who would allenge examinations to get into
the prestigious civil service (particularly the engineering corps). Aribald
(2007), a historian of mathematics, points out that the curriculum developed
in the 19th century lives on today in high sool mathematics, in spite of
the fact that contemporary high sools serve a mu wider population
than the mathematically elite of 19th-century Europe. Circumstances and
sensibilities have changed, along with the needs of a mathematically literate
citizen. But so too have the aﬀordances of the world in whi we live:
availability of data, speed at whi information is shared, and the means of
handling information. As Lesh (2010) noted, complexity has emerged as “an
important topic to be included in any mathematics curriculum that claims
to be preparing students for full participation in a tenology-based age of
information” (p. 563).

An important qualiﬁcation must be made here, as the suggestion is not
that study of complex systems is new, but that this mathematics for sool
represents a signiﬁcant shi from traditional emphases. In fact, Descartes,
Newton, and many of their contemporaries were well aware of complex
phenomena at the time of the emergence of modern sooling. However,
because of the intractability of many nonlinear diﬀerential equations, when
they came up in resear, they were routinely replaced by linear
approximations (Stewart, 1989). Lecturers and texts followed suit in
omiing nonlinear accounts; hence generations of students were exposed to
oversimpliﬁed, linearized versions of natural phenomena. In other words,
non-complex mathematics prevailed in public sools not because it was
ideal but because it lent itself to calculations that could be done by hand.
Ultimately that emphasis is complicit with a resilient worldview of a
clowork reality. Kaput (1992) argued, the advent of powerful computing
tenologies over the past half century can help to restore an appreciation
of the relentless nonlinearity of the universe. at is, due to their power,
digital tenologies have not just opened up new vistas of calculation, they
have triggered epistemic shis as they contribute to redeﬁnitions of what
counts as possible and what is expressible. is insight has been engaged by
many mathematics education researers (e.g., English, 2011; Moreno-
Armella, Hegedus, & Kaput, 2008; Hoyles & Noss, 2008).
As a bran of mathematics with possibilities for sooling, then,
resear on complex systems has deep historical roots and a wealth of
applications. Complexity thus represents an important strand of
mathematical inquiry, with subtopics that include dynamic modeling,
systems thinking, network analysis, and fractal geometry—among others—
and concepts su as sensitivity to initial conditions, aractor basins, scaling
factors, network stability, and cascading failures. emes that have been
developed within the ﬁeld of mathematics education as possible curriculum
topics include mathematical modeling, data modeling, and a range of

systems-based approaes for applications in engineering and other STEM
domains. ree examples are oﬀered: powerful programming languages
appropriate to young learners but with utility for all levels; data
management and associated modeling strategies; and mathematical
modeling.
Notable in this regard is the seminal work of Seymour Papert (e.g., 1980),
particularly his development of the Logo programming language in the late
1970s. e language was designed to be usable by young novices and
advanced experts alike. It enabled users to solve problems using a mobile
robot, the “Logo turtle,” and eventually a simulated turtle on the computer
screen. While not intended explicitly for the study of complexity, Logo lent
itself to recursive programming (an instance of C 2.0) and was thus easily
used to generate fractal-like images and to explore applications
dynamically—opening the door to more complexity-specific topics.
To that end, diﬀerent developers have since oﬀered Logo-based
platforms that are explicitly intended to explore complex systems (and
other) applications. Notable in this regard are StarLogo (lead designer,
Mitell Resni; http://education.mit.edu/starlogo/) and NetLogo (lead
designer, 
Uri 
Wilensky; http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/). 
Both
platforms were developed in the 1990s and extended Papert’s original Logo
program by presenting the possibility of multiple, interacting agents
(turtles). is feature renders the applications useful for simulating ranges
of complex phenomena. Both StarLogo and NetLogo include extensive
online libraries of already-programmed simulations of familiar phenomena
(e.g., ﬂoing birds, traﬃc jams, disease spread, and population dynamics)
and less-familiar applications in a variety of domains su as economics,
biology, physics, emistry, neurology, and psyology. At the same time,
the platforms preserve the simplicity of programming that distinguished the
original Logo (e.g., utilizing swites, sliders, oosers, inputs, and other
interface elements), making them accessible for even young learners. Other

visual programming languages have been developed that are particularly
appropriate to students (e.g., Scrat, http://scratch.mit.edu, and ToonTalk,
www.toontalk.com).
Over the past few decades, hundreds of speculative essays and resear
reports 
(see, 
e.g., 
the 
NetLogo 
reference 
page,
http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/references.shtml) have been published
on these and other multi-turtle programs. Regarding maers of potential
innovations for sool mathematics, in addition to well-developed
resources, there have been extensive discussions. ere exists a substantial
empirical basis for moving forward on the selection and development of
curriculum content that is ﬁed to themes of complexity. Not surprisingly,
then, with the ready access to computational and imaging tenologies in
most sool classrooms, some (e.g., Jacobson & Wilensky 2006) have
advocated for the inclusion of su topics as computer-based modeling and
simulation languages, including networked collaborative simulations (see
Kaput Center for Resear and Innovation in STEM Education,
www.kaputcenter.umassd.edu). In this vein, complexity is understood as a
digitally enabled, modeling-based bran of mathematics that opens spaces
(particularly in secondary and tertiary education) for new themes su as
recursive functions, fractal geometry, and modeling of complex phenomena
with mathematical tools such as iteration, cobwebbing, and phase diagrams.
e shi in sensibility from linearity to complexity is seen as more
important than the development of the computational competencies
necessary for sophisticated modeling—a maer that serves as a growing
focus among mathematics educators with an interest in modeling, including
e International Community of Teaers of Mathematics Modeling
Applications (ICTMA; see Lesh, Galbraith, Haines, & Hurford, 2010). To this
end, data management and associated modeling strategies have emerged as
particularly prominent (and relevant) topics, likely spurred by the density of
data made available by current information tenologies. English (2006,

2008), for example, has examined data modeling in the early years and
engineering education in the middle sool years with a view toward
developing ildren’s mathematics thinking in manners that have
signiﬁcant utility in the evolving world. Lesh and Doerr (2003) and Lesh et
al. (2010) covered similar ground in their development of a modeling-
centric approa to mathematical problem solving, noting that an emphasis
on complexity entails shis in thinking not just about the nature of problem
solving situations, but also about the nature of the “things” that are being
interpreted mathematically and the nature of the mathematical thinking
that is needed. Indeed, the very role of mathematics in one’s life has been
argued to be transformed through this shi in curriculum emphasis. As
Lesh (2010) pointedly described, “whereas the entire traditional K–14
mathematics curriculum can be aracterized as a step-by-step line of
mar toward the study of single, solvable, diﬀerentiable functions, the
world beyond sools contains scarcely a few situations of single actor–
single outcome variety” (p. 564). Extending this thought, Lesh highlighted
that questions and topics in complexity and data management are not only
made more accessible in K–14 seings through digital tenologies, but
also current tools have made it possible to render some key principles
comprehensible to young learners in manners that complement traditional
curriculum emphases.
Despite the growing resear base and the compelling arguments,
however, few contemporary programs of study in sool mathematics have
heeded su admonitions for ange. It is perhaps for this reason that many
mathematics education researers have focused on familiar topic areas
(su as the data management examples just mentioned) as means to
incorporate studies of complexity into sool mathematics. Discussions of
and resear into possible sites of integration have spanned all grade levels
and several content areas, and proponents have tended to advocate for
complexity-content, but in a less calculation-dependent format.

Alongside discussions of the possible content of sool mathematics are
discussions of complexity-informed and tenology-enabled means of
engaging with learners, all framed by a growing realization that the what,
the how, the who, the where, and the when of mathematics learning cannot
be pried apart. Su emergent, complexity-informed pedagogical issues are
addressed in subsequent sections.

Complexity as a Theoretical Discourse
As noted in the introductory section of this apter, complexity tends to be
deﬁned in terms of the particular interests of researers. For example,
biologists tend to talk about complexity in terms of living systems,
physicists in terms of nonlinear dynamical systems, and information
scientists in terms of evolving networks. It should not be surprising, then,
that among educational researers, one deﬁnition has a particular
resonance: a complex system is one that learns. Indeed, perhaps the best-
developed aspect of complex systems resear within the ﬁeld of
mathematics education is around researers’ understandings of and
contributions to theories of learning.
On this count, still-heard descriptors su as “new paradigm” and
“emerging worldview” are perhaps not appropriate when it comes to
manifestations of complexity thinking in the ﬁeld, where core principles of
complexity (if not the explicit movement) have a deep history. In particular,
several theories of learning that have been prevalent for many decades are
readily aligned with complexivist sensibilities. For example, one would be
hard pressed to ﬁnd recent resear on mathematics learning that is not
deeply commied to su notions as co-participation, inextricable
entanglements, decentralized structures, co-adaptive dynamics, self-
determination, and nonlinear unfoldings. But perhaps the clearest evidence
of the prevalence of sensibilities that are sympathetic to complexity is the
frequent usage of the notion of emergence, in descriptions of individual
learning (e.g., Lesh & Doerr, 2003; van Oers, 2010; Proulx, 2013, Bowers &
Nierson, 2001), the products of mathematical understanding (Cobb, 1999;
Font, Godino, & Gallardo, 2013), the structures of personal knowing (e.g.,
ACT-R theory: Anderson & Labiere, 1998; Implicit Learning eory: Reber,
1993); tools of learning (Hershkowitz & Swarz, 1999), collective
knowledge production (Cobb & Bauersfeld, 1995; Burton, 1999; Davis &

Simmt, 2006; Martin & Towers, 2011), teaers’ dynamic knowledge of
mathematics (Davis, 2011; Davis & Renert, 2014), and the open-ended
aracter of mathematics knowledge itself (Foote, 2007; Hegedus &
Moreno-Armella, 2011).
Notably, the discourse of emergence is not necessarily rooted in
complexity resear. Its variety of sources includes psyology, sociology,
and philosophy (Sawyer 2002a, 2002b), and usages of emergence are
frequently le undeﬁned. Relatively few researers have explicitly likened
complex systems to learners (e.g., Wilensky & Resni, 1999; Stroup &
Wilensky, 2000; Davis & Simmt, 2003; Lesh & Doerr, 2003, Kilgore, 1999).
However, the frequent use of emergence signals an important and broad
appreciation of the adaptive, irreducible, unprescribable, yet-coherent
natures of knowledge, knowledge production, and knowledge-producing
systems.
Before engaging in a complexity-based reading of a few of the more
prominent theories of learning in the ﬁeld, it is useful to be explicit about
some of the key aspects of a complex (learning) form/phenomenon/entity—
hereaer referred to simply as a learner. In brief, a learner is a perceptible
coherence that
co-dependently arises with the world in the co-implicated interactions
of multiple agents/systems (e.g., neurons, instantiations, semata,
persons, social clusters, subcultures, species),
is typically conceived/perceived and aracterized as a body and/or in
embodied terms (e.g., a person, a body of knowledge, a social corpus,
the body politic),
manifests features and capacities that are not observed in constituting
agents/systems,
maintains itself over some period of time, and
evolves in response to both internal and external dynamics in manners

that are beer described in terms of adequacy/suﬃciency (i.e., ﬁtness
among subagents and between agent and environment) than
optimality/efficiency (i.e., match between internal and external).
To be clear, the claim here is not that prominent theories of learning in the
ﬁeld of mathematics education draw on complex systems thinking. In fact,
it is more the reverse: complex systems resear, as a domain, has cohered
around studies of sorts of phenomena and dynamics that have been the
focus of mathematics education resear for many decades. As su,
complexity resear should be construed more in terms of a domain to
whi researers of learning might contribute and less a domain from
which they might draw. This detail might be underscored by noting that the
bulleted points, noted above, were proposed in one way or another by
multiple learning theorists long before the ﬁeld of complexity studies arose.
For example, in the 1700s Kant described a concept as a structured cluster
of representations that can be used to collect objects, scenarios, or
sequences of events or relations—a notion that directly informed Piaget’s
(1953) account of a schema as a mental framework that is created as a ild
interacts with/in physical and social environments, and integrates
sensorimotor, symbolic, and operational instantiations.
What complexity discourses oﬀer, then, is not a new description, but
interpretive devices that derive from the study of a great diversity of
complex, emergent forms. at is, complex systems resear presents a
frame that brings diverse theories of learning into productive conversation,
as it simultaneously highlights common ground (e.g., the bulleted points
earlier) and important divergences (Davis, Sumara, & Luce-Kapler, 2008).
Signiﬁcantly, in complexity terms, those divergences arise because learning
theorists are studying learning at many diﬀerent levels—and a core tenet of
complex systems resear is that behaviors and laws that are appropriate at
one level of activity may not apply at another (see Laborde, Perrin-Glorian

& Sierpinska, 2005). Phrased diﬀerently, phenomena must be studied at the
levels of their emergence (Cohen & Stewart, 1995).
Before addressing some of the details of the divergences among theories
of learning, it is worth noting a further contribution of complex systems
thinking to studies of learning and learners. Concerned as they are with
su a range of adaptive phenomena, complexity researers have
developed several empirical tools that can be used to distinguish whether or
not a particular phenomenon is indeed complex. For example, in terms of
internal structure, the agents that comprise a complex unity organize
themselves in a decentralized network (see Was, 2003). As well, one can
expect ubiquitous power law distributions when complex activity is present
(e.g., in social systems, there tend to be a great many people of lower status
and many fewer of higher status; in active classrooms, there tend to be very
many brief articulations and very few extended ones; in languages, a few
words are encountered with very high frequency while most are rarely
used; see Buanan, 2002). A further feature of a complex system is the
presence of multiple feedba loops that work in concert to modulate its
internal coherence and maintain its external ﬁt with its context (Pirie &
Kieren, 1994).
ese qualities might be illustrated with the broad example of human
knowledge, as eﬀorts to map out domains and their interconnections reveal
both decentralized network structures and power law distributions.2 e
same appears to be true of mathematics—supporting, increasingly,
aracterizations of the domain as “a living, breathing, anging organism”
(Burger & Starbird, 2005, p. xi) that “emerges as an autopoietic [i.e., self-
creating and self-maintaining] system” (Sfard, 2008, p. 129). More pointedly,
Foote (2007) has argued that mathematics is an adaptive, complex system
that is approaing the limits of human veriﬁability. Su aracterizations
are a far cry from the rather static, certain, and linearized portrayals of
mathematics in artifacts intended for schools.

Similarly, theories of learning that might be aligned with complexivist
sensibilities are a far cry from cause–eﬀect accounts (e.g., behaviorism,
cognitivism) that dominated educational resear for mu of the 20th
century. Today there are dozens—perhaps hundreds—of theories of learning
at play in the mathematics education literature. Some researers see this
proliferation of perspectives as a fracturing of the ﬁeld. Indeed, mu of the
educational literature over the past decade has been focused on specifying
the ﬁne-grained distinctions among diﬀerent frames—between, for
example, radical constructivism and social constructivism, between actor-
network theory and activity theory, between embodied cognition and
enactivism, and so on. In contrast, from a complexity perspective, it is more
useful to focus not on where theories fracture but on how they might
complement and elaborate one another. To this end, one useful strategy is
to compare their units of analysis. Phrased diﬀerently, it is useful to ask,
“Who/what is posited as the learner within each theory?”
Figure 17.2 Some of the nested complex systems of interest to mathematics educators.
Figure 17.2 is intended to gesture toward the conclusion that, when

learners and learning phenomena of interest to mathematics educators are
understood as co-implicated systems, a range of theories become necessary
to grapple with the many issues the ﬁeld must address (cf. Lemke, 2000).
No single perspective will do. Ea of the entries in the “Sample eories”
column (among others, of course) is well represented in the current
mathematics education literature, ea is principally concerned with one
particular knowing/learning system, ea is tethered to speciﬁc
methodological traditions (“Academic Domains”), and ea tends to
gravitate toward particular concerns (“Emergent Issues”). In more concise
terms, ea is a theory of a complex system—and their common ground
(i.e., the sorts of details mentioned in the bulleted points earlier) is as vital
as their separate emphases.
ese level-speciﬁc complexities—and the collected, inter-theory
complexity that emerges when they are considered simultaneously—are
vital for the project of mathematics education. Sophisticated and eﬀective
mathematics pedagogies demand sophisticated insights into the complex
dynamics of knowing and learning in all their manifestations.
To recap, then, among educationists interested in complexity, there is
frequent resonance with the notions that a complex system is one that
knows (i.e., perceives, acts, engages, develops, etc.) and learns (adapts,
evolves, maintains self-coherence, etc.). is interpretation reaes across
many systems that are of interest among educators, including physiological,
personal, social, institutional, epistemological, cultural, and ecological
systems. Unfolding from and enfolding in one another, it is impossible to
study one of these phenomena without studying all of the others. Once
again, this sensibility has been well represented in the mathematics
education resear literature for decades in the form of varied theories of
learning. Among others, radical constructivism, socio-cultural theories of
learning, embodied, and critical theories can all be read as instances of
complexity theories. at is, they all invoke bodily metaphors, systemic

concerns, evolutionary dynamics, emergent possibility, and self-maintaining
properties.

Complexity as a Pragmatic Discourse
ere is an ongoing debate within the ﬁeld of complex systems resear
that is oen aracterized in terms of a tension between “hard” and “so”
complexity. e hard deals with well-deﬁned, readily modeled phenomena,
the so with hazily bounded phenomena that defy quantiﬁcation and that
can be approximated only through modeling— the break oen coincides
with the separation of the physical and social sciences.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, given the way it straddles the discipline of
mathematics and the ﬁeld of education, this same tension is well
represented within mathematics education resear (cf. Hurford, 2010).
Nevertheless, there is a vibrant and productive community within the ﬁeld
that is taking on su “soer” questions around the pragmatic implications
for the decidedly complex space of the mathematics classroom. ese
eﬀorts are largely oriented by the realization that beliefs on the nature of
mathematics have been infused into the teaing of mathematics
throughout the history of formal education. From a master and apprentices
working with straight edge and compass to demonstrate earth measures, to
a professor lecturing to a group of pupils on the integration of a function, to
a teaer facilitating student inquiry into simulations, pedagogical seings
are inﬂuenced by beliefs on the nature of the mathematics being taught and
learned.
In other words, mathematics pedagogy itself is a complex phenomenon
that emerges from the interaction of teaers, mathematics, and students,
all of whi in themselves are complex learning systems. With complexity
having emerged in the last century as a prominent discourse in
mathematics and science, there are new metaphoric lenses to interpret and
enable productive, “intelligent” classrooms. Central to this sort of transition
is a shi from learning theories that focus principally on individuals’ inner
understandings to theories that are designed to foster collective

understanding (Towers, Martin, & Heater, 2013). As Kilgore (1999) noted,
the dominant shared meaning and identity of the collective is most closely
related to collective social action: “People collectively develop solutions to
societal problems, a process that Milbrath (1989) calls ‘learning our way
out’” (Kilgore, p. 196). In other words, for sooling in general and
mathematics education in particular, it has become important to create
experiences for learners that encourage collective action and that draw on
collective possibility.
Traditionally, in sool mathematics, even when it is granted that the
group is critical to sense making and knowledge generation, individual
learning has most oen served as the principal focus (e.g., Cobb &
Bauersfeld, 1995; Lerman, 2000; Sfard, 2008). is tendency is not surprising
in a society in whi the individual is viewed as the primary agent having
autonomy and responsibility. Complexivist researers do not contest this
focus. However, they oen problematize the bifurcation of the
independently constituted individual and varied collective foci of the formal
education, thus advocating a sensibility that is aentive to mutual inﬂuence
across levels. As Kilgore (1999) argued, “understanding learning in social
movements requires not only a concept of the group as a learner and
constructor of knowledge, but also an understanding of the centrality of the
group’s vision of social justice that drives it to act—mostly in conﬂict with
other groups—in the larger social, economic, and political ﬁeld of meaning
making” (p. 191). Phrased diﬀerently, people coming together around an
issue demonstrate collective behavior/learning through a focus that is
neither the individual nor the group but the emergent product of their
actions and interactions.
So, what might teaing and learning look like at a time when the
mathematics is framed as a complex, dynamic phenomena rather than a
ﬁxed collection of facts? Or when individuals are seen not as the locus of
learning, but as complex learners that are nested in grander learning

systems? Or when we note that mathematics itself is a decentralized
network and many of the hubs of activity use experimental methods and
are completely dependent on tenology to run data sets and create
visualizations of potential relationships? In other words, what kind of
pedagogies, curricula, and classrooms might be occasioned by a
contemporary mathematics of complexity?
Eﬀorts to address su questions are well under way. For example, as
already noted in the section on complexity as a disciplinary discourse, there
are innovative classes and resear projects that invoke modeling (Lesh &
Doer, 2003), collaborative and collective data collection and analysis
(Jacobson & Wilensky, 2006), and the study of complex phenomena
(English, 2008). ese might all be construed as instances in whi the focus
is shied away from controlling the mathematics that students must
replicate, and toward creating space for and nurturing common experiences
and other redundancies in whi mathematical thinking might ﬂourish.
Refocusing traditional curricula can make space for the collective learner to
emerge. Interactive classrooms are ripe with the possibility of the
emergence of a collective learning system. But, as Davis and Simmt (2003)
developed, they need to be allowed to function as a collective—presenting
issues of control (e.g., mathematical authority can no longer be vested
exclusively in the teaer and/or textbook); diversity (e.g., variation among
students becomes an asset that can be used by the collective for specialized
tasks and thinking); redundancy (e.g., the teaer must provide experiences
to serve as common places for the students so they might be able to interact
with ea other); and interconnectivity (e.g., ideas must have a means of
interacting, through group sharing).
ere are many examples of classrooms functioning well as collective
mathematics learners, but most resear reports do no explicitly present
them as su. Exceptions include Davis and Simmt (2003) and Martin and
Towers (2011), who ask us to consider not the individual meaning maker

but instead the knowledge that emerges from the collective activity of co-
acting learners. In an inquiry class where learning is more about being
mathematical and less about learning some particular thing, the collective
learner emerges and with it new mathematics. Teaing is therefore “a
complex act of participation in unfolding understandings” (Martin &
Towers, 2011, p. 425). To the extent the collective learner emerges in
mathematics classes, there is individual knowledge made public, there are a
bumping up of ideas, there emerges a shared project, and there is collective
action on a task that produces the emergent learner, and products attributed
to the group.
Networks, for example, have been explored as a new pedagogy, as
demonstrated in some of the work at the Kaput Center. In 2003 Roselle,
Vahey, Tatar, Kaput, and Hegedus explored the use of hand-held computer
tenologies to create within-classroom networks. ey described ﬁve key
considerations of networked mathematics classes: network extent and
generality (e.g., extending network outside of class, constraining it to the
inside only, including members, including non-members etc.); network
topology (e.g., hub and spokes, multiple hubs, cascades); anonymity and
group display (i.e., features where students may be anonymous or traed);
types of network functions (e.g., distributing information, diﬀerentiating
information, 
contributing 
information, 
collecting 
information 
and
aggregating information); and representational integration (e.g. when and
how functions are communicated and represented).
e omnipresence of information and communication tenologies—
mobile, highly connected, fast, and flexible—is a good place to start thinking
about the potential shape of mathematics education in a complex infused
environment. Two current and popular manifestations of mathematics
“lessons” have emerged in this context: the video lesson and massive online
courses.
With regard to the former, the Internet is a repository for a great number

of instructional videos. Although many of the clips are concerned with do-
it-yourself projects, ranging from tying a Windsor knot to ﬁxing a
bathroom toilet, a good number are explicitly related to sool topics and
content. Indeed, YouTube has an education annel in whi mu of the
content is sool related. One of the advantages of current information and
communications tenologies is that, with access to the Internet, it is
possible to ﬁnd an explanation-based tutorial for almost any topic covered
in sool mathematics, and students use these (as demonstrated by the
millions of hits on the Khan Academy, for example). Not without irony,
however, in spite of the tremendous power for supporting connectivity and
collaboration, the Internet’s main inﬂuence on mathematics pedagogy so
far appears to be more to further entren centuries-old sensibilities than to
introduce new possibilities. Mathematics tends to be presented in a
procedural, “how to” format; practice tends to be focused more on
automaticity than meaning; and an individual may interact with and learn
from other individuals (in the case of blogs), but there is nothing speciﬁc in
the design of a posted video that occasions collectivity or a collective
learner. e sole signiﬁcant innovation of on-demand video appears to be
the “ﬂipped classroom”—whi is claimed to aﬀord a more human
experience by enabling every student to work on his or her own time
(Khan, 2011, Mar), amplifying rather than allenging the individual-
centric emphasis of modern schooling.
is situation might be contrasted with aﬀordances of massive open
online courses (MOOCs), another instructional strategy aﬀorded by current
Information and Communications Tenologies. As an educational “space,”
a MOOC has the potential to occasion many sorts of collectivity. ey may
be an infrastructure from whi a collective learning system can emerge.
Although MOOCs are one-to-many (one teaer–many students) they are
made up of an emergent and unbounded landscape (topology) of
neighboring interactions: there is within them incredible diversity of

individual and subgroup learners (massive ensures this), yet there is also
adequate sameness (redundancy) through language groups, baground
experience, etc. In the MOOC we see the emergence of subsystems by
language groups, topic interest, forms of inquiry, and manners of working
(Nixon et al., 2013), and it is out of these subsystems that the MOOC is
maintained and evolves.
Drawing on complexity principles to interpret the MOOC phenomenon,
some critical ingredients for collective emergence come into sharp relief.
For example, in the one-to-many format, while there is a localized source
of energy-ri maer from whi individual agents draw, control of the
phenomenon is actually decentralized. e only aspect that the teaer
controls is the initial distribution of information. No individual learner is
compelled to take up any or all of the aspect of the course in the way that
he or she is compelled to do so in traditional sools. e control is
distributed through infrastructure that enables individuals and groups of
individuals to interact and co-act.
However, it is perhaps overly optimistic to suggest that MOOCs are
fecund sites for the emergence of complex co-activity, particularly in light
of the fact that most MOOCs are rooted in assumptions and the visions of
learning that are readily aligned with traditional sooling. As McLuhan
(1964/2013) noted, new media use the old as content. e new tenology is
always ﬁrst used in ways of the previous generation. e MOOC might
thus at ﬁrst seem like just a hyper-eﬃcient means to manage a classic
approa—namely, the lecture. However, because of the learning platforms
and their aﬀordances, a MOOC has potential to be more than another video
or another textbook. It presents the possibility of a landscape for learners to
cluster into collectives to explore ideas, teniques, and practices. It is
around this possibility that a MOOC diﬀers from Web-based instructional
videos. Su topic-speciﬁc video clips may give the teaer an opportunity
to ﬂip her or his classroom, but the result is likely to be an ampliﬁcation of

established sensibilities rather than an opening of new possibilities—unless
opportunities are made for the learners to work collectively on
mathematics. e key diﬀerence aﬀorded by the MOOC lecture, then, in
not the small ange in delivery, but in the possibilities that arise with su
a large number of interacting participants.
Recently, another massive online approa is being oﬀered as a
possibility for education. With the great interest in massive multiplayer
online gaming, the Education Arcade at MIT has created a game specifically
to promote mathematics and science learning.3 This game is currently in the
pilot phase, but it has the potential to be an environment for collective
learning. e aritecture of the game, the multiple players, and the
collective action toward various goals all provide possibilities for complex
emergence.
To be clear, the suggestion here is not at all that mathematics educators
should consider MOOC-like structures. Rather, the point is that when
complexity is taken up as a pragmatic discourse, it does more than oﬀer
suggestions on more productive engagements within traditional classroom
structures. It allenges many of the foundational principles of those
structures.

Closing Remarks
In his influential Finite and Infinite Games, James Carse (1987) distinguished
between two sorts of rule-governed engagements: For ﬁnite games, the
rules are ﬁxed boundaries that constrain the play and delimit possibilities.
For inﬁnite games, the rules are more akin to shiing horizons—in the
language of complexity, emergent possibilities—that move with the play.
Among Carse’s examples of ﬁnite games are athletic engagements (e.g.,
most sports), academic engagements (e.g., debates), and intercultural
engagements (e.g., wars). Not surprisingly, he also includes sooling. For
inﬁnite games he oﬀers only one example: life. We would oﬀer others—
including, for example, mathematics.
Among other contrasts, ﬁnite games have deﬁnite beginnings and ends—
and the goal is to win—whereas it is not always clear when an infinite game
began and when it might be over. Further, the goal of the inﬁnite game is
not to win, but to stay in the game. To that end, if it seems that an inﬁnite
game is approaching an end, the players are obligated to change the rules in
order to continue the play. (is is the reason we include mathematics as an
inﬁnite game. As its history shows, the rules of engagement have anged
as the domain has evolved.)
Both types of games can serve as instances of complex emergence. e
diﬀerence is that, for one, the rules are immutable, and for the other, the
rules and the systems are both emergent. With regard to a distinction
among complexity researers, ﬁnite games are akin to the sorts of
phenomena that are of interest among those who study “hard complexity”
through computer modeling, controlled experimentation, and so on. Inﬁnite
games are more the fodder of those who are interested in phenomena that
might be modeled, but for whi the models never really suﬃce. For
instance, it is one thing to wat a simulation of the emergence and spread
of an idea in a population, and it is quite another to be a teaer in a

classroom where knowledge is actually being generated. e model is a
useful device for enabling perception, but it is a poor substitute for the
actual phenomenon.
Complexivists Cohen and Stewart (1995) made a similar point in a
somewhat diﬀerent manner, by crossing the words simplicity and
complexity to generate the terms simplexity and complicity. For them,
simplexity refers “to the process whereby a system of rules can engender
simple features. Simplexity is the emergence of large-scale simplicities as
direct consequences of rules” (p. 411). Among the illustrative examples they
oﬀer are Newton’s laws and formal mathematics, whose “properties are the
direct and inescapable consequences of the rules” (p. 412). Other instances
that might be mentioned are those that Carse identified as finite games.
A core issue among complexivists, Cohen and Stewart noted, is that
simplexities (ﬁnite games) have not only been taken as models, but they
have also been mistaken as the way things really are. In an eﬀort to
interrupt this deeply entrened habit, Cohen and Stewart proposed the
notion of complicities as a category of phenomena in whi “totally
different rules converge to produce similar features, and so exhibit the same
large-scale structural paerns” (p. 414). at is, complicities can are
structurally similar to simplexities—hence the ﬁdelity of the laer in
modeling the former.
ere is a crucial diﬀerence, however. In an eo of the ancient caution
against mistaking the map for the territory, Cohen and Stewart
summarized, “Simplexity merely explores a ﬁxed space of the possible….
Complicity enlarges it” (p. 417). It is a sensibility that is eoed in among a
growing number of voices in the ﬁeld of mathematics education. Consider
an imperative from Laborde, Perrin-Glorian, and Sierpinska (2005), for
example:
To see beyond the banality, it is necessary to abandon the psyological-cognitive perspective
and look at the classroom situation as an integral but dynamic system evolving in time…. For a

mathematical debate to take place in the classroom, then, students should not consider the work
of verbalization of their mathematical work as an isolated, individual school task to be evaluated
by the teaer and then quily forgoen, but as a mere phase in a collective project of common
knowledge construction. The class must work as a system, to produce a system of knowledge and
this implies the necessity of “record keeping” or memory.
(p. vi)
is manner of thinking is ampliﬁed even more as one considers the
potential of tenology to connect and amplify possibilities. As
mathematics educators whose work is informed by complexity resear,
we cannot help but read su statements as invitations to think in terms of
our complicity in inﬁnite games, rather than the maintenance of
simplexities in a finite game.
More pointedly, we close with the question of whether it is adequate or
appropriate for mathematics education researchers to take up complexity as
a means to make sense of long-standing practices. Complexity may be
taken up as one theory among many others. However, it is potentially a
game-changing discourse.

Notes
1. See 
Borwein 
& 
Devlin 
(2008). 
See 
also
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/ExperimentalMathematics.html.
2. Many examples are provided at the Visual Complexity Web site, www.visualcomplexity.com. A
particularly cogent mapping of knowledge domains has been generated by the International
Institute for General Systems Studies, and is available at www.iigss.net/files/gPICT.pdf.
3. See The Radix Endeavor, http://education.mit.edu/projects/radix-endeavor.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Lebiere, C. (1998). Learning. In J. R. Anderson & C. Lebiere (Eds.), e atomic
components of thought (pp. 101–142). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Aribald, T. (2007, April). History of anging the culture: From the Fren revolution to the 21st
century. Paper presented at Changing the Culture, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada.
Abstract retrieved from www.pims.math.ca/educational/changing-culture/2007
Bell, E. T. (1937). Men of mathematics: e lives and aievements of the great mathematicians
from Zeno to Poincaré. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Borwein, J., & Devlin, K. (2008). e computer as crucible: an introduction to experimental
mathematics. Natick, MA: A. K. Peters.
Bowers, J. & Nierson, S. (2001). Identifying cyclic paerns of interaction to study individual and
collective 
learning. Mathematical 
inking 
and 
Learning, 
3(1), 
1–28,
doi:10.1207/S15327833MTL0301_01
Buchanan, M. (2002). Ubiquity: Why catastrophes happen. New York: Broadway Books.
Burger, E. B., & Starbird, M. (2005). e heart of mathematics: An invitation to eﬀective thinking
(2nd ed.). Emeryville, CA: Key College Publishing.
Burton, L. (Ed.). (1999). Learning mathematics: From hierarchies to networks. London: Falmer.
Carse, J. (1987). Finite and infinite games. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Cobb, P. (1999). Individual and collective mathematical development: the case of statistical data
analysis. Mathematics Thinking and Learning, 1(1), 5–43.
Cobb, P., & Bauersfeld, H. (Eds.). (1995). Emergence of mathematics meaning: Interaction in
classroom cultures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cohen, J. S., & Stewart, I. (1995). Collapse of aos: Discovering simplicity in a complex world.
London: Penguin.
Davis, B. (2011). Mathematics teaers’ subtle, complex disciplinary knowledge. Science, 332, 1506–
1507.
Davis, B. & Renert, M. (2014). e math teaers know: Profound understanding of emergent
mathematics. New York: Routledge.
Davis, B., & Simmt, E. (2003). Understanding learning systems: Mathematics education and

complexity science. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 34(2) 137–167.
Davis, B., & Simmt, E. (2006). Mathematics-for-teaing: An ongoing investigation of the
mathematics that teachers (need to) know. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 61(3) 293–319.
Davis, B., Sumara, D., & Luce-Kapler, R. (2008). Engaging minds: Changing teaing in complex
times. New York: Routledge.
English, L. D. (2006). Mathematical modeling in the primary sool: Children’s construction of a
consumer guide. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 62(3). 303–329.
English, L. D., (2008). Introducing complex systems into the mathematics curriculum. Teaching
Children Mathematics, 15(1), 38–47.
English, L. D. (2011). Complex learning through cognitively demanding tasks. Mathematics
Enthusiast, 8(3). 483–506.
Ernest, P. (1994). Social constructivism and the psyology of mathematics education. London:
Falmer.
Ernest, P. (2011). e unit of analysis in mathematics education: Bridging the political-tenical
divide. Paper presented at the Mathematics Education and Contemporary eory. Manester
Metropolitan University, July 17–19, 2011.
Fauvel, J. & Grey, J. (1987). e history of mathematics: S reader. London: Macmillan Education
with The Open University.
Font, V., Godino, J. D., & Gallardo, J. (2013). e emergence of objects from mathematical practices.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(1), 97–124.
Foote, R. (2007). Mathematics and complex systems. <A3+7>Science</A3+7>, <A3+7>318</A3+7>,
410–412.
Hegedus, S. J., & Moreno-Armella, L. (2011). e emergence of mathematical structures. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 77(2–3), 369–388.
Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. (1999). e emergent perspective in ri learning environments: some
roles of tools and activities in the construction of sociomathematical norms. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 39(1–3), 149–166.
Hoyles, C., & Noss, R. (2008). Next steps in implementing Kaput’s resear programme. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 68(2), 85–94.
Hurford, A. (2010). Complexity theories and theories of learning: literature reviews and syntheses. In

B. Sriraman & L. D. English (Eds.), Theories of mathematics education: Seeking new frontiers (pp.
567–590). New York: Springer.
Jacobson, M., & Wilensky, U. (2006). Complex systems in education: Scientiﬁc and educational
importance and resear allenges for the learning sciences. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
15(1), 11–34.
Kaput, J. J. (1992). Tenology and mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbooks on
mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 515–556). New York: Macmillan.
Khan, S. (2011, Mar). Let’s use video to reinvent education. TED2011. Retrieved from
www.ted.com/talks/salman_khan_let_s_use_video_to_reinvent_education
Kilgore, D. (1999). Understanding learning in social movements: A theory of collective learning.
International Journal of Lifelong Education, 18(3), 191–202. doi: 10.1080/026013799293784
Laborde, C., Perrin-Glorian, M., & Sierpinska, A. (Eds.) (2005). Beyond the apparent banality of the
mathematics classroom. New York: Springer.
Lemke, J. L. (2000). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial systems.
Mind, Culture, and Activity, 7(4), 273–290.
Lerman, S. (2000). e social turn in mathematics education. In J. Boaler (Ed.), Multiple perspectives
on mathematics education (pp. 19–44). Westport, CT: Ablex.
Lesh, R. (2010). e importance of complex systems in K–12 mathematics education. In Sriraman, B.
& English, L. D. (Eds.), eories of mathematics education: seeking new frontiers (pp. 563–566).
Berlin: Springer.
Lesh, R., & Doerr, H. (Eds.) (2003). Beyond constructivism: Models and modeling perspectives on
mathematics problem solving learning and teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R., Galbraith, P. L., Haines, C. R., & Hurford, A. (Eds.). (2010). Modeling students’
mathematical modeling competencies. New York: Springer.
Martin, L. C., & Towers, J. (2011). Improvisational understanding in the mathematics classroom. In
R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), Structure and improvisation in creative teaing (pp. 252–278). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Maturana, H., & Varela, F. (1992). e tree of knowledge: e biological roots of human
understanding. Boston: Shambhala Publications.
McLuhan, M. (1964/2013). Understanding media: e extensions of man. Berkeley, CA: Gingko

Press.
Milbrath, L. W. (1989). Envisioning a sustainable society: Learning our way out. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Mitchell, M. (2009). Complexity: A guided tour. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Moreno-Armella, L., Hegedus, S. J., & Kaput, J. J. (2008). From static to dynamic mathematics:
Historical and representational perspectives. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68(2), 99–111.
Nixon, L., Kendle, M., Bowdoin, D., Bailey, A., Wressell, L., Alshammari, M., Agra, E., & Donaldon,
J., (2013). Massively open: How massive open online courses anged the world. CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Piaget, J. (1953). The origin of intelligence in the child. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Pirie, S., & Kieren, T. (1994). Growth in mathematical understanding: How can we aracterise it
and how can we represent it? Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26(2), 165–190.
Proulx, J. (2013). Mental mathematics, emergence of strategies, and the enactivist theory of
cognition. Educational Studies in Mathematics. doi:10.1007/s10649–013–9480–8
Reber, A. S. (1993). Oxford Psychology Series: No. 19. Implicit learning and tacit knowledge: An essay
on the cognitive unconscious. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; New York: Clarendon Press.
Roselle, J., Vahey, P., Tatar, D., Kaput, J., & Hegedus, S. J. (2003). Five key considerations for
networking in a handheld-based mathematics classroom. In N. A. Pateman, B. J. Dougherty, & J.
T. Zilliox (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2003 Joint Meeting of PME and PMENA (Vol. 4, pp. 71–78).
Honolulu: University of Hawaii.
Sawyer, R. K. (2002a). Emergence in psyology: Lessons from the history of non-reductionist
science. Human Development, 45, 2–28.
Sawyer, R. K. (2002b). Emergence in sociology: Contemporary philosophy of mind and some
implications for sociological theory. American Journal of Sociology, 107(3), 551–585.
Sfard, A. (2008). inking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses, and
mathematizing. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Stewart, I. (1989). Does God play dice? Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Stroup, W. M., & Wilensky, U. (2000). Assessing learning as emergent phenomena: moving
constructivist statistics beyond the bell curve. In A. E. Kelly & R. A. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of

Resear in Mathematics and Science Education (pp. 877–911). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Towers, J., Martin, L., & Heater, B. (2013). Teaing and learning mathematics in the collective.
Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 32, 424–433.
van Oers, B. (2010). Emergent mathematical thinking in the context of play. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 74(1–3), 23–37.
Waldrop, M. M. (1992). Complexity: e emerging science on the edge of order and aos . New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Was, Duncan (2003). Six degrees: e science of a connected age. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Wilensky, U., & Resni, M. (1999). inking in levels: A dynamic systems approa to making sense
of the world. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 8(1), 3–19.

Section IV
Advances in Research
Methodologies

18 Researching Mathematical Meanings
for Teaching1,2
Patrick W. Thompson
Arizona State University
Resear on mathematical knowledge for teaing (MKT) has the goal of
trying to ﬁnd relationships among the mathematics that teaers know,
their instruction, and students’ learning. e underlying assumption seems
to be that if we ﬁnd these relationships, and if we then help teaers obtain
the appropriate knowledge, they will be positioned to tea beer and
support beer student learning. is conceptualization of resear on MKT
seems quite plausible—until we ask, “What do we mean that a teaer
knows something? How can a teaer knowing something help a student
know it, too?” Answers to these questions will reveal the importance of
being clear about what we presume we are assessing when we assess
teachers’ MKT and about why we even care to assess it.

What Is Knowledge and Why Do We Care?
Mason and Spence (1999) analyzed historical uses of “knowledge” and
quily determined that knowing is mu more useful for thinking about
teaing and learning than is knowledge. Knowing connotes activities of a
knower, 
while knowledge connotes facts—justiﬁed true beliefs. ey
argued that thinking about teaers’ knowledge leads us to separate
knowers from what they know, which has the consequence of separating, in
our thinking, what teaers know from their thinking, deciding, and acting.
Mason and Spence urged us to think instead about teaers’ acts of
knowing, whi brings us closer to describing sources of teaers’ actions
and decisions. Within their acts of knowing Mason and Spence
distinguished two broad kinds: knowing about (knowing-that, knowing-
how, knowing-why) and knowing-to, “active knowledge whi is present
in the moment when it is required” (Mason & Spence, 1999, p. 135).
Mason’s and Spence’s stance on knowledge versus knowing is in line
with Glasersfeld’s explanations that to interpret Piaget’s concept of
knowledge we need to think quite diﬀerently about knowledge than as
justiﬁed true belief. He explained that we need to understand Piaget’s use
of knowledge as connoting the dynamic, adaptive, and organized
functioning of an organism’s neural system—and as having reference only
within the organism’s experience (Glasersfeld, 1978, 1981, 1985). Put
another way, “knowledge” and “knowing” are the same concept in Piaget’s
genetic epistemology. As I will explain in later sections, knowing-to, as
described by Mason and Spence, can be aracterized more expansively by
appealing to Piaget’s notion that a seme is a meaning—an organization of
actions, images, and other meanings. us, one knows-to act in a particular
way in a particular context because the actions implied by one’s
understanding of a context are in the seme to whi you assimilated the
context. In this regard, I hasten to add that Piaget had an expansive

meaning of action, as “all movement, all thought, all emotion that responds
to a need” (Piaget, 1968, p. 6). us, when Piaget spoke of semes, he had
in mind organizations of mental and aﬀective activity whose contents could
be highly nuanced and could contain several layers of structure.
Hill and Ball’s Learning Mathematics for Teaing (LMT) project
demonstrated that there is a correlational link between K–8 mathematics
teaers’ mathematical knowledge for teaing as measured by their LMT
instrument and the mathematical quality of teaers’ instruction (MQI) as
measured by their MQI instrument (Charalambous & Hill, 2012; Hill, 2011;
Hill, Blunk, Charalambous, Lewis, Phelps, Sleep, & Ball, 2008; Hill &
Charalambous, 2012). At the same time, Silling, Blunk, and Hill (2007)
point out that they tacitly assumed in developing the LMT assessment that
knowledge held by teaers, speciﬁcally their knowledge of content and
students (KCS), was declarative.
When we began developing items in this domain [KCS], we hypothesized that teaers’
knowledge of students existed separately from their mathematical knowledge and reasoning
ability. We thought of su knowledge as “declarative,” or factual knowledge teaers have of
student learning. Results from these validation studies, however, suggest that this “knowledge”
may actually contain both elements of mathematical reasoning and knowledge of students and
their mathematical trajectories.
(Schilling, et al., 2007, p. 121)
e approa to investigating teaers’ MKT that I describe in this
apter builds from Silling et al.’s observation that our understanding of
MKT can be broadened proﬁtably by shiing our focus from teaers’
(declarative) mathematical knowledge, to focus instead on teaers’
mathematical meanings. is shi is essentially from a philosophically
mainstream view of knowledge as justiﬁed, true belief about things
external to the knower, to a Piagetian perspective in whi meaning and
knowledge are largely synonymous, and both are grounded in the knower’s
schemes.

is shi allows us to move, for example, from asking what teaers
know about equations to what teaers mean by an equation. Compare
Teacher 1’s and Teacher 2’s meanings of algebraic equations.
Teaer 1 thinks that any mathematical statement that contains an equal
sign is an equation. Upon seeing an algebraic equation Teaer 1 thinks “do
the same thing to both sides to keep the equation balanced,” thinks that a
solution is the number in the ﬁnal step that produces a statement like “ x =
(number),” and has the goal of reaing the ﬁnal step. Teaer 1 also feels
confused about diﬀerences among equations and identities, and between
equations and functions. Teaer 1 thinks they should all be called
equations because they all contain an equal sign.
Teaer 2 thinks that an algebraic equation is a statement of equality
together with the question, “For what values of the variable(s) will this
statement be true?” Teaer 2 has the goal of answering that question, and
thinks to put the equation into an equivalent form that can be solve by
inspection. Teaer 2 thinks of a “step” as applying an equivalence-
preserving transformation to one or both sides of the equation so that it is
closer to being solvable by inspection.3 Teaer 2 has no diﬃculty
distinguishing between equations and functions and between equations and
identities. To Teaer 2, a function is a statement about a relationship
between two quantities’ values. An identity is an equation that is true for all
values in the equation’s domain. Teaer 2 realizes that all statements with
an equal sign could be called “equations.” However, she realizes also that to
do so, the general meaning of an equation would have to be that an
equation represents its solution set and that she would therefore need to
deﬁne functions as sets of ordered pairs—ideas that she feels are too general
for her students.
Both teaers could exhibit similar performances in answering questions
about equations and procedures for solving them. eir diﬀerent meanings,
however, would provide diﬀerent potentialities regarding what they say to

students about equations and equation solving.
e mathematical knowledge that maers most for teaers resides in
the mathematical meanings they hold. Teaers’ mathematical meanings
constitute their images of the mathematics they tea and intend that
students have. Teaers’ mathematical meanings guide their instructional
decisions and actions (ompson, 2013). Dewey (1910) said as mu when
h e elaborated the connection between thinking and meaning: “at
thinking both employs and expands notions, conceptions, is then simply
saying that in inference and judgment we use meanings, and that this use
also corrects and widens them” (Dewey, 1910, p. 125). Dewey also alerted
us to the dangers of being vague about our central constructs:
Vagueness disguises the unconscious mixing together of diﬀerent meanings, and facilitates the
substitution of one meaning for another, and covers up the failure to have any precise meaning
at all.
(Dewey, 1910, p. 130)
Vagueness in our meaning of knowledge becomes especially problematic
when we set out to assess it. We place ourselves in the uncomfortable
position of deﬁning knowledge, or types of it, in the same way that many
psyologists use the idea of operational deﬁnition to deﬁne intelligence—
intelligence is deﬁned to be what intelligence tests assess. Bridgman, who
originated the method of operational deﬁnition, roundly criticized using a
measure of a construct to deﬁne that construct: “Without doubt it is possible
to apply the procedure suggested here, but I believe that the situation
seldom arises whi one would be content to treat ﬁnally by any su
method as this” (Bridgman, 1955, Chapter 1, Kindle Locations 507–508).
Without explication, the word knowledge becomes a primitive term in
resear on mathematical knowledge for teaing, open to any
interpretation that a person can pack into it.
I will not try to explicate what others might mean by knowledge in

discussing what teaers know and how what they know is related to what
they do. To do so would take us into a morass of philosophical disputes,
su as knowledge versus belief (ompson, 1992) and constructivism
versus realism (Glasersfeld, 1992; Howe & Berv, 2000; Phillips, 2000;
Suting, 1992)—disputes that turn out to be immaterial for the purpose of
improving mathematics teaing. Instead, I will argue here, as I have
argued elsewhere (ompson, 2013), that a focus on teaers’ mathematical
meanings, as opposed to their mathematical knowledge, oﬀers a fruitful
approa to uncovering important sources of teaers’ instructional
decisions and actions, and provides useful guidance for designing teaers’
professional development.
In this apter I make two proposals. e ﬁrst is that a focus on teaers’
mathematical meanings, in line with Mason and Spence’s focus on
knowing-to, is more productive for understanding and improving teaers’
instruction than is a focus on mathematical knowledge. With meaning
deﬁned appropriately, a focus on meanings positions us to help teaers
focus on creating instruction that helps students develop productive
meanings. e second proposal is a means to gain insight into mathematical
meanings teaers have. To do this requires a theory of meaning as well as
a set of teniques that can be used at scale for creating useful models of
teaers’ mathematical meanings—models that provide guidance in
designing mathematics teaers’ professional development that helps them
to help their students create coherent mathematical meanings.
Finally, an example might give further clarity to the distinction between
knowledge and meaning. Suppose a ild lays three meter stis end to
end, and then is given a fourth meter sti to lay down. Upon puing it
down, we ask, “How mu did you add to the total length?” (“A meter.”)
e ild knows that he added a meter. But what did it mean to him? Did
he mean that he added one more sti called “a meter”? Or did he mean
that he added a meter in length that is constituted by centimeters, whi in

turn are constituted by millimeters, whi in turn are constituted by (and so
on). Understanding what people mean gives more insight into their
thinking than does understanding what they believe to be true.

Examples of Investigating Teachers’ Meanings
Two examples will set the stage for discussing the idea of meaning, and
mathematical meanings for teaing, and how one might assess them. ey
are 
drawn 
from Mathematical 
Meanings for Teaing Secondary
Mathematics (MMTsm), a 43-item diagnostic instrument designed for use in
mathematics professional development.4,5
Example 1: Meanings of “Over”
We noticed that English speakers oen speak of average speed as “Distance
over time” and represent it with a symbolic expression like d/t. However,
what “over” means to persons saying this was unclear to us. Are they
speaking of a spatial arrangement of symbols? Or are they thinking that
two things happened concurrently—something moved and some amount of
time elapsed?
We designed an item (Figure 18.1) to see the extent to whi teaers
distinguish or confound “over” as meaning spatial arrangement of symbols
versus “over” as meaning that two events happened or are happening
concurrently. e diﬀerence in these meanings can reﬂect an importance
diﬀerence regarding what teaers intend that students understand from
their instruction of average rate of change. If teachers intend to convey only
a spatial arrangement of symbols, then their uerances are about marks as
wrien and are not about what students should understand about variables
varying or about the meaning of quotient within a context.
e purpose of Part A in Figure 18.1 was to have teaers commit to a
meaning of “over” in a context where, when interpreted normatively, it
means “during.” e purpose of Part B was to give teaers an opportunity
to show how they interpreted the context in whi “over” occurred while

expressing it symbolically. Since the statement is about a ange in mass,
the symbolic representation of it should reﬂect a ange in mass that
happened as time passed from one moment in time to another. Since the
function f gives the culture’s mass at moments in time, and since the ange
in time is represented by “∆x,” one representation of the ange in mass
would be f (x + Δx) – f (x) = 4 or f (x0 + Δx) – f (x0) = 4,where x0 refers to
a specific moment in time.
Figure 18.2 contains one teaer’s response to Parts A and B. In Part A,
the teaer said that “over” means “during,” but went on to say that you
also can think of “over” as meaning a ratio. is teaer’s Part B response
shows more than that, “over” brings to mind a spatial arrangement of
symbols. It reveals two additional issues: (1) the teaer deﬁned “ f (x)” in
terms of an expression in whi “ x” does not appear, and (2) used “ f (x)” to
represent a rate of ange even though the text stated that “the function f
gives the culture’s mass at moments in time.”6
Figure 18.1 An item to investigate teachers’ meanings of “over.” © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents.
Used with permission.
Figure 18.2 A teacher’s responses to questions in Figure 18.1.

We designed a scoring rubric to capture the range of meanings we
discerned from responses given in summer 2013 by 96 high sool
mathematics teaers in the Midwest and Southwest United States. Table
18.1 and Table 18.2 show gradations among levels of responses to Parts A
and B, respectively. We put any response equivalent to “during” at the
highest level for Part A of Figure 18.1, and any response like “ f (x + Δx) – f
(x) = 4” or “
 where 
” at the highest level for Part B.
While a method for creating rubrics that focus on meanings is discussed in a
later section, for now it is worth pointing out that though this item’s design
emerged from being aentive to teaers’ and students’ meanings in prior
resear and in our daily work with teaers, the rubrics for scoring
responses to Figure 18.1 emerged from analyzing teaers’ responses to the
item itself. When distinguishing between levels of responses, we continually
asked, “How might a student interpret what the teaer produced? How
productive would it be for students’ development of coherent meanings
were a teacher to express what he or she did?”
In subsequent tables I share results of our scoring for Figure 18.1 to
illustrate how a focus on teaers’ meanings can provide useful information
about their thinking. Table 18.3 summarizes teaers’ responses to Part A:
61% of responses were assigned Levels A3 or A2 (teaers spoke of “over”
in a way that suggested something happening during a passage of time)
while 32% were assigned Level A1 (they speciﬁcally mentioned that “over”
meant division or ratio in the statement about a ange of mass over a time
interval). Table 18.3 also breaks down responses by teaers’ undergraduate
major. “Math” points to teaers who received a B.Sc. in mathematics;
“Math Ed” points to teaers who received a B.Sc. or B.A. in secondary
mathematics education; “Other” is any other undergraduate degree. As
shown in Table 18.3, 59% of Math majors, 53% of Math Ed majors, and 73%
of Other majors answered at Levels A3 or A2.
Table 18 1
Rubric for scoring Figure 1 Part A © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents Used with

Table 18.1  Rubric for scoring Figure 1, Part A. © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents. Used with
permission.
A3:
Teacher said “during,” or otherwise referred to the culture’s mass
in relation to a passage of time.
A2:
Any of the following:
• The teacher conveyed “during” but represented the time interval
using a symbol other than ∆x.
• The teacher described “over” as meaning an amount of time.
A1:
The teacher conveyed that “over” means division, regardless of
saying anything else.
A0:
Any of the following:
• The teacher wrote “I don’t know.”
• The scorer cannot interpret what the teacher meant by “over.”
• The teacher’s response is not described by any of levels A1 to
A3.
Table 18.2 Rubric for scoring Figure 1, Part B. © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents. Used with
permission.
B4:
The teacher represented a difference in the mass of a culture at
different moments in time, with the resulting difference being
4. If the teacher used a variable other than “m” or “y” to stand
for mass instead of using f(x), or a variable other than x to
represent elapsed time, the letter must be defined.
B3:
Any of the following:
• The teacher wrote a statement like ∆m = 4 or ∆y = 4.
• The teacher represented a difference of masses that equals 4
using a letter other than m or y to represent mass, and said that
their variable represents mass. In addition, the teacher did not
represent a time interval.
B2:
• Teacher’s response contains a combination of ∆m = 4 and ∆m /
∆x = 4.
B1:
The teacher wrote a quotient showing the change in mass divided
by the change in time is equal to 4 (with or without a unit), or

some algebraically equivalent statement.
B0b:
The teacher’s response conveys division but the response is not
described by level B1.
B0a
Any of the following:
• The teacher wrote “I don’t know”
• The scorer cannot interpret the teacher’s response.
• The teacher’s response is not described by any of Levels B0b to
B3.
Table 18.3 High school mathematics teachers’ responses to Figure 1, Part A (n = 96).
Table 18.4 High school mathematics teachers’ responses to Figure 1, Part B (n = 96).
Table 18.4 shows the classiﬁcation of teaers’ symbolic representations
of the entire statement: 3% of responses were at Level B4; 5% of responses
were at Level B3, 60% of responses were at Level B1 or Level B0b, and 26%

were placed at Level B0a. Responses at levels B1 and B0b contained a
quotient or the equivalent of a quotient (e.g., ∆m = 4∆x). Figure 18.3 shows
four examples of Level B0a responses. e ﬁrst two responses in Figure
18.3 are by teaers holding a degree in mathematics; the second two are
by teachers holding a degree in mathematics education.
Table 18.3 shows the majority of teaers responding at a high level
regarding a meaning of “over” while Table 18.4 shows the majority of
teaers responding at a low level regarding a representation of the entire
statement—representing it with a quotient or with a wholly inappropriate
response. Table 18.5 examines the relationship between teaers’ responses
to Parts A and B: 100% of teaers who responded at a low level (A0 or A1)
for Part A scored at a low level (B0a, B0b, B1, or B2) for Part B. Moreover,
51 of 59 teaers (86%) who scored at a high level for Part A (A2 or A3)
scored at a low level for Part B (B0a, B0b, B1, or B2). is suggests strongly
that the phrase “ange in mass over ange in time” triggered a variety of
meanings among teaers, most of whi were unlike the meaning that the
culture’s mass anged by some amount while elapsed time anged by
some amount.
It is worthwhile to unpack two implications of what we learned from this
item. e ﬁrst regards mathematical modeling—teaers understanding
situations described verbally and describing their understandings
symbolically. e second regards what teaers might convey to students
unthinkingly about fractions.7
Modeling. In this item, the textbook’s statement is read normatively as
being about a ange in mass that happened during a ange in time. at
su a large percentage of teaers associated the statement fundamentally
with a ratio suggests that they did not interpret the statement in terms of
the quantities involved (a diﬀerence of masses and a diﬀerence of times)
and a relationship between them (concurrence). is raises the possibility
that teaers’ meanings for the quantities and relationships that any rate of

ange entails are muddled when they tea the idea of rate of ange or
model situations that involve a rate of ange. Put another way, “over”
meaning a spatial arrangement of symbols is in line with “ more means
addition, less means subtraction, of means multiplication”—meanings that
muddle young children’s thinking when solving arithmetic word problems.
Figure 18.3 Examples of Level B0a responses.
Table 18.5 Relationship between teachers’ responses to Part A and to Part B of Figure 1 (n = 96).
What teaers convey to students about fractions. Teaers should
be alert to how students interpret “a/b”. We would hope they aend to
whether their students assimilate “a/b” just as two numbers separated by a
slash mark or that they also assimilate it to a seme that relates the value
o f a, the value of b, and their relative size. is second meaning can be
expressed as “ a/b is a number m that tells you that a is m times as large as
b.”8 e second meaning of “ a/b” is the meaning of quotient, and is related
tightly to past resear on ratio-as-measure (Lobato & anheiser, 2000;
Simon & Blume, 1994). Teaers who read “ a/b” as “a over b” and for
whom “over” implies a spatial arrangement seem unlikely to worry about

whether students are developing the quotient meaning of “ a/b.” Cameron
Byerley is investigating the viability of this claim.
Example 2: An Item to Investigate Teachers’
Meanings for Slope
We oen see teaers tea the idea of slope simply as a computation,
expressed as “rise over run” or “the ange in y divided by the ange in
x.” We also oen see it taught as a property of a triangle drawn against a
graph. ese are unproductive meanings for students to have. ey only
work to answer the question, “What is the slope?” It is important for
students to understand that the idea of slope is tightly bound to the idea of
relative size of anges in two quantities, whi then ties the idea of slope
to the idea of constant rate of ange. It is also important for students to
understand that a graph’s slope is independent of axes’ scales and
independent of the coordinate system in which the graph is made.9
With this in mind, we designed the item in Figure 18.4 to probe teaers’
meanings of slope in regard to relative size of anges and to issues of axes’
scales. Part A requests a numerical value for m even though the coordinate
system’s axes are sans numbers. If you see the line segments as
representing amounts of ange in x and y, and if you understand the
quotient ∆y/∆x as the measure of ∆y in units of ∆x, then you can decide to
estimate the numerical value of m simply by physically measuring ∆y using
∆x as a unit. e ange in y is 2.5 times as large as the ange in x, so m =
2.5.10

Figure 18.4 An item to investigate teachers’ meanings of slope. © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents.
Used with permission.
Table 18.6 Teachers’ responses to Part A and Part B of Figure 4 (n = 96).
We included Part B to see whether teaers thought of the line’s slope as
being a property of the triangle itself instead of as a relative size of anges
that the horizontal and vertical segments represent. When the y-axis is
enlarged by a factor of 2, and remembering that the graph represents the
relationship between values of x and values of y, the value of m remains
the same because the ange in y that the vertical segment represents does
not ange. Interviews with students and teaers convinced us that if
someone’s meaning for slope is a property of a triangle, then he or she will
say either that the slope will be twice as large (if imagining that the triangle
stretes) or half as large (if imagining that the y-axis is rescaled but the
triangle remains the same).

Table 18.6 shows responses from the group of 96 high sool
mathematics teaers mentioned in the prior example. Rows describe
responses to Part A. Close Num means a numerical estimate from 2 to 3.
Far Num means a numerical estimate less than 2 or greater than 3. Diff
Quot means a response like “∆y / ∆x” or “(y1) / (x1).” Other responses
included “y/x,” “P/Q,” and “ m = (y – b) / x.” Columns describe responses to
Part B.
Table 18.6 shows that 52% of the teaers gave a numerical
approximation that was close to 2.5. Many of them showed work that
suggested measuring ∆y in units of ∆x. However, 90% (45/50) of these
teaers who gave a close approximation for Part A answered either
“double” or “half” to Part B. is suggests that though they understood
slope to be about relative size, they compared side-lengths of a triangle and
not what those lengths represented. Teaers answering Part A with a
number outside the “close” range seemed to give numerical values as an
index of the line’s perceptual “slantiness.” ese responses did not contain
work to suggest that the teaer measured the length of one segment in
terms of the length of the other. Teaers who gave a symbolic response
(Diﬀerence otient or Other) to Part A had the highest percentage of
“same” on Part B. We suspect that this was because they focused on
symbolic formulas, whi they could think of as remaining the same
regardless of how, or whether, they interpreted the graph. e results in
Table 18.6 suggest that a large percentage of these 96 teaers thought that
“slope” meant a property of a triangle drawn against a graph that either
reﬂects the relative size of its legs or that is associated with a computational
formula.

Teachers’ Mathematical Meanings
e items in the previous section share a trait: they were designed to elicit
teaers’ interpretations of a statement or seing about an idea that recurs
in mathematics teaching, and then to elicit implications in teachers’ thinking
that their interpretations held. is design strategy is rooted in a theory of
meaning that is based on Piaget’s notion of assimilation to a seme. In this
section I will unpa the idea of assimilation and explain its connection to
assessing teachers’ mathematical meanings for teaching mathematics.
A sense of absorption is commonly associated with assimilate. Object A
is assimilated to Object B when A is transformed to become part of B. As
Piaget famously stated in elaborating his meaning of assimilation, “A rabbit
that eats a cabbage doesn’t become cabbage; it’s the cabbage that becomes
rabbit—that’s assimilation. It’s the same thing at the psyological level.
Whatever a stimulus is, it is integrated with internal structures” (Bringuier,
1980, p. 42). By this Piaget meant that a person experiences the structures
that are activated through assimilation, not the stimulus that an observer
views as separate from the experiencer. To illustrate this distinction,
suppose that a person, deep in thought, rounds a corner on the streets of
Chicago and looks up at what we call the Willis Tower and sees the Empire
State Building, recalling the dinner he had in it. is person assimilated the
Empire State Building—despite it being 1286 kilometers away. His
experience was that he saw the Empire State Building, even if he
eventually corrected himself by realizing that he was in Chicago, not New
York.11
Another way to understand assimilation in Piaget’s theory is to think of
meanings that come to a person’s mind upon encountering a situation.
What looks like absorption (taking in the situation) actually is the person’s
imbuement of meaning to the situation.

Assimilating an object to a seme involves giving one or several meanings to this object, and it
is this conferring of meanings that implies a more or less complete system of inferences, even
when it is simply a question of verifying a fact. In short, we could say that an assimilation is an
association accompanied by inference. (Johnheere, Mandelbrot, & Piaget, 1958, p. 59) as quoted
in (Montangero & Maurice-Naville, 1997, p. 72).
Johnheere et al.’s reference to “a more or less compete system of
inferences” was their way to talk about the implicative nature of meanings.
A person’s meaning in a situation is what comes to mind immediately
together with what is ready to come to mind next. e implicative nature
of meanings is at the heart of Piaget’s notion of seme (Piaget & Garcia,
1991). ompson, Carlson, Byerley, and Hatﬁeld (2014), building from
Harel’s (2008, 2013) notions of ways of understanding and ways of thinking,
captured the implicative nature of meaning in their system for
differentiating among various forms of understanding (Table 18.7).
Understanding in the moment addresses what a person understands of
something said, wrien, or done in the moment of understanding it. All
understandings are understandings-in-the-moment. Some understandings
might be a state that the person has struggled to aain at that moment
through functional accommodations of existing semes (Steﬀe, 1991). is
is an understanding that can be easily lost once the person’s aention
moves on; it is typical of when a person makes sense of an idea for the ﬁrst
time. e meaning of an understanding is the space of implications that the
current understanding mobilizes—actions, operations, or semes that the
person’s current understanding suggests.12 An understanding is stable if it is
the result of an assimilation to a seme. A seme, being stable, then
constitutes the space of implications resulting from the person’s assimilation
of anything to it.13 e seme is the meaning of the understanding that the
person constructs in the moment. As an aside, semes provide the “way”
in Harel’s “way of understanding” (Harel, 2013). Finally, ompson et al.
(2014) aracterize “way of thinking” as a person having developed a

paern for utilizing speciﬁc meanings or ways of thinking in reasoning
about particular ideas.
Table 18.7  Thompson and Harel’s definitions of understanding, meaning, and way of thinking.
(Thompson et al., 2014)
Construct
Definition
Understanding
(in the
moment)
Cognitive state resulting from an assimilation
Meaning (in the
moment)
The space of implications existing at the moment of
understanding
Understanding
(stable)
Cognitive state resulting from an assimilation to a
scheme
Meaning (stable)
The space of implications that results from having
assimilated to a scheme. The scheme is the
meaning, what Harel previously called a way of
understanding.
Way of Thinking
Habitual anticipation of specific meanings or ways of
thinking in reasoning
e previous section’s examples were designed to gain insight into
aspects of teaers’ meanings. e ﬁrst example examined their meanings
of “over” as revealed in their linguistic and mathematical descriptions of
two events’ concurrence. e second example examined their meanings of
slope. In neither example can we say that we determined teaers’
meanings. e best we can say is that we gained insight into their
meanings. 
Since 
meanings 
are 
semes 
(“implications 
of 
an
understanding”), their boundaries and connections with other meanings are
oen subtle and sensitive to context. us, diagnoses of teaers’ meanings
to support the design of professional development require a baery of
items that reveal broader semes, or clear indicators of limited meanings,

among a body of related mathematical ideas. I address this issue in the next
section.

Assessing Teachers’ Mathematical Meanings for
Teaching
To assess teaers’ mathematical meanings for teaing requires that the
assessment designers have a theory of the meanings they intend to assess.
Assessment designers must say what they will take to constitute productive
and less productive meanings for students’ learning regarding a
mathematical idea—and an explanation of why one is more productive than
another. Productive meanings are propaedeutic (preparing the student for
future learning) and they lend coherence to the meanings students already
have.
A theory of meanings-to-be-assessed should also draw from resear on
meanings that prove to be problematic when students have them. For
example, resear on students’ understandings of fractions shows that “ a
out of b” as a meaning for a/b is highly detrimental for students’ later
mathematical learning (Carpenter, Coburn, Reys, & Wilson, 1976; Norton &
Wilkins, 2009; ompson & Saldanha, 2003; Torbeyns, Sneider, Xin, &
Siegler, 2014; Vinner, Hershkowitz, & Bruheimer, 1981). Teaers who
have unproductive meanings can easily convey them to students
unthinkingly (Izsák, 2012; ompson, 2013), so it is essential to create
assessment items that give teaers the opportunity to display unproductive
meanings as well as productive ones. e next section illustrates the process
for designing su items in the context of the concepts of variation and
covariation.
Continuous Variation and Covariation
It is well established that students proﬁt by thinking that values of variables
vary continuously on a connected subset of the real numbers (Castillo-

Garsow, 2010; Confrey, 1994; Confrey & Smith, 1995; ompson, 1994a).
e idea that variables’ values vary continuously is the basis for thinking
covariationally, which is an essential component of understanding functions,
graphs, and relationships (Carlson, Jacobs, Coe, Larsen, & Hsu, 2002;
Thompson, 1994b).
To assess teaers’ meanings for continuous variation and covariation,
we must ﬁrst say precisely what we mean by “understanding continuous
variation” and “understanding continuous covariation” and how teaers’
thinking might be at diﬀerent levels regarding them. Table 18.8 and Table
18.9 are a culmination of prior resear on students’ understandings of
variables, functions, and rate of ange (Carlson, et al., 2002; Castillo-
Garsow, 2010; Confrey, 1992; Confrey & Smith, 1995; Saldanha &
ompson, 1998; ompson & ompson, 1996; ompson, 1994a, 2011;
Thompson & Thompson, 1994).
Table 18.8 Meanings of continuous variation behind the MMTsm.
Meanings of Continuous Variation
Level
Description
Smooth
Continuous
Variation
The individual thinks of variation of a variable’s value as
the variable’s magnitude increasing in bits while
anticipating simultaneously that within each bit the
variable’s value varies smoothly.
Chunky
Continuous
The individual thinks of variation of a variable’s
magnitude as increasing by intervals of a fixed size.
The individual imagines, for example, the variable’s
value varying from 0 to 1, from 1 to 2, from 2 to 3 to
(and so on). Values between 0 and 1, between 1 and 2,
between 2 and 3 “come along” by virtue of each
being part of a chunk, but the quantity does not have
them as a value in the same way it has 0, 1, 2, etc. as
values.

Variation
Chunky continuous variation is not just thinking that
increases happen in whole number amounts. Thinking
of a variable’s value going from 0 to 0.25, 0.25 to 0.5,
0.5 to 0.75, and so on (while thinking that entailed
intervals “come along”) is just as much thinking with
chunky continuous variation as is thinking of
increases from 0 to 1, 1 to 2, and so on.
Discrete
Variation
The individual thinks of a variable as taking specific
values. The individual sees the variable’s value
changing from a to b by taking values 
,
but does not envision the variable taking any value
between ai and ai+1.
No Variation
(NV)
The individual envisions a variable as having a fixed
value. It could have a different fixed value, but that
would be simply to envision another scenario.
Variable as
Letter (VL)
A variable is a letter. It has nothing to do with variation.
Table 18.9 Meanings of continuous covariation behind the MMTsm.
Meanings of Continuous Covariation
Level
Description
Smooth
Continuous
Covariation
(SCC)
The individual envisions changes in one variable’s
value in relation to changes in another variable’s
value where variables vary smoothly and
continuously.
Chunky
Continuous
Covariation
(CCC)
The individual envisions chunky continuous
variation in one variable’s value in relation to
chunky continuous variation in another variable’s
value.
Coordination of
Values (CV)
The individual coordinates the values of one
variable with values of another variable with the
anticipation of creating a discrete collection of

pairs (x, f(x)).
Precoordination
of Values (PCV)
The individual envisions two variables’ values
varying together but asynchronously (one
variable changes, then the second variable
changes, then the first, etc.). The individual does
not anticipate creating pairs of values.
Variation but No
Coordination
(VNC)
The individual has no image of variables varying
together. The individual focuses on one or
another variable’s variation with no coordination
of values.
Table 18.8 describes diﬀerent levels at whi someone could think of a
variable’s value varying. e two highest levels of thinking are about a
meaning of variation that creates continuous intervals. e distinction
between the two levels is that a person thinking at the highest level has a
recursive anticipation that any variation can be reﬁned (ompson, 2011, p.
47). A person at the second level (“unky”) envisions variation over an
interval in ﬁxed increments without the accompanying image that variation
happens within ea increment, as if laying rulers end-to-end. e lower
three levels capture thinking about variation as an act of replacement—the
individual thinks of a variable’s value as something that is substituted for
the letter.
Table 18.9 imports the meanings of continous variation (Table 18.8) into
meanings of covariation. Table 18.9 could be expanded to account for the
possibility that an individual conceives of two variables having diﬀerent
kinds of variation, but in practice this has not been workable.
Figure 18.5 shows the fourth version of one of several items that we
designed to assess teaers’ meanings of covariation. e highest level of
reasoning we anticipated is this: If you imagine the ball bobbing, and if you
coordinate small anges in displacement in a direction with small anges
in total distance, you will realize that the two anges are always the same

magnitude but possibly in diﬀerent directions. us, the graph’s slope will
be ±1 over any interval in whi the ball’s displacement anges without
changing direction.
We designed the item in Figure 18.5 purposely to exclude considerations
of the ball’s speed and its elapsed time. Our intention was to create a
situation that forced teaers to conceptualize both quantities in the
covariation. Our reason for this was that teaer interviews in the early
stages of the item’s development convinced us, in line with prior resear,
that teaers could envision an event happening in time without actually
conceptualizing time as a quantity.
Table 18.10 summarizes responses from 111 high sool mathematics
teaers in the Midwest United States who took the Summer 2012 version
of the MMTsm. It is split into two groups: responses that involved some
description of variation (n = 17) and responses that contained no description
of variation (n = 94). Only 10 responses (9%) spoke of displacement and
total distance covarying.
e item in Figure 18.5 was extremely diﬃcult to score, for two reasons:
First, teaers oen used poor grammar and vague language. Second,
surprising to us, most teaers explained the graph in ways having nothing
to do with the quantities involved and their variation. Instead, many
teaers took the graph as given and tried to use its properties to explain
the situation (Figure 18.6). Other teaers tried to explain the graph in
terms of what happens when a ball bobs up and down (Figure 18.7). Yet
other teaers tried to explain the graph in terms of an overaring theme
(Figure 18.8). Finally, many teaers mentioned time in their responses to
Figure 18.5.

Figure 18.5 Version 4 of an item to assess covariational reasoning. © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents.
Used with permission.
Table 18.10 Responses by high school mathematics teachers in Summer 2012 to the item in Figure 5
(n = 111).
Response
Freq
1. Covaried distance and displacement
10
2. Coordinated distance and displacement
3
3. Varied total distance, mentioned displacement, but no covariation
3
4. Varied displacement, mentioned total distance, but no covariation
1
5. Used physical situation wrongly to explain the graph
22
6. Used graph to describe the ball’s behavior
29
7. Measuring distance implies a linear graph
16
8. Other
27

Figure 18.6 Example of a response that explains the ball’s movement based on properties of the
graph in Figure 18.5.
Figure 18.7 Example of response that uses physical situation to explain the graph in Figure 18.5.
Figure 18.8 Example of response that explains the graph in Figure 18.5 in terms of the theme that
distance is a linear measurement.
ese non-covariational responses led us to add categories of “thematic
thinking” (categories 5 and 7 in Table 18.10), “shape thinking” (category 6 in
Table 18.10), and “nonresponsive” to our theoretical framework. We added
these categories in order to capture ways of thinking that teachers exhibited
in response to an item that is ostensibly about covariation, but whi elicits
responses having nothing to do with covariation. We also modiﬁed the item
to alert teaers explicitly that they should not incorporate time into their
explanations.
Our diﬃculty in developing a scoring rubric for Version 4 of this item
(Figure 18.5) led us to create a multiple-oice version (Figure 18.9), where
the options were worded to reﬂect the kinds of thinking we detected in
teaers responses to Figure 18.5. We anticipated that we would see an
increase in responses aligned with smooth continuous covariation (option d)
simply because teaers might see that it is the most reasonable

explanation even though it might not occur to them spontaneously. Indeed,
we thought it entirely possible that most teaers would recognize option d
as the response they should select.
Option a reﬂects thematic thinking (TT). Option b reﬂects unky
covariational thinking (CCC). Option c reﬂects coordination of variations
(CV). Option e reﬂects shape thinking (ST)—using properties of the graph to
describe properties of the situation. We were unable to include an option
that would reﬂect precoordination ways of thinking, largely because our
descriptions were too long. We included Part B as a second opportunity for
teaers to express shape thinking, or to recognize the inappropriateness of
the student’s shape thinking, but we do not yet have data on Part B.
Table 18.11 shows responses from 96 high sool mathematics teaers
who took the Summer 2013 version of the MMTsm (whi did not include
Part B). It shows that we were correct to anticipate a higher rate of
responses aligned with smooth and unky continuous covariation—but
since 67% of responses were other than d, our concern was unfounded that
making the item multiple-oice would “give away” what we considered
the most appropriate response. Also, Table 18.11 shows that no teaer
selected option e (shape thinking). is was our motive for including Part B.
We are collecting data on Part B with 200 high sool mathematics teaers
in Summer 2014. Interviews with teaers, and trials with senior
mathematics majors, suggest to us that Part B will elicit shape thinking
among teachers who are prone to think this way.
I mentioned earlier that a teaer’s response to a single item is not
suﬃcient to gain insight into the boundaries and connections within his or
her meanings—that to do this requires multiple items that involve aspects of
a meaning in diﬀerent seings. My ﬁnal example is of a variation item
(Figure 18.10) given in a context where the question is not about variation
or covariation directly. Rather, it addresses the seeming contradiction
described by Chazan (1993) that many students worldwide experience

while studying algebra: Why do we call “ x” a variable in equations like 3x
+ 7 = 12 when it stands for just one number?
Figure 18.9  Version 10 of item in Figure 5. © 2014 Arizona Board of Regents. Used with permission.
Table 18.11 Responses to Figure 9 (Version 10 of the item in Figure 5) by 96 high school
mathematics teachers in Summer 2013.

Figure 18.10  Item to investigate teachers’ conceptions of variation in equations. © 2014 Arizona
Board of Regents. Used with permission.
e conundrum that this item raises is an artifact of the way many
teaers and textbooks speak of equations. ey convey to students that
equations have a particular form (formula on one side, number on the
other) and that they are triggers for a special collection of activities that
should end when you get a leer on one side of an equal sign and a number
on the other. us, students learn that the leer in the equation you start
with stands for the number(s) your equation-solving activities end with.
e meaning that a variable in an equation stands only for a solution is
highly debilitating for students’ making meaning of related ideas. For
example, in y = mx + b students must distinguish between x and y as
variables (in the sense that we envision their values varying) and m and b
as constants (meaning, they can have diﬀerent values, but we envision any
value of m and b being ﬁxed while values of x and y vary). Also, the

meaning that a variable in an equation stands just for a solution is
incoherent with solving equations graphically. If a solution is the only
possible value of x in 3x + 7 = 12, then any graph we draw would have only
the point (5/3, 12) on it. Later in their study of mathematics, students must
think of both m and x as variables in y = mx + b and that the two together
create a surface whose cross-sections are lines. us, our intention for the
item in Figure 18.10 was to see the extent to whi teaers hold meanings
that would support students’ thinking “in an equation, x stands for the
equation’s solutions.”
Table 18.12 displays the rubric we developed for scoring responses to
Darren’s question. Level 4 responses conveyed the message that you can
think of the value of x varying in magnitude just as in non-equation
seings. Level 3 responses conveyed the message that x can have diﬀerent
values, but the values are substituted for x.14 Level 2 responses separated
the meaning of variables into two categories—a meaning for variables used
in functions and a meaning for variables used in equations. Level 1
responses agreed with Darren’s interpretation—that in equations, a leer in
an equation stands only for its solutions.
Table 18.12  Rubric for scoring teachers’ responses to Darren’s question in Figure 10. © 2014 Arizona
Board of Regents. Used with permission.
Level 4
The teacher conveyed that the value of x varies in the sense of
varying values or of a magnitude growing larger, and
conveyed that a solution to the equation is a value of x that
makes the statement 3x + 7 = 12 true.
Level 3
The teacher conveyed a sense that we substitute values for x
(including “x can be any number” or “x can be many
numbers”), and that we are looking for the number or
numbers that make the statement 3x + 7 = 12 true.
Level 2
The teacher conveyed that x could be used in more than one
way. For instance, when x is in equations, it stands just for a

solution, but when it is in something like y = 3x + 7, x can
vary (or, it can stand for any number).
Level 1
A Level 1 response conveys that x represents a single value
(possibly not until we solve for it). Responses at this level
support the idea that x does not vary, or at most that the
value of x changes depending on the value on the right
hand side of the equal sign.
Level 0
Any of the following:
• Scorer cannot interpret the teacher’s response.
• The teacher wrote “I don’t know” or equivalent.
• The teacher addressed the question with incoherent
reasoning.
• The teacher stated that a variable is just a letter, and makes
no further statements that fit in a higher level.
• The teacher’s response does not fit into Levels 1 to 4.
Table 18.13 High school mathematics teachers’ responses to Figure 10 in Summer 2013 (n = 96).
Table 18.13 displays our scoring of 96 high sool mathematics teaers
in Summer 2013 using the rubric in Table 18.12. I include teaers’ initial
major to show that responses’ levels were largely independent of major. It
shows that only 13% of these teaers resolved the conundrum at the
highest two levels, that 22% said that the meaning of x depends on whether
it occurs in an equation or in a function, while 57% essentially agreed with

Darren that x is a constant in the equation 3x + 7 = 12. Level 1 included
responses like, “Yes, x stands for only one number in 3x + 7 = 12. But it
would stand for a different number in 3x + 7 = 14.”
Table 18.14 examines the relationship between teaers’ responses to the
Bouncing Ball item and to Darren’s question. Responses to neither item are
predictive of responses to the other. We see this as an artifact of two things:
(1) We created an overestimate of teaers’ covariational thinking by
making the Figure 18.9 item multiple oice, and (2) the Figure 18.10 item,
for many teaers, triggered an “equation” seme in whi the idea of
variable is isolated from the idea of variation. In either case, our
recommendation to these teaers’ professional development leaders was
that they work with teaers to build meanings of variation and covariation
so that they are coherent across the topics of functions and equations.
Table 18.14  Relationship between responses to items in Figure 9 and Figure 10 (n = 96).
An Item’s Focus
Results from assessing teaers’ meanings for “over” ( Figure 18.1), their
covariational reasoning (Figure 18.9), and their meanings for variation
(Figure 18.10) highlight an issue that will be faced in designing any

assessment of meaning: A meaning can never be isolated in teaers’
responses to an item; teaers oen activate many meanings when
interpreting an item. For example, in the “over” item ( Figure 18.1), many
teaers incorporated their meanings of function and their meanings for
ratio into their responses. In the Bouncing Ball item (Figure 18.9), even
though we designed it to focus on covariation, teaers saw two graphs,
whi certainly activated their semes for graphs. Also, the item describes
a ball bobbing on a rubber cord; teaers certainly envisioned its behavior
idiosyncratically. Teaers also thought of a variety of quantities, some of
whi turned out to be immaterial to the question—su as that the ball
bounces in time and with a velocity. In the “ x varies” item (Figure 18.10),
the question is about variables and constants, but in the context of
discussing an equation. Teaers certainly activated their meanings for
equations as well as their meanings for “constant” and “variable.”15
us, in devising a scoring rubric one must identify the rubric’s focus. In
the “over” item, we ose to ignore aspects of responses that revealed
problematic meanings for function notation and for rate of ange—simply
because not all teaers thought to use function notation or to mention rate
of ange in their responses. For most items, we ose to ignore arithmetic
errors because the items’ foci were on something that was immaterial to
correct calculations. e idea of focus in designing and scoring an item is
tantamount to deciding to whi aspects of teaers responses you will
aend, whi also entails the willingness to ignore other aspects of
teaer’s thinking that are revealed in their responses, no maer how
interesting those revelations are.

Methodological Issues in Assessing Teachers’
Mathematical Meanings for Teaching Mathematics
Our overall method for developing the MMTsm resembles the methods
used by Hestenes and colleagues to create the Force Concept Inventory, or
FCI (Hestenes, Wells, & Swahamer, 1992; Savinainen & Sco, 2002) and
by Carlson and colleagues to create the Precalculus Concept Assessment, or
PCA (Carlson, Oehrtman, & Engelke, 2010): (1) Create a dra item,
interview teaers (in service and preservice) using the dra item. A panel
of four mathematicians and six mathematics educators also reviewed dra
items at multiple stages of item development. In interviews, we looked for
whether teaers interpret the item as being about what we intended. We
also looked for whether the item elicits the genre of responses we hoped
(e.g., we do not want teaers to think that we simply want them to
produce an answer as if to a routine question). (2) Revise the item;
interview again if the revision is signiﬁcant. (3) Administer the collection of
items to a large sample of teaers. Analyze teaers’ responses in terms of
the meanings and ways of thinking they reveal. (4) Retire unusable items.
(5) Interview teaers regarding responses that are ambiguous with regard
to meaning in cases where it is important to sele the ambiguity.(6) Revise
remaining items according to what we learned from teaers’ responses,
being always alert to opportunities to make multiple-oice options that
teaers are likely to ﬁnd appealing according to the meaning they hold. (7)
Administer the set of revised items to a large sample of teaers. (8) Devise
scoring rubrics and training materials for scoring open-ended items; revise
items only when absolutely necessary.
ough the overall method described resembles the development of the
FCI and PCA, our focus on assessing teaers’ meanings rather than
performance introduced many new issues. In this section I share issues to
whi we found ourselves aending methodically in our aempts to assess

teaers’ mathematical meanings for teaing. ey can be grouped into
three themes: (1) item design, (2) rubrics for scoring, and (3) aggregating
data. ough it is these three themes I will expand, a general comment to
frame them might be helpful. You will proﬁt by approaing the task of
designing items to assess mathematical meanings mu like you would a
design experiment (Brown, 1992; Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, &
Sauble, 2003). e diﬀerence between a design experiment and what I
outline in this section is that within the cycle of design-evaluate-redesign
you will have mini-cycles with the same structure, and you will maintain a
more intimate dialectic between design and theory throughout the design
and refinement process.
Designing Items
The foremost characteristic of meanings is that they are invoked in an act of
interpretation. An item to assess teaers’ mathematical meanings must
therefore be designed so that teaers reveal something about their
interpretation of it. Ideally, it will invite teaers to think that the meanings
that come to their minds in understanding the item are the ones that the
item writers want them to share. Next, an item must have a focus—a
meaning that you deem important enough to merit devoting one or more
of a relatively small number of items to it. Finally, the collection of
meanings you assess must form a coherent baground for the assessment
itself. e collection must address the body of ideas that comprise the
conceptual skeleton of the elementary, middle, or secondary curriculum for
whi teaers taking the assessment are responsible. ese three
considerations undergird the design of individual items.
Start with Meanings That Matter to Students, Both Positively and

Negatively
Resear on teaers’ and students’ mathematical understandings and
thinking oen provides inspiration for items, as do ways of thinking by
teaers and by students that you notice in your everyday interactions with
them. Resear on students’ or teaers’ performance that emphasizes
correct responses is usually not helpful. Resear that reveals sources of
students’ productive and unproductive meanings and ways of thinking are
more useful. For example, APOS (Action, Process, Object Seme) theory
(Arnon, et al., 2014; Dubinsky & McDonald, 2001) describes students’
diﬃculties with the idea of function as a mapping of the function’s domain
onto its image. e idea that a function maps a set of values A to a set of
values B entails thinking that the function is evaluated at every element of
A, and that every value of the function is an element of the set B. One
might get at teaers’ thinking regarding the idea of mapping a set to a set
by asking something like the item in Figure 18.11.16
Part (a) asks what the expression f([0.5, 1.5]) might mean, not what it
does mean. It asks teaers to make a meaning for the expression even if
they’ve never seen this notation. e purpose would be to see whether
teaers could think about what it might mean to have an interval of
numbers instead of a single number as input to a function. Part (b) gives
teaers an opportunity to express whatever meaning they expressed in
Part (a) more concretely. is could reveal that they have an intuitive
seme for mapping a set that they cannot articulate, or it could reveal that
their verbal formulation of a meaning for f([0.5, 1.5]) is not grounded in a
scheme of actions and operations.

Figure 18.11  Potential item to probe teachers’ meaning for function as mapping.
Leverage the Implicative Nature of Meanings
To leverage the implicative nature of meanings, one asks for a teaer’s
response and then follows up with a question to reveal what the teaer’s
response implies for him or her. Examples of this strategy appear earlier in
the chapter.
Raise Issues of Conflicting Meanings That Often Arise, or that a Teacher
Should Anticipate, in Students’ Thinking
e resear literature on students’ understandings of important
mathematical ideas is a ri source for items that probe teaers’ meanings.
For example, it is well known that students oen interpret graphs that
show a function’s rate of ange as if the graph is of the function itself, su
as mistaking a speed-time graph for a distance-time graph (Monk, 1992;
Monk & Nemirovsky, 1994; Oehrtman, Carlson, & ompson, 2008). A
common explanation is that students did not pay aention to the axes’
labels. We included an item on the MMTsm that showed a graph that
represented the rate of ange of a bacterial culture’s mass relative to
elapsed time since the measurements began, with axes clearly labeled
“g/hr” and “hr.” We asked, “Over what time intervals is the culture’s mass

increasing?” On the next page we presented the same graph with one point
highlighted, and asked teaers to explain what the point represented. en
we asked teaers whether they would like to ange their answer to the
ﬁrst part. Some teaers responded to the ﬁrst part as if the graph showed
the culture’s mass, not its rate of ange, interpreted the point correctly,
and then anged their answer to Part A. ese teaers had not aended
to the axes labels and anged their response when their aention was
drawn to them. Other teaers interpreted the graph as if about mass,
interpreted the point as if about a rate of ange, and le their answer to
Part A the same. For these teaers, their original interpretation of the
graph was stable. We interpret this as suggesting that, to these teaers,
graphs are about amounts. It is also consistent with a form of reasoning
about graphs that I mentioned earlier—shape thinking. We cannot be
certain of either hypothesis without follow-up interviews, but these
teachers’ original interpretation was certainly resistant to perturbation.
Request Symbolic Responses Sparingly
Teaers oen use symbolism idiomatically—the expression itself has
meaning to them, but the meaning of the whole does not derive from
meanings of its parts. Request symbolic responses only when it is important
to see how teaers express their meanings symbolically and only in cases
where you have another window to the meaning they think they are
expressing.
Decide Early on an Item’s Focus
Since meanings are semes, an item can invoke multiple meanings in the
person responding to it. See the discussion of focus on page 451.

Pilot Items Early and Often
It is essential that you conduct interviews on as many items as your
resources allow. Of course, we all operate with limited resources, so you
must decide strategically on whi items you will interview. It is also useful
to share items with mathematicians with whom you’ve established a
working relationship. It is imperative that you also share your rationale for
the item and what you hope teachers will reveal in their responses.
Scoring Responses and Refining Items
Our method for developing scoring rubrics and for reﬁning items is inspired
by the work of Wilson and Draney at the UC Berkeley Evaluation and
Resear (BEAR) Center (Kennedy & Wilson, 2007; Wilson & Sloane, 2000).
at work focuses on creating construct maps and progress variables that
form the basis of instruments that use a developmental perspective on
students’ learning to assess students’ progress—to evaluate learning
progressions. BEAR assessments are given on multiple occasions to tra
students’ progress over large periods of time in learning a body of
interrelated ideas and ways of thinking.
MMTsm items, however, do not come with models for the development
of meanings they assess. Teaers are not ﬁrst-time learners of these ideas.
Rather, in many instances they developed unproductive meanings as
students, and then spent years learning to cope with mathematics
instruction that they were unprepared to understand—developing ways to
satisfy demands to perform without having a basis in meaning. Moreover,
experienced teaers, over time, oen develop curricular meanings that
overlay meanings they already possessed. As a result, it is rare that we can
place teaers’ meanings on a developmental scale regarding progress in
learning an idea. Our approa instead became to design rubrics to reﬂect
levels 
of productive meaning—where “productive” is judged by the

criterion of how useful a meaning would be for students’ future
mathematical learning were a teaer to convey it to them. Levels of
productive meaning do not form a progression in the sense that we
envision teaers going through lower levels to rea higher levels. But the
levels do impose order on teaers’ responses on a scale that is relevant to
teaing the idea being assessed, and we may expect responses by teaers
who are involved in professional development to aain higher levels when
responding to an item on successive occasions.
It is essential that ea free-response item have a scoring rubric. Your
assessment will be unusable outside your project without scoring rubrics.
As mentioned earlier, our method for developing scoring rubrics derives
from the work of Wilson and Draney. It has ﬁve phases that describe the
scoring of items that have gone through the development phase of
interviews and small-scale piloting, and for whi you now have a large
number of responses.
Phase 1: Grounded theory. In the ﬁrst phase you approa responses
with the open aitude espoused by Strauss and Corbin (1998), but the
“openness” is theoretical. Aend to how well you can make sense of
teaers’ responses using the theory of meaning behind the item. In this
phase we sometimes made major anges to an item and placed the item in
the pool awaiting further development without trying to score responses, or
we discarded the item altogether. With some items we found that we could
make sense of teaers’ responses if we modiﬁed its theory of meaning. In
other cases, we made minor anges to the item to use in later testing, but
proceeded to analyze responses to the current item as given to teachers.
Phase 2: Group responses. When an item elicits responses that you feel
give insights into teaers’ meanings or ways of thinking, you then proceed
to group responses by levels of productive meaning. In this case, “meaning”
is the researcher’s aribution of meanings and ways of thinking that would
explain why a teaer wrote what he or she wrote. Our team found it

useful to conduct these analyses individually with subsets of responses to an
item and then report our analyses to the team for discussion. Lengthy
discussions of individual responses, over time, will increase the overall
coherence of the scoring seme for all responses. I hasten to add that it
will oen happen that you cannot describe a group of responses in terms of
meanings that teaers might have had. But you may still be able to
describe a group of responses in terms of meanings that you envision
students might construct were teaers to say in class what they said in
their responses to the item.
Phase 3: Codify your criteria for grouping responses. It is in the third
phase that you begin to have something that resembles a scoring rubric for
an item. Your aim will be that the criteria’s descriptions allow a scorer to
place any response at a particular level. Sometimes a teacher’s response will
ﬁt two levels. In this case the scoring rubric must say whether to place the
response at the higher or lower level. e response in Figure 18.2 (meaning
of “over”) is an example of this. e teaer said that “over” means
“during” and the teaer said that “over” means a ratio. We decided to state
clearly that responses like this should go at the lower level.
Phase 4: Small-scale interscorer trials. e rubric is ready to be “stress
tested” aer it has reaed its ﬁrst stable state. Select a small random
sample of responses (we used samples of size 10) and have several team
members score them independently according to the rubric. Team
discussions of scoring discrepancies oen lead to further revisions of the
rubric during the discussion. When consensus has been reaed on a rubric
it is ready for interscorer agreement testing.
Phase 5: Interscorer agreement and scoring all responses. For
eﬃciency we combined the scoring of all responses with scoring for
interscorer agreement. We had 112 responses to score on ea item of the
MMTsm. Two team members ea scored 66 responses, 46 that were
unique to a scorer and 20 that were common to the two scorers.17 Scorers

scored their respective responses independently, entering scores in a
spreadsheet. e team discussed discrepancies between scores on common
responses. Some discrepancies were accepted as unavoidable error, whi
le the rubric intact. Other discrepancies pointed to problems with the
rubric that, upon revision, eliminated the discrepancy. If we anged a
level’s description, each scorer revisited responses unique to his response set
whose scores might be affected by the rubric’s revisions.
It should be obvious that the method for developing a scoring rubric
described here is an exercise in reﬂecting abstraction (Piaget, 2001). e
shis from Phase 1 to Phase 5 reﬂect the team members’ progressive
thematization of their thinking about the responses that an item elicits from
teaers. A scoring rubric, in its ﬁnal form, therefore reﬂects a seme that
the rubric designers built by continually reﬂecting on their actions of
making sense of teachers’ responses.
Aggregating Data
Our goal for the MMTsm, from the outset, was to create an instrument
whose results could inform teaers and their professional development
leaders about areas in whi teaers might work to strengthen their
mathematical meanings for teaing and areas in whi they have
productive meanings. e issue of aggregating data, then, is really the issue
of how to report results in a way that helps teaers improve their
mathematics teaing and helps professional developers design an
evidence-based intervention. Each item is rich in the information it provides
about teaers’ meanings. But results cannot be reported item-by-item. We
also faced the problem that one mix of meanings on a set of related items
can have very diﬀerent implications for teaing and for professional
development than another mix of meanings.

We are facing the issue of data aggregation as of this writing, and at this
moment I cannot oﬀer a solution. We hope that the data we’ve collected
and scored are amenable to a variant of the BEAR assessment system, a
system that was designed for traing students’ progress within a learning
progression. But it is not clear to me that it even makes sense to look for
structure among levels of productive mathematical meanings in responses
to MMTsm items. Lower levels of a scoring rubric tend to be about
unproductive meanings teaers might convey to students instead of about
meanings they have.
For professional development projects currently using the MMTsm, we
will report very simple proﬁles for individual teaers: scaled-level scores
for groups of items within the MMTsm item categories along with brief
statements about what scores in diﬀerent ranges mean regarding
mathematical meanings for teaing that concept area. We have no
illusions that this will be especially meaningful to teaers except to alert
them that there might be something they should work on. However, we
expect this information to be very helpful to leaders of the teaers’
professional development projects. Project teams aend an 18-hour
workshop on the MMTsm, its design, and on using the rubrics so score
teaers’ responses. e workshop, and the rubrics’ supporting materials,
also goes into great detail about implications for student learning that we
foresee responses at the diﬀerent levels having. It is this aspect of the
MMTsm that we see having the greatest potential impact—alerting
professional development leaders about the mathematical meanings they
will be aempting to aﬀect in their projects and why aﬀecting them is
important.
Two large projects are using the MMTsm as a measure of their yearlong
projects’ impact on teaers’ mathematical meanings for teaing
secondary mathematics. eir use of the MMTsm will allow us to inquire
into two questions: (1) Can we be conﬁdent that gains on the MMTsm

actually reﬂect higher quality and more coherent meanings? (2) Is it
possible for teaers’ scores to go down over the period of a year, and if so,
why? Both questions require qualitative methods that we hope will yield
results that triangulate with what we think teaers’ responses to the
MMTsm tell us.

Connecting Assessments of Mathematical
Meanings to Classroom Instruction
I discuss the idea of teaing as a form of conversation in (ompson, 2013)
and explain how successful conversation relies in principle on participants’
conscious aention to their and others’ meanings. I cannot repeat that
discussion here. One point, however, deserves mentioning: Teaers convey
meanings to students in the sense that students strive to understand what
their teaer wants them to do or to understand, building meanings in the
process. is happens regardless of whether teaers are aware of the
meanings they possess, and it happens regardless of the coherence of the
teaer’s meanings. A teaer’s aim should be that the meanings students
build from instruction are meanings worth having for a lifetime. Teaers’
instruction should support students in creating coherent meanings of the
mathematics the teaer is teaing, and those meanings should lay a
foundation for students’ future learning. Aention to teaers’
mathematical meanings for teaing mathematics will support this broad
goal.
Having high-quality, coherent meanings is an essential aspect of high-
quality instruction—but it is only a piece of high quality instruction. Other
factors will aﬀect whether teaers convey productive mathematical
meanings to their students:
e teaer has meanings. Is the teaer aware of them? Is the teaer
oriented to conveying them to students?
Does the teaer reﬂect on activities and problems that might give
students an occasion to transform their current meanings into desired
meanings?
Does the teaer care about the meanings students construct from
what he or she does and says, and convey that care to students? Is the

teaer oriented to notice students’ meanings, and adjust instruction
accordingly?

Conclusion
In this apter I argued in principle and by example that a focus on
teaers’ mathematical meanings for teaing mathematics is both
important and potentially productive regarding the improvement of
teaers’ teaing, whi I take as necessary for the improvement of
students’ mathematical learning. I also outlined a method for developing
items and instruments that focus on teaers’ mathematical meanings for
teaing mathematics. In this concluding section, I will speak about how we
can link resear and assessment more intimately than simply using the
results of each in the activities of the other.
Assessment as a Context and Source for Research
While developing the MMTsm, we oen found that existing resear was
inadequate to guide an item’s design or to make sense of teaers’
responses. For example, in designing items to investigate teaers’
meanings for function we discovered that function notation is a far more
complex notion for teaers than existing resear on function suggests
(Musgrave & ompson, in press; Yoon, Hatﬁeld, & ompson, in press).
is led to function notation becoming one of the identiﬁed areas in whi
we aended to teaers’ meanings, whi in turn has led to an expansion of
our understanding of the conceptual requirements for students and teaers
to use functions as models of dynamic situations. We anticipate that these
developments will lead to new directions in resear on students’ and
teachers’ understandings of function.
More broadly, a focus on creating items that assess teaers’ meanings
will reveal lacunae in past resear related to that those meanings, largely
because you will need to address issues of teaers’ and students’ thinking

that past resear ﬁnessed. When this happens, you can both address the
issue within your overall seme for the assessment’s design while
simultaneously putting it on your and others’ agendas for future research.
Finally, we are now planning proposals to use the MMTsm to draw
national and international comparisons—not as a horse race among groups,
but to investigate whether diﬀerences among teaers’ mathematical
meanings for teaing might be a partial explanation for diﬀerences among
nations’ mathematics education outcomes.
Research as Source for Assessment
I mentioned that resear on students’ and teaers’ mathematical thinking
oen provides inspiration for deciding upon the areas that your assessment
will cover and for items to include in it. ere is, however, another
important way in whi we can leverage the conduct of resear on
mathematical thinking, especially qualitative resear, to inform future
assessments: In doing qualitative resear on students’ or teaers’
mathematical thinking, one is aentive to nuances in individuals’ thinking
that point to understandings, meanings, or ways of thinking that might
prove explanatory with regard to why it is reasonable, from the individuals’
perspectives, that they do what they did. If researers were to think also
about the prevalence of any of these as possible explanations of phenomena
that have already been witnessed broadly, they would have the beginning
of an assessment focus. If in addition they were to ﬁne-tune their tasks so
that they could be given outside of interviews, and responses could be
scored with that focus, they would have early drafts of assessment items.
Striving for Common Measures

While writing this apter, the MMTsm team and I struggled with the
question of what to include as examples of items that focus on teaers’
mathematical meanings for teaing. We were reluctant to include actual
MMTsm items, for the simple reason that if we amortize the amount spent
by the National Science Foundation across items and scoring rubrics, ea
item and its rubric cost, on average, over $35,000. ese items are not easy
to create. I could have used discarded items, and they would have served
the purpose of this chapter.
We decided collectively that I should use actual items and include our
data on them, for three reasons. e ﬁrst reason is that most people with
whom we shared results are truly surprised by them—they were unaware
of teaers’ diﬃculties with mathematical meanings that they thought were
largely unproblematic. We decided that it is important that the mathematics
education community realize the depth of a problem that has gone largely
unnoticed. e second reason that we decided to include actual items and
data on them is to encourage others to use them, or the MMTsm in its
entirety, in their resear. It is only through the use of common measures
that resear results are comparable, and the use of common measures also
supports the development of common conceptions of what is being
measured. e third reason for including actual items and their data is that
they are beer than the discarded items, and we wanted to share the best
items we could in hopes that they would inspire others to create even
better ones.

Notes
1. Resear reported in this article was supported by National Science Foundation Grant No. MSP-
1050595. Any recommendations or conclusions stated here are the author’s and do not
necessarily reflect official positions of the NSF.
2. I thank John Mason, David Kirshner, Lyn English, Mark Wilson, Karen Draney, and Cameron
Byerley for their thoughtful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts.
3. is narrative also assumes that the teaer has a ri meaning of “equivalence-preserving
transformation.”
4. MMTsm team members are Stacy Musgrave, Ioanna Mamona, Cameron Byerley, Neil Hatﬁeld,
Hyunkyoung Yoon, Surani Joshua, Ben Whitmire, Mark Wilson, Karen Draney, Perman
Gochyyev, Diah Wihardini, Dong Hoon Lee, and JinHo Kim.
5. e MMTsm assesses teaers’ mathematical meanings in the areas of variation and covariation,
function (deﬁnition, notation, and modeling), frames of reference, magnitude, proportionality,
rate of change, and structure.
6. A later section discusses general issues of method. One of the issues is that of “focus.” Teaers’
responses oen tell you far more about their thinking than an item was designed to tap. What
you decide to ignore in teaers’ responses to a particular item is as important as what you
decide to look for.
7. My use of “convey” is not the same as “transmit.” A meaning that a teaer conveys to a
student is the meaning the student constructs in aempting to understand what the teaer
meant.
8. is is precisely the meaning of division stated in the Grade 5 mathematics textbook published
by the Japan Ministry of Education (2008).
9. e graph of y = 3x + 2 has a constant slope of 3 even when graphed in a polar coordinate
system or in a log-log coordinate system—and its graph does not appear to be a line in either one.
10. e graph in the actual item was mu larger than it appears here, making physical
measurement quite easy.
11. I am indebted to Les Steffe for this example.

12. I use the word space instead of set because meanings do have structure. Actions imply other
actions by creating conditions for further action. e structure of a person’s meaning arises from
the structure of the interconnections among actions, images, and semes that constitute it in
that person’s reality.
13. One of Piaget’s deﬁnitions of scheme was, “[Semes are] organized totalities [of actions and
operations] whose internal elements are mutually implied” (Piaget, 1952, p. 405)
14. One reviewer of this apter suggested that what we have as Level 3 in Table 12 should be the
highest level. I respectfully disagree. Students and teaers who have the meaning of variables in
equations as described in Level 4 see greater coherence among ideas of functions, graphs,
equations, and solutions to an equation. In effect, they will see an equation’s solution set S as S =
{x ∈ D | f (x) = c}, where D is a function’s domain and c is in the function’s image. To think of
values of x in D that make the statement true, one must envision the possibility of all values of x
in D, which is what the meaning of continous variation described here affords.
15. For example, some teaers declared “ x” is a variable by virtue of being a leer, and that only
specific numbers, represented with numerals, are constants.
16. This is item is not on the MMTsm.
17. The solution to 2x + 20 = 112 is 46.

References
Arnon, I., Coril, J., Dubinsky, E., Oktac, A., Fuentes, S. R., Trigueros, M., & Weller, K. (2014). APOS
eory: A framework for resear and curriculum development in mathematics education. New
York: Springer.
Bridgman, P. W. (1955). Reflections of a physicist (Kindle ed.). Retrieved from Amazon.com.
Bringuier, J. C. (1980). Conversations with Jean Piaget. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: eoretical and methodological allenges in creating
complex interventions in classroom seings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141–178.
Retrieved from www.jstor.org/stable/1466837. doi:10.2307/1466837
Carlson, M. P., Jacobs, S., Coe, E., Larsen, S., & Hsu, E. (2002). Applying covariational reasoning while
modeling dynamic events: A framework and a study. Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 33, 352–378.
Carlson, M. P., Oehrtman, M. C., & Engelke, N. (2010). e precalculus concept assessment (PCA)
instrument: A tool for assessing students’ reasoning paerns and understandings. Cognition and
Instruction, 28, 113–145.
Carpenter, T. P., Coburn, T. G., Reys, R. E., & Wilson, J. W. (1976). Notes from National Assessment:
Addition and multiplication with fractions. e Arithmetic Teaer, 23 , 137–142. Retrieved
from www.jstor.org/stable/41191386. doi:10.2307/41191386
Castillo-Garsow, C. C. (2010). Teaing the Verhulst model: A teaing experiment in covariational
reasoning and exponential growth. Ph.D. dissertation, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
Retrieved from http://pat-thompson.net/PDFversions/Theses/2010CastilloGarsow.pdf.
Charalambous, C. Y., & Hill, H. C. (2012). Teaer knowledge, curriculum materials, and quality of
instruction: Unpacking a complex relationship. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 44, 443–466.
Chazan, D. (1993). F(x)=G(x)?: An approa to modeling with algebra. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 13, 22–26.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Sauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational
research. Educational Researcher, 32, 9–13.
Confrey, J. (1992). Using computers to promote students’ inventions on the function concept. In S.
Malcom, L. Roberts, & K. Sheingold (Eds.), is year in sool science 1991  (pp. 141–174).

Washington, DC: AAAS.
Confrey, J. (1994). Spliing, similarity, and rate of ange: A new approa to multiplication and
exponential functions. In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), e development of multiplicative
reasoning in the learning of mathematics (pp. 293–330). Albany: State University of New York
Press.
Confrey, J., & Smith, E. (1995). Spliing, covariation and their role in the development of
exponential function. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 66–86.
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Boston: D. C. Heath.
Dubinsky, E., & McDonald, M. A. (2001). APOS: A constructivist theory of learning in undergrad
mathematics education research. New ICME Studies Series, 7, 275–282.
Glasersfeld, E. v. (1978). Radical constructivism and Piaget’s concept of knowledge. In F. B. Murray
(Ed.), Impact of Piagetian Theory (pp. 109–122). Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Glasersfeld, E. v. (1981). The concepts of adaptation and viability in a radical constructivist theory of
knowledge. In I. Sigel & R. M. Golinkoﬀ (Eds.), Piagetian eory and Resear: New Directions
and Research (pp. 87–95). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Glasersfeld, E. v. (1985). Reconstructing the concept of knowledge. Arives de Psyologie, 53 , 91–
101.
Glasersfeld, E. v. (1992). Constructivism reconstructed: A reply to Suting. Science & Education, 1,
379–384.
Harel, G. (2008). What is mathematics? A pedagogical answer to a philosophical question. In R. B.
Gold & R. Simons (Eds.), Current issues in the philosophy of mathematics from the perspective of
mathematicians (pp. 265–290). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Harel, G. (2013). Intellectual need. In K. Leatham (Ed.), Vital directions for resear in mathematics
education (pp. 119–151). New York: Springer.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swahamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. e Physics Teaer, 30 ,
141–158.
Hill, H. C. (2011). Measuring the mathematical quality of instruction. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 14, 25–47.
Hill, H. C., Blunk, M. L., Charalambous, C. Y., Lewis, J. M., Phelps, G. C., Sleep, L., et al. (2008).
Mathematical knowledge for teaing and the mathematical quality of instruction: An

exploratory study. Cognition and Instruction, 26, 430–511.
Hill, H. C., & Charalambous, C. Y. (2012). Teaer knowledge, curriculum materials, and quality of
instruction: Lessons learned and open issues. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 44, 559–576. doi:10.
1080/00220272.2012.716978
Howe, K. R., & Berv, J. (2000). Constructing constructivism, epistemological and pedagogical. In D.
C. Phillips (Ed.), Constructivism in education: Opinions and second opinions on controversial
issues, Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education (pp. 19–40). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Izsák, A. (2012). Measuring mathematical knowledge for teaing fractions with drawn quantities.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 43, 391–427.
Japan Ministry of Education. (2008). Japanese Mathematics Curriculum in the Course of Study (A.
Takahashi, T. Watanabe, & Y. Makoto, Trans.). Madison, WI: Global Education Resources.
Johnheere, A., Mandelbrot, B. B., & Piaget, J. (1958). La lecture de l’expérience [Observation and
decoding of reality]. Paris: P.U.F.
Kennedy, K. A., & Wilson, M. R. (2007). Using progress variables to map intellectual development. In
R. W. Lissitz (Ed.), Assessing and modeling cognitive development in sools: Intellectual growth
and standard setting. Maple Grove, MN: JAM Press.
Lobato, J., & anheiser, E. (2000). Using tenology to promote and examine students’ construction
of ratio-as-measure. In Proceedings of the 22nd annual meeting of the North American apter
of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 371–377).
Tucson, AZ: PME-NA.
Mason, J., & Spence, M. (1999). Beyond mere knowledge of mathematics: e importance of
knowing-to act in the moment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 38, 135–161.
doi:10.1023/A:1003622804002
Monk, G. S. (1992). Students’ understanding of a function given by a physical model. In G. Harel &
E. Dubinsky (Eds.), e concept of function: Aspects of epistemology and pedagogy (pp. 175–
194). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Monk, S., & Nemirovsky, R. (1994). e case of Dan: Student construction of a functional situation
through visual aributes. In E. Dubinsky, A. H. Soenfeld, & J. J. Kaput (Eds.), Resear in
Collegiate Mathematics Education, 1, Issues in Mathematics Education (pp. 139–168).

Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.
Montangero, J., & Maurice-Naville, D. (1997). Piaget or the advance of knowledge. (A. Curnu-Wells,
Trans.) Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Musgrave, S., & ompson, P. W. (in press). Function notation as idiom. In P. Liljedahl & C. C. Nicol
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Meeting of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education. Vancouver, BC: PME.
Norton, A. H., & Wilkins, J. L. M. (2009). A quantitative analysis of ildren’s spliing operations
and fraction schemes. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 28(2), 150–161.
Oehrtman, M. C., Carlson, M. P., & ompson, P. W. (2008). Foundational reasoning abilities that
promote coherence in students’ understandings of function. In M. P. Carlson & C. Rasmussen
(Eds.), MAA Notes. Making the connection: Resear and practice in undergraduate mathematics
(pp. 27–42). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Phillips, D. C. (2000). An opinionated account of the constructivist landscape. In D. C. Phillips (Ed.),
Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education. Constructivism in education:
Opinions and second opinions on controversial issues (pp. 1–16). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York: W. W. Norton.
Piaget, J. (1968). Six psychological studies. New York: Vintage Books.
Piaget, J. (2001). Studies in reﬂecting abstraction. (R. L. Campbell, Trans.) New York: Psyology
Press.
Piaget, J., & Garcia, R. (1991). Toward a logic of meanings. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Saldanha, L. A., & ompson, P. W. (1998). Re-thinking co-variation from a quantitative perspective:
Simultaneous continuous variation. In S. B. Berenson & W. N. Coulombe (Eds.), Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Psyology of Mathematics Education—North America, (Vol. 1, pp.
298–304). Raleigh, NC: North Carolina State University. Retrieved from http://pat-
thompson.net/PDFversions/1998SimulConVar.pdf.
Savinainen, A., & Sco, P. (2002). e force concept inventory: a tool for monitoring student
learning. Physics Education, 37, 45–52. doi:10.1088/0031–9120/37/1/306
Silling, S. G., Blunk, M., & Hill, H. C. (2007). Test validation and the MKT measures:

Generalizations and conclusions. Measurement, 5, 118–128. doi:10.1080/15366360701487146
Simon, M. A., & Blume, G. W. (1994). Mathematical modeling as a component of understanding
ratio-as-measure: A study of prospective elementary teaers. Journal of Mathematical Behavior,
13, 183–197. doi:10.1016/0732–3123(94)90022–1
Steﬀe, L. P. (1991). e learning paradox. In L. P. Steﬀe (Ed.), Epistemological foundations of
mathematical experience (pp. 26–44). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative resear: Teniques and procedures for
developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Suchting, W. A. (1992). Constructivism deconstructed. Science & Education, 1, 223–254.
ompson, A. G. (1992). Teaers’ beliefs and conceptions: A synthesis of resear. In D. A. Grouws
(Ed.), Handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 127–146). New York:
Macmillan.
Thompson, A. G., & Thompson, P. W. (1996). Talking about rates conceptually, Part II: Mathematical
knowledge for teaching. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 2–24.
ompson, P. W. (1994a). e development of the concept of speed and its relationship to concepts
of rate. In G. Harel & J. Confrey (Eds.), e development of multiplicative reasoning in the
learning of mathematics (pp. 179–234). Albany: State University of New York Press.
ompson, P. W. (1994b). Students, functions, and the undergraduate mathematics curriculum. In E.
Dubinsky, A. H. Soenfeld, & J. J. Kaput (Eds.), Resear in collegiate mathematics education:
Vol. 1. Issues in Mathematics Education (pp. 21–44). Providence, RI: American Mathematical
Society.
ompson, P. W. (2011). antitative reasoning and mathematical modeling. In L. L. Hatﬁeld, S.
Chamberlain, & S. Belbase (Eds.), WISDOMe Monographs. New perspectives and directions for
collaborative research in mathematics education (pp. 33–57). Laramie: University of Wyoming.
ompson, P. W. (2013). In the absence of meaning. In K. Leatham (Ed.), Vital directions for resear
in mathematics education (pp. 57–93). New York: Springer.
ompson, P. W., Carlson, M. P., Byerley, C., & Hatﬁeld, N. (2014). Semes for thinking with
magnitudes: A hypothesis about foundational reasoning abilities in algebra. In L. P. Steﬀe, L. L.
Hatﬁeld, & K. C. Moore (Eds.), WISDOMe Monographs: Vol. 4. Epistemic algebra students:
Emerging models of students’ algebraic knowing (pp. 1–24). Laramie: University of Wyoming.

ompson, P. W., & Saldanha, L. A. (2003). Fractions and multiplicative reasoning. In J. Kilpatri,
G. Martin, & D. Sier (Eds.), Resear companion to the Principles and Standards for Sool
Mathematics (pp. 95–114). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
ompson, P. W., & ompson, A. G. (1994). Talking about rates conceptually, Part I: A teaer’s
struggle. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25, 279–303.
Torbeyns, J., Sneider, M., Xin, Z., & Siegler, R. S. (2014). Bridging the gap: Fraction understanding
is central to mathematics aievement in students from three diﬀerent continents. Learning and
Instruction, 37(1), 5–13. doi:10.1016/j.learninstruc.2014.03.002
Vinner, S., Hershkowitz, R., & Bruheimer, M. (1981). Some cognitive factors as causes of mistakes
in the addition of fractions. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 12, 70–76.
Wilson, M. R., & Sloane, K. (2000). From principles to practice: An embedded assessment system.
Applied Measurement in Education, 13, 181–208.
Yoon, H., Hatﬁeld, N., & ompson, P. W. (in press). Teaers’ meanings for function notation. In P.
Liljedahl & C. C. Nicol (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Meeting of the International Group for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education. Vancouver, BC: PME.

19 Measurement Challenges in
Mathematics Education Research
Rosemary Callingham
University of Tasmania
Mathematics education resear has developed over the last 50 years from
its early grounding in psyology into a ri and diverse ﬁeld of endeavor.
At the same time, there is a growing international concern that we are
failing the upcoming generations. In many Western countries, fewer sool
students are undertaking mathematics at high levels. ere are calls for
improved curricula, beer teaing, and structural anges to education
systems that will lead to more people wanting to take up mathematics
teaing as a career—and a constant refrain of increased accountability.
Soenfeld (2008, p. 513) suggested that the diﬃculties faced by
mathematics education were twofold. Internal to the field, as it expands and
takes on new theories and methodologies, is the necessity to “develop and
impose the highest standards for its own conduct.” To meet external
demands for sound and trustworthy information, the methods used should
“gather evidence that provides solid warrants for the claims being made.”
ese demands create signiﬁcant allenges for mathematics education
resear in designing studies that are rigorous and methodologically sound,
and that provide information to practitioners, including policy makers,
curriculum and resources developers, teaers, parents, and their students,
that meets their very diverse expectations.
At the heart of these issues is the notion of measurement. Regardless of
the methodology osen, are we truly gathering data about the intended
construct—whether that be aievement or performance in mathematics,

beliefs, and aitudes towards mathematics, “best practice” in classroom
teaing, or curriculum materials, for example—or are we in reality
addressing some other underlying aracteristic or trait? A related but not
trivial question concerns the ways in which the research team’s perspectives
or beliefs privilege particular approaes—to teaing, to resear design,
or to analyses. Su maers have the potential to distort resear outcomes
in fundamental ways that go beyond simply having diverse interpretations
of the data collected: they rea into the heart of the resear itself,
aﬀecting the resear questions posed, the resear design, and data
collection and analysis. ese allenges for measuring mathematical
constructs exist whether the study is qualitative or quantitative, large or
small scale, funded or unfunded, mandated or grassroots.
At this point it is necessary to consider what I mean by “measure.” An
exploration of several online and hardcopy dictionaries reveals two clear
meanings of the word as a verb: to determine the quantity of something
using an instrument of some form with standard units, and to ascertain the
quality of something by making an assessment against some deﬁned
standard. Measurement thus encompasses both quantitative and qualitative
approaes to resear. at is not to say that there are no tensions existing
between these two paradigms, but it does suggest that in essence they are
the same endeavor, using diﬀerent approaes to aieve the same end,
which is to increase the knowledge base about mathematics education.
e qualitative/quantitative divide, however, still exists in the minds of
some researers, and more particularly in the views of consumers of
mathematics education resear. Researers of both persuasions may feel
at times that their study has not been funded, or their paper has been
rejected, on the grounds of not conforming to some perceived “norm” of
good resear. Pragmatists may adopt a “mixed-methods” approa,
arguing that this can cover the best of both worlds. Su views, however,
seem to miss the point: the resear question, arising from a consideration

of a particular situation and a review of prior work, is the determinant of
the method. Unless the target construct is clearly deﬁned and the study
deeply conceptualized, it maers lile what approa is taken. e
measures, of quantity or quality, will not be dependable and the study will
ultimately be untrustworthy.
It may be useful at this point to consider what is meant by mathematics
education resear. Niss (1999) deﬁned it as “the scientiﬁc and solarly
ﬁeld of resear and development whi aims at identifying, aracterizing,
and understanding phenomena and processes actually or potentially
involved in the teaing and learning of mathematics at any educational
level” (p. 5). Mason (2002) used the term disciplined noticing. It relates to
mathematics only—it is domain speciﬁc (Seldon, 2002)—although connected
to the larger ﬁeld of educational resear more generally. It may include
studies of individuals, classrooms, systems, or nations. As su it is a broad
domain, able to encompass a wide range of theories and perspectives,
drawing on psychology and social sciences as required.
is breadth, however, poses signiﬁcant allenges. Some may consider
mathematics education resear to be a mile wide but an in deep, with
su a range of interests that nothing is considered in depth. Others may
think of it as within an ivory tower, disconnected from the reality of
mathematics, its learning and teaing. Su views are exacerbated by
internecine disputes, especially those between mathematicians and
mathematics educators su as the well documented “math wars” (e.g.,
Klein, 2007, Soenfeld, 2004). e term education may itself impact
perceptions of mathematics education resear. e value and nature of
educational research more broadly has been in the spotlight for many years.
Burkhardt and Soenfeld (2003), for example, stated “Educational resear
is not very inﬂuential, useful, or well-funded” (p. 3) and went on to argue
that educational resear required signiﬁcant realignment to bring resear
and practice closer together in meaningful ways. Among their suggestions

was a call for a “reasonably stable theoretical base” (p. 10) accompanied by
a greater consistency and standardization of methods and instruments.
Given the current situation in mathematics education, the ﬁeld may have
much ground still to cover.
Soenfeld (2008, p. 487) suggested several criteria for making
judgements about the quality of mathematics education research:
Descriptive power
Explanatory power
Scope
Predictive power
Rigor and specificity
Falsifiability
Replicability, generality, and trustworthiness
Multiple sources of evidence (triangulation)
These criteria provide a framework against which a published study may be
counted, and may aid in determining the study’s quality or worth. ese
criteria do not favor any particular approa to resear: they allow for
both qualitative and quantitative approaes, and avoid common value
judgements such as “effectiveness” or “best practice.”
e structure of this apter is as follows. Resear traditions in
mathematics education will be brieﬂy reviewed to provide some context
for the discussion. e nature of knowledge forms privileged by diﬀerent
resear approaes, and researers’ own perspectives and beliefs, will
then be canvased, followed by a consideration of the impact of these issues
on what is measured, or is measurable. Finally, Soenfeld’s (2008) criteria
will be applied to three studies as case studies of quality mathematics
education research.

Research Traditions in Mathematics Education
Early resear into the learning and teaing of mathematics—mathematics
education—was drawn largely from the ﬁeld of psyology and used
methods and approaes pertinent to that ﬁeld. e work of Riard
Skemp (1971), for example, was pioneering and led to the foundation of the
PME (Psyology of Mathematics Education) organization. Studies were
small-scale, based on a hypothesis, and used experimental or quasi-
experimental designs. Consider the study by Bell described by Skemp
(1971, pp, 47–50) relating to networks. e hypothesis was that learning
with understanding leads to greater transferability. In brief, a group of 11-
year-old students (n = 12) who had been taught Euler’s rule for
traversability of networks including an explanation for why it works
considerably outperformed two other similar groups on a novel set of
networks. One of these two groups had been taught the rule alone, and the
third group had not been taught the rule at all. Of interest was the ﬁnding
that the ﬁrst two groups, both of whi had been taught the rule,
performed identically on a ﬁrst group of network problems. In the novel
situation, with harder networks, the group taught for understanding
performed far beer. is study is typical of early studies in mathematics
education. ey were, in eﬀect, laboratory-style studies drawing on the
Western psychological tradition.
e work of Swiss psyologist Jean Piaget anged the way that
educational researers thought about ildren’s cognitive development.
His notion of stages of development was based on one-to-one clinical
interviews in whi ildren completed carefully designed tasks, many of
whi were based on mathematical concepts (e.g., Piaget, 1941/1952; Piaget
& Inhelder, 1947/1956). He considered the quality of a ild’s response to
develop a hierarical framework that, he claimed, ildren moved through
in an invariant sequence as their understanding developed. Although today

some of Piaget’s methods are questioned, and the lo-step approa to
cognitive development has been largely superseded by more complex
theories, his work has been highly influential in educational research.
In a similar fashion, coming from a psyology baground but within a
diﬀerent tradition, the work of Krutetskii (1976) “inﬂuenced generations of
researers” (Mason & Johnston-Wilder, 2004, p. 119). Like Piaget, he also
used clinical interview teniques described by Presmeg (2014) as a
“precursor to the qualitative methodologies that followed” (p. 9). Krutetskii
described insights and approaes to problem solving that were used by
students identiﬁed as gied in mathematics, and initiated the term a
mathematical cast of mind to describe individuals who not only solved
mathematical problems correctly but did so “elegantly.” He was interested
not only in what mathematically gied ildren knew but also in how they
used that knowledge to solve problems.
In contrast, studies that have addressed mathematics performance or
aievement have oen come from the psyometric tradition. Wrien
tests of mathematics have been used since 1830 and public examinations
have been the norm since the early 20th century. Underpinning studies of
this type are a drive for standardization—the test used is administered under
identical conditions to all students—in the belief that this approa is
equitable. Oen driven by the American Psyological Association or
similar organizations, this logical positivist resear tradition emphasizes
validity and reliability, usually deﬁned statistically (Cherryholmes, 1988).
e data generated from these activities have been used by researers to
establish factors, su as socio-economic status, that inﬂuence mathematics
aievement, and to compare aievement by diﬀerent groups, su as
indigenous status, jurisdiction, or gender. Although su activity as
measuring mathematical performance, especially through national or
international surveys, may not always be recognized as mathematics
education resear, the ﬁndings are widely used and publicized in many

instances, and are often used as a basis for policy development.
In parallel with social science resear more broadly, mathematics
education resear began to draw on other traditions. Interpretive studies
are now commonplace, where researers aim to describe and explain
behaviors. Learning mathematics, or any other subject, is seen as part of a
social practice codiﬁed in educational institutions and sools (Eisenhart,
1988). Bishop (1985) referred to studies focused on classroom transactions,
for example, as having a “social construction” frame. Postmodern
approaes consider issues of power within social institutions (Goldin,
2003). Many others could be described.
e point is that there is now a broad range of theories, methods,
frameworks, and teniques available to researers in mathematics
education. ese diverse approaes come from a range of philosophical
perspectives (Bredo, 2012) and draw on diﬀerent epistemological traditions
(Kelly, 2012). e educational resear community itself is divided and
unable to ﬁnd common ground. It has proven diﬃcult to identify agreed
standards against whi to test the quality of any particular study. e
sometimes competing demands have created a situation in whi some
researers—especially those inexperienced in the ﬁeld—“go ﬁshing” for a
theoretical approa aer collecting some data, rather than developing a
sound rationale for their resear method. Mathematics education
researchers are not immune from such challenges.
As the ﬁeld has taken on a broadly more sociological ﬂavor, cultural
diﬀerences in resear traditions have emerged. Sririman and Törner
(2008), for example, described the disunity among mathematics education
research traditions within Europe. They suggested that this arises because of
diﬀerent approaes to “mathematics didactics.” Tsatsaroni, Lerman, and
Xu (2003) considered the theories in use in mathematics education in the
early 21st century. ey found that while most studies used an explicit
theory and also had an orientation towards empiricism, the nature of the

theories had anged over time. e orientation towards psyological and
mathematical studies had dropped, whereas resear based on a range of
socio-cultural 
theories 
had 
increased. 
More 
recently, 
Ross 
and
Onwuegbuzie (2014), considering methodologies rather than theories,
showed that in the period 2006 to 2010, there was an increase in the number
of articles published in the Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education
that used mixed resear designs, and that the quantitative approaes used
in these mixed designs were at a lower end of a complexity scale. ese
meta-analyses of published articles appear to indicate a trend towards using
more qualitative research designs, underpinned by a wide range of theories.
Lerman (2010) suggested that this proliferation of theories, and hence
methodologies, is inescapable and warns that “there is cause to have some
worries about how these theories are being used” (p. 107). As an example,
there is a considerable body of resear that indicates that “direct
instruction” (the practice of the teaer controlling all dialogue in the
classroom using a well-scripted and structured process of instruction) is
more eﬀective than what are oen termed “reform” approaes, where
students are provided with activities that allow them to construct their own
understanding in mathematics (e.g., Beer, 1992; Wilson, Andrew, &
Below, 2006). Opponents of the direct instruction approa argue that
students taught through this approa become procedural users of
mathematics only and do not develop deep connected mathematical
knowledge (e.g., Boaler, 2002; Brown, Askew, Hodgen, Rhodes, & Wiliam,
2003). ese two views are based on fundamentally diﬀerent philosophies
of 
mathematics 
learning 
and 
teaing 
(Ewing, 
2011). Without
understanding or recognizing how these views diﬀer, resear ﬁndings can
be misinterpreted, and the limitations of a resear study may go
unanowledged. ese considerations give rise to questions about
researers privileging one form of knowledge over another. e next
section addresses this notion more explicitly.

Privileging Forms of (Mathematics Education)
Knowledge
e understanding that researers bring to their work about mathematics
—its learning and teaing—inevitably inﬂuences the nature and scope of
their resear studies. In addition, because lile resear exists outside a
political reality, funding may be tied to speciﬁc approaes. ese factors
may consciously or unconsciously impact on the design and conduct of a
speciﬁc resear project. In this section I consider the eﬀects of su
influences and the challenges that ensue for researchers as a result.
It is diﬃcult, probably impossible, to be completely objective about the
subject of any resear study. e action of deciding to engage in a
particular study is itself the result of personal interest, baground, and
inclination and is influenced by training and the local context. Context plays
an important part in any study undertaken within an education setting.
ere are two ways in whi context may inﬂuence a study. e ﬁrst is
the actual social context within whi the study is set. e second is the
researer context that informs the conduct of the study. For clarity I will
refer to the ﬁrst as “environmental” context and the second as
“instrumental” context.
e environmental context, by its very nature, can inhibit the
generalizability of any study. No two educational contexts are identical,
even within the same sool. Indeed Lietz (2009), reporting on data from
the Programme for International Student Assessment, or PISA
(www.oecd.org/pisa), indicated that in many Western countries, including
Australia, Canada, and the UK, approximately 20% of the diﬀerences in
student performance was found between sools, and approximately 80%
was aributable to diﬀerences between students within sools: that is, in-
sool variance was greater than between sool variance. Finland was an
exception with only 5% of variance occurring between sools and

Germany, in contrast, showed 52% of the variance occurring between
sools. ese ﬁndings suggest that the environmental contexts within
whi participating sools operated—whi may include aspects su as
the organization of the educational systems, approaes to teaing, and
educational values—appear to impact on students’ performances. is point
has been the subject of a number of comparative studies across cultures,
particularly between East Asian and Western countries, exploring
environmental contexts among nations. For example, East Asian students,
su as those from Korea, Shanghai, and Hong Kong, tend to perform at a
high level on mathematics tests and many factors have been identiﬁed as
having a likely inﬂuence on their performance, including cultural values
(Leung, 2005a; Li, 2004), teaer knowledge (Leung, 2005b; Ma, 1999),
expectations of sooling (Wardlaw, 2006), and language (Callingham,
2013). ere are contextual inﬂuences at all levels—international, national
and local—and the mathematics education researcher in choosing the unit of
analysis needs to be mindful of these potential eﬀects. e multiplicity of
factors and broad diﬀerences between and within countries, districts, and
sools indicate that environmental context is likely to threaten
generalizability and replicability. e mathematics education researer
still, however, has a responsibility to ensure that studies are undertaken
with rigor. e diﬀerent environmental contexts must be recognized and
anowledged, and the ﬁndings of the study have to be interpreted in the
light of the environmental contextual inﬂuences. e diﬃculties provide
some limitations to claims of generalizability but do not necessarily negate
the validity of any one study.
Consider as an example that body of work that could be aracterized as
“workplace mathematics” or “everyday mathematics.” Carraher, Carraher,
and Sliemann (1985) conducted a study into the calculation skills of
young people in Brazil that was in many ways seminal in the ﬁeld. ey
used a combination of resear approaes, including participant

observation in whi a researer posed as a customer and purased items
from the youngster, and a formal clinical interview (termed the formal test)
in whi subjects aempted mathematics problems based on the ones that
they had solved informally in the street sales situation. ey found that the
youngsters involved solved problems in context—both informally in the
marketplace and when orally presented with word problems—signiﬁcantly
beer than they did context-free mathematics problems that were
mathematically identical to those embedded in context. Clements (2004, p.
186) pointed out that this study was “the forerunner of numerous
subsequent investigations … into the oen peculiar calculation skills of
persons immersed in particular ‘cultures’.” ese types of studies are still
happening.
As the ﬁeld developed, a more critical stance was taken. Mary Harris
(1997), for example, pointed out the complexity of mathematics in the
largely female ﬁeld of textiles and suggested that if the mathematical skills
of women engaged in textile work were formally recognized, women could
potentially gain beer employment. Hoyles and her associates (Hoyles,
Noss, Kent, & Bakker, 2010) used the notion of boundary objects to develop
tenology-based tools for improving workplace training, emphasizing the
collaborative aspects of the study both to make the tools useful and ensure
their take-up and use. In these laer two studies predominantly qualitative
approaes were used to provide ri descriptions. e studies themselves
were specific to their contexts.
Cultural mathematics developed in other ways as well. Bishop (1988)
brought together many diﬀerent studies to argue that although
mathematics is a cultural phenomenon, nevertheless there are common
threads. ere have been many cultural studies of mathematics including
counting and number systems (e.g., the work of Lean cited in Owens, 2001).
e ﬁeld of “ethnomathematics” (D’Ambrosio, 1985) is concerned with
those ways in whi diﬀerent cultures have developed diverse

mathematics, depending on the needs within the particular society. It has a
number of diﬀerent foci, including one of empowerment through
mathematics and criticisms of the Eurocentric nature of sool mathematics
(e.g., Powell & Frankenstein, 1997).
e point here is not that the cultural aspect of mathematics education is
a diverse ﬁeld, rather it is that it is an umbrella encompassing many
diﬀerent studies, none of whi is truly replicable or generalizable because
of its situated nature (Lave, 1988). Like a dot in a pointillist painting, every
mathematics education cultural resear study carries limited information,
bounded by time and place. Taken together, however, the body of work
reveals a ri and subtle picture of the place of mathematics in the world,
historically and currently. Mathematics education researers need to be
mindful of where their study ﬁts within the wider ﬁeld, and how it
contributes to that field within its own environmental context.
e previous discussion referred to the environmental contexts in whi
a study may be located. e inﬂuences of the researers’ own
environments may themselves exert subtle inﬂuences on the decisions that
are made about the conduct of the project itself through the personal biases
that any resear team or individual may bring to a study. Shulman (1987)
indicated that educational ends, purposes, and values are part of the
knowledge base of all teaers, and hence, also of educational researers.
Researers cannot isolate themselves from their environment; the best that
can be done is to anowledge the inﬂuence of prior experiences, previous
resear 
understandings, 
and 
personal 
preferences. 
Interestingly,
researers who use qualitative approaes may explicitly address su
issues. Rarely, however, are su considerations made when a quantitative
study is being designed. is kind of inﬂuence is what I term instrumental
context.
It should be emphasized that in discussing the notion of bias, I am not
referring to prejudice or unfairness. Rather it is those dispositions towards

one theory over another, or in the oice of a particular resear approa,
that emerge from baground, training, culture, and personal experiences.
e resear questions developed, the instruments used, the sample osen,
the data collected and so on are all subject to the internal, oen
unexamined, aitudes, beliefs, and dispositions of the individual researer.
Researers should examine their thinking deeply, and anowledge that
there may be a variety of ways of addressing the same problem or of
interpreting the same results, even when the environmental contexts are
taken into account.
As an example, consider a number of approaes to examining the
nature of pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) in mathematics. Shulman
(1987) first defined PCK as
the blending of content and pedagogy into an understanding of how topics, problems, or issues
are organized, represented, and adapted to the diverse interests and abilities of learners, and
presented for instruction. Pedagogical content knowledge is the category most likely to
distinguish the understanding of the content specialist from that of the pedagogue.
(p. 8)
Since Shulman ﬁrst described PCK, there has been considerable interest in
aempting to identify and measure PCK in the context of mathematics. In
the United States, a team led by Ball explored the notion of knowledge for
teaing (Ball, ames, & Phelps, 2008) by considering the ways in whi
teaers needed to know and understand mathematics that went beyond
simply being able to undertake mathematical problems. ey developed a
model of knowledge for teaing that included both mathematical
knowledge (subject maer knowledge) and PCK, with several subdomains
within ea of these two categories. Using this basis, they developed
instruments to measure elementary sool teaers’ knowledge for
teaing mathematics. Analysis of data from initial administration of the
instruments suggested three factors: two content knowledge factors

addressing knowledge of number and operations, and knowledge of
paerns, functions, and algebra; and a student factor, termed knowledge of
students and content (Hill, Silling, & Ball, 2004). e oice of
mathematical content was conﬁned to areas of importance in the local
curriculum. In contrast, in Australia Callingham and Watson (2011) ose to
focus on statistics as a newer component of the curriculum and one that
was known to be problematic for teaers. eir items asked teaers to
anticipate students’ likely correct and incorrect responses to statistical
questions, and to indicate what they would do to move students’
knowledge forward. e content knowledge was present but the emphasis
in the measures was on knowing about students’ knowledge, based on
teaers’ own statistical understanding. A third approa to the
measurement of PCK was taken by Baumert and his associates in Germany
(Baumert et al., 2010) in whi they proposed three facets of high sool
teaers’ PCK: tasks in whi teaers were asked to recognize a variety of
possible solution paths; students, addressing common mistakes and
misconceptions; and instruction, addressing the range of representations and
approaches to teaching.
ese three quantitative studies aimed at identifying and measuring
teaers’ PCK all took diﬀerent perspectives based on researers’
understanding, experience, and context. e US study (Ball et al., 2008)
placed an emphasis on teaers’ mathematical knowledge in the areas of
arithmetic operations and paerns and relationships. eir knowledge of
students was also linked to content, reﬂecting a belief about the critical
importance of core mathematical concepts. In contrast, the Australian
statistics-based study (Callingham & Watson, 2011) focused on teaers’
knowledge of likely student diﬃculties and development of student
understanding. Implicit in the decision to make students the focus was a
recognition that teaers themselves were unsure of their own statistical
knowledge and that to ask them directly to solve statistical problems would

have been threatening. e European study (Baumert et al., 2010)
considered aspects such as the choice of teaching tasks and multiple solution
paths, privileging a particular didactic tradition. It is clear that there are
overlaps, but ea measure developed appears to have been inﬂuenced by
the researers’ bagrounds and traditions, leading to diﬀerent
instrumental contexts.
Baumert et al. (2010) conjectured that a teaer’s baground and
experience would inﬂuence the development of PCK. Teaers training at
diﬀerent institutions, even within the same country, may experience very
diﬀerent emphases in their education. Chi (2011) described the allenges
experienced in deciding what aspects of PCK in mathematics to address,
both in teaching and research. She stated
we demigod-like educators think we have power to direct people on this path to enlightenment.
We oose what aspects of PCK to emphasise based, if you like, on our PCK for PCK. We cannot
do all we would like (we are not omnipotent) but our expertise is the basis for oices about
what to include. We exhibit a self-asserted omniscience that we are doing what is best.
(p. 1)
Clearly, regardless of whether a particular study is qualitative or
quantitative, it is not context free. Some aspects of mathematical
knowledge, understanding, beliefs, and aitudes, or skill will inevitably be
privileged over others. e important point for any researer is to accept
and anowledge these diﬀerences. Unless these aspects are recognized the
value of the resear in providing descriptive or explanatory power may be
distorted. ese considerations point towards the postmodern dilemma of
pluralism and localization. Walshaw (2004) noted
As a crucial component of our complex societies, mathematics education is an evolving, self-
critical enterprise—constantly on the lookout for creative solutions and new ways of looking,
interpreting and explaining.
(p. 2)

Mathematics education researers, while continuing to embrace new
approaes, theories, and teniques, need to take care not to ignore prior
work—that is they must recognize and anowledge the heritage and
traditions both within the ﬁeld and their own circumstances, and frame
their work accordingly.
e two previous sections have served to highlight the intricacy of
mathematics education resear. Not only is there a ra of possible theories
that lead to a range of methodological oices, but these theories can also
be applied in a variety of environmental contexts by researers who bring
their own perspectives to bear, inﬂuencing the instrumental contexts. Given
this complexity, it seems unlikely that the ﬁeld is moving towards a uniﬁed
theory of mathematics education, or if indeed this goal is sensible (Sririman
& English, 2010). e mathematics education researer of necessity must
rely on the professional judgement and knowledge of the resear team,
being explicit about the theoretical underpinnings of the study and the
inherent strengths and limitations of the supporting philosophy. e
important message is that having a theory is essential to provide a rationale
and platform on whi to build the study. Lerman (2010) reported that
around 10% of reported mathematics education studies in the period from
1996 to 2001 did not use an explicit theory of any type. As with teaing,
having no solid basis for the decisions and oices that arise throughout a
resear study is like walking on quisand—at any moment the luless
researer can sink in the mire of competing interpretations of the data. I
sometimes see resear students struggling to write a thesis from a poorly
conceptualized study, aempting to make sense of a disordered collection
of disparate information. Being clear about the theoretical perspective
allows the researer to justify the resear design and focuses aention on
the relevant data to collect. Considerations of what information is needed
to answer the resear question inevitably leads to discussion about
measures and measurement. is aspect of resear is addressed in the next

section.

Measures and Measurement in Mathematics
Education
Issues around the nature of the measurement—of quality or quantity—
appear to be rarely anowledged or discussed in mathematics education
resear. ese maers are, however, fundamental to meeting the kinds of
criteria to which Schoenfeld (2008) referred. Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer,
and Sauble (2003, p. 12), in the context of design experiments, made the
point that “all measurements (even observations) are indexes to constructs
of interest, not the constructs themselves.” They went on to point out that
Measures are created, not found, and decisions about the creation of measures are among the
most important made. An otherwise impeccable design will produce no useful information about
the phenomena of interest if problems of construct validity are not successfully resolved.
Measures that are feasible to administer, and that produce precise and reliable scores, may or
may not adequately capture the phenomenon of interest.
(p. 12)
There are a number of important points here. The idea that a measure is not
simply waiting to be discovered but is purposefully manufactured to
capture indicators of the focus of the study is critical. No study exists in a
vacuum: however apparently unstructured or naturalistic the data collection
purports to be, there must be some underlying construct of interest to the
researer or the study itself becomes questionable. e development of
some measure bridges the gap between the theory espoused and the
observed phenomenon.
As an example, an exercise I set for my resear methods students is to
go and observe people at an eating place. No other instructions are given.
When the students report ba, it is obvious that they all focus on diﬀerent
aspects—the type of food, the conversations happening, the use of space—
and that without some frame of reference the observations are fairly
useless. Even when a frame of reference is supplied retrospectively, the data

are too diﬀuse to be used to make sensible inferences about the new focus
of aention. e point is simply and quily made that having some
framework or theory, usually based on previous resear reported in the
literature, is essential in order to construct measures of the target behavior.
Because measures are constructed, the validity of the construct is
important. e notion of validity has been allenged in relation to
qualitative data, but Messi (1991) argued for a holistic view where the
idea of a “score” that is used as a measure encompasses
any coding or summarization of observed consistencies or performance regularities on a test,
questionnaire, observation procedure, or other assessment device (su as work samples,
portfolios, or realistic problem simulations). is general usage subsumes qualitative as well as
quantitative summaries.
(p. 1)
Regardless of the form in whi the data are collected, the construct itself
must carry useful, interpretable information if it is to contribute to the
study. Consideration of the construct needs to go beyond content alone and
take account of su maers as values and utility. It should also be
recognized that establishing validity is always a maer of argument, and
that as new evidence is produced the validity of the construct may ange,
for better or worse.
As an example of the diﬀerent ways in whi measures may be
constructed, I return to the body of work that addresses that complex
construct of PCK. In the three studies discussed in the previous section (Ball
et al., 2008; Baumert et al., 2010; Callingham & Watson, 2011) aempts
were made ﬁrst to deﬁne components of the construct and then to write
items that would address these components. e focus in ea study,
despite 
the 
diﬀerences, 
was 
on 
the 
appropriate 
mathematical
understandings of teaers that were needed to develop students’
understanding. In contrast, two other studies, Rowland, Hustep, and

waites (2005) and Chi, Baker, Pham, and Cheng (2006), took a
qualitative approa to identify the actions that teaers use when teaing.
eir focus was the process of teaing. Rowland et al. (2005) used 24
videotaped lessons from elementary preservice teaers towards the end of
their teaer education course. Using an inductive approa they identiﬁed
a “knowledge quartet,” based on identifying larger themes from the 18
codes that they created during analysis of their data. ese themes—termed
foundation, transformation, connection, and contingency—aimed to capture
what teaers were doing in the process of teaing and were used to
frame discussions with preservice teaers about their teaing practice.
Chi and her colleagues used a combination of interviews, questionnaires,
and classroom observations to consider aspects of mathematics teaing,
and hence developed a framework for examining PCK in relation to
speciﬁc aspects of mathematics (Chi, Pham, & Baker, 2006). ey
described three facets of teaers’ knowledge: pedagogical knowledge in a
content context, content knowledge in a pedagogical context, and a
category that was “clearly PCK” involving a symbiotic relationship
between pedagogy and content.
Of interest here is that although the two approaes—quantitative and
qualitative—to the consideration of PCK were diﬀerent, they both provided
sound and valid data for the purposes that were intended. e three
quantitative studies aimed to identify how mu PCK teaers had and
ultimately to use the measure of that PCK as one variable in identifying
factors that impacted on students’ learning. In contrast, the two qualitative
studies aimed to consider teaing in action and to use the data as a basis
for discussions with preservice and in-service teaers. All the studies
focused on the relationship between mathematical knowledge and
pedagogy that is at the heart of the PCK construct. Of particular note,
however, is that based on the same body of previous resear identiﬁed in
the literature, the aims of the studies and the nature of the resear

questions drove the methodology used. ese ﬁve studies exemplify the
importance of having a strong theoretical basis on whi to frame an
investigation and from whi to develop measures, quantitative or
qualitative, of the target construct.
ese PCK studies also bring aention to the utility of the studies and
what Messi (1991) referred to as “consequential validity.” e diﬀerent
types of PCK study described earlier had diﬀerent intentions. e three
quantitative studies aimed ultimately to explore the links between teaers’
knowledge and students’ outcomes, whereas the objective of the two
qualitative studies was to open conversations with teaers about the
nature of teaing mathematics. e nature and use of the data collected
was appropriate and provided no adverse consequences. Unfortunately,
sometimes resear ﬁndings are used carelessly, oen by inﬂuential
nonresearers, with unanticipated consequences. Consider for example the
consequences of using data from large-scale national or international
testing programs, su as the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) (e.g., National Center for Educational Statistics, 2014). ere is
growing evidence (e.g., Berliner, 2011) that as a consequence of the
emphasis on high-stakes testing, the curriculum oﬀered in sool becomes
curtailed, and that this in turn aﬀects outcomes for students later. Rather
than improving the quality of education, the intense focus on performance
is detrimental to education more broadly. Resear programs su as NAEP
in the United States, and its equivalents in many other countries, are
intended to provide a series of snapshots of a system, rather than data that
can provide worthwhile evidence at the sool or individual level. e data
are being used beyond their design limitations and the consequential
validity is weak.
Returning to the comments of Cobb et al. (2003) quoted earlier,
constructing measures is a key aspect of any resear study. ality
measures, used appropriately, provide rigorous evidence about the focus of

study. Ras measurement (Bond & Fox, 2007) provides one approa to
developing rigorous measures within a qualitative inferential framework.
Using the interactions between questions (test items, hierarically coded
interviews or observations, Likert scale surveys) and persons (teaers,
students) it is possible to produce an interval-level ordered conjoint scale
that can be used to explore, describe, or explain relationships between the
items and persons. Measures produced by the model are a sound basis for
comparing groups, considering interactions, or predicting outcomes. In the
editorial to a special issue of the Mathematics Education Resear Journal
addressing uses of Ras measurement in mathematics education resear,
the editors wrote:
First, we believe strongly that all resear should have a strong conceptual basis and should be
supported by rigorous teniques. Conceptualising a resear study requires a deep consideration
of the ideas of others, and interpretation of those ideas within the set of values and beliefs ea
researer brings to the resear process—a qualitative framework. Second, we believe that
resear approaes should be defensible and rigorous, and that quantitative teniques can
provide a sound basis for such an approach. There is an important caveat, however: Measurement
is a means to an end, not an end in itself, and must be used properly.
(Callingham & Bond, 2006, p. 7).
is caveat is an important one. It relates to Soenfeld’s (2008) calls for
mathematics education resear to provide sound evidence for the claims
made, and goes further to suggest that how that information is used also
has an impact, incorporating the notion of consequential validity. It is a
legitimate resear activity to develop an instrument to measure, for
example, aitudes towards mathematics that may take various forms
(Aiken 1970)—but that instrument has to produce measures that have
descriptive power (e.g., Leder, 1985), explanatory power (e.g., Ma & Kishor,
1997), or predictive power (e.g., Neale, 1969). Ultimately it is the meaning
ascribed to the measure that impacts.
e notion of meaning is a philosophical one. Mundey (1986) suggested

“e hallmark of a meaningless proposition is that its truth-value depends
on what scale or coordinate system is employed, whereas meaningful
propositions have truth-value independent of the oice of representation,
within certain limits” (p. 392). Comments su as this have implications for
the development of ways of measuring a construct, whatever that construct
might be, in mathematics education. e ideal, perfect-world construct may
not exist, but the ideal should be the basis for the development of any
survey, test, observation, or interview sedule that might be used to
measure a construct. All too oen, however, any relationship between the
ideal and the components that the instrument purports to measure goes
unexamined (Fisher, 2004), apart from a cursory review by a panel of
researchers.
Fisher (2004) argued that
Resear methods embodying integrated qualitative-quantitative mathematics have two crucial
advantages over currently popular methods in the social sciences. e ﬁrst is that strict criteria
exist for knowing when mathematically transparent representation, and so, quantiﬁcation, has
been provisionally aieved. e second is the foundation this aievement lays for creating and
maintaining universal uniform metrics as a common language for the exchange of value.
(p. 441)
ese conditions—aievement of quantiﬁcation and the establishment of a
universal measurement scale—are then open to falsiﬁability, one of
Soenfeld’s (2008) criteria for mathematics education resear. e
resear becomes transparent in its meaning and can thus be questioned. It
is this questioning that moves the field forward.
ere is, however, a subtle distinction between Fisher’s (2004) approa
and the positivist paradigm. Fisher proposes the ideal and aims to ﬁt the
data obtained from the measures employed to that ideal. In contrast, the
usual positivist approa is to aempt to ﬁt a model to the data obtained
from the measures. e underlying assumption in the laer approa is that
the measures are the construct. e clarity and transparency of the resear

is not clearly established, leaving open the potential for confusion and
reducing the capacity for falsiﬁability. Fisher is arguing for the use of
numbers because of the precision of meaning they carry when the
instruments used to generate these numbers conform to an ideal model.
Su a requirement taken at face value appears to allenge qualitative
methodologies. Oen, however, qualitative researers use frequency
counts of some action, comment, or code to build their argument. If,
however, the investigation is truly about quality—as qualitative resear
implies—it should be possible to mat the actions or observations to a set
of standards. Deﬁning a set of standards implies an ideal to whi the
construct should mated, whi is the same activity as recommended by
Fisher. Using teniques su as Ras measurement, the levels of quality
identiﬁed can be transformed into a true measurement scale. It is the
underlying ideal construct that provides the basis for judgements that then
can be coded numerically without compromising the qualitative approach.
e work of Long, Wendt, and Dunne (2011) provides an example of this
dual approa. ey considered proﬁciency in multiplicative thinking, one
of the important staging posts in developing mathematical understanding in
the middle years of sooling (Siemon, 2013; Siemon, Blely, & Neal,
2012). Items were selected from the Trends in International Mathematics
and Science Study (TIMSS) (International Association for the Evaluation of
Educational Aievement, 2007) to address a theorized conceptual domain
of multiplicative thinking, including addressing ratio, proportion, and
percent, and intentionally covering a wide range of diﬃculty, based on
released TIMSS data. ese items were administered to 330 South African
students in Grades 7 to 9. In addition, a group of students from high-,
middle-, 
and low-proﬁciency bands was interviewed, with items for
interview osen in su a way that, for example, a high proﬁciency
student would answer a relatively easy item, and a low proﬁciency student
might receive a more diﬃcult item. In this way the nature of the students’

thinking at different proficiency levels was able to be identified.
From the initial Ras analysis of the test items a hierary of items was
identiﬁed that were ﬁrst grouped by identifying appropriate cut points on
the scale—a qualitative interpretation of quantitative data. ese initial item
groupings were examined for common themes and cognitive demands. e
interviews provided identiﬁcation of particular types of error associated
with levels of competency and the diﬃculty of the items. Combining all of
this information allowed researers to identify paerns of thinking that
were demonstrated as students displayed greater competency. More
importantly, some ﬁne-grained identiﬁcation of the needs of speciﬁc
individuals was possible that enabled teaers to target their teaing more
eﬀectively. e combination of quantitative precision and qualitative
interpretation provided insights that neither approa would have done if
used in isolation.
Nevertheless, there are many studies that provide sound evidence but do
not conform to this approa. Any diagnostic tool, by deﬁnition, seeks
responses that do not conform to an ideal so that studies aiming to identify
students’ misconceptions, for example, will not ﬁt the model. Stacey and
Steinle (2006), for example, worked to identify misconceptions about
decimals. ey used a carefully designed diagnostic test based on available
literature that required students to compare pairs of decimal numbers. Their
aim was to identify paerns of responses and to see how these paerns
anged as students moved through sooling. is approa is best
aracterized as “mapping” learning as students moved between diﬀerent
categories of response, as opposed to measuring learning, where students
show an increasing quantity of understanding of the core construct as they
learn more. e Ras model is not appropriate for activities of this type,
but it is worth noting that the resear design used by Stacey and Steinle
conformed to the model described earlier. ey developed a strong
conceptual framework, based on previous work, designed and delivered an

appropriate test, and then analyzed the results using a combination of
quantitative (percentages in categories and so on) and qualitative
(descriptions of typical errors) analysis to identify paerns in students’
thinking.
Instruments developed for diagnosis are legitimate but cannot provide
information about students’ mathematical aievement, and they should
not be used for that purpose. Similarly many cross-cultural studies aim to
identify similarities and diﬀerences, again a diagnostic activity. Studies su
as these map the territory rather than make judgements about a situation.
e measures used are categorical and descriptive, but may become the
basis for later development of tools to consider increasing quality or
quantity.
Sound measurement is the foundation of quality resear in mathematics
education. Identifying and deﬁning the construct provides speciﬁcity and
rigor, and identiﬁes the scope of the study. e measures used must meet
expectations for descriptive, diagnostic, explanatory, or predictive power.
Clarifying the underlying construct provides transparency so that studies
can be judged in terms of replicability, generality and trustworthiness.
Using sound measurement teniques provides for falsiﬁability, and from a
clear discussion of the target construct it is easier to develop multiple ways
of collecting data. Sound measurement allows for all of Soenfeld’s (2008)
criteria to be met.
e previous sections have aempted to map the territory of
mathematics education resear from the particular perspective of
considering measures as the basis for quality outcomes. In the next section
three case studies are presented, with a focus on the measures used and
testing the projects against Schoenfeld’s criteria.

Case Studies From Mathematics Education
Research
In this section three case studies are used to exemplify aspects of
mathematics education resear. e ﬁrst of these is PISA, run across many
countries under the auspices of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD). e second is the Learners’ Perspective Study
(www.lps.iccr.edu.au/), an international umbrella for considering ways in
whi students’ learn mathematics in diﬀerent countries. e last study,
StatSmart, (Callingham & Watson, 2007) is typical of many small- to mid-
scale studies funded by national bodies. In ea case only publically
available material has been used as a source of information. is material
includes reports, Web sites, and published books and papers. e three
studies were osen because of the availability of information, and because
they are distinctively diﬀerent in their aims and methodologies: PISA uses
quantitative approaes to conduct large-scale studies; the Learners’
Perspective Study uses qualitative approaes that are applied in a range of
situations; and the StatSmart project used a mixed-methods approa in a
longitudinal study.
Case Study 1: PISA
PISA aims to provide evaluative information to governments about the
outcomes from their education systems. Surveys are used on a triennial
basis—2003, 2006, 2009, 2012—to consider three aspects of sooling:
reading, science, and (of speciﬁc interest) mathematics. Unlike other
international surveys, su as the Trends in Mathematics and Science Study
(http://timssandpirls.bc.edu), PISA does not use the mathematics curriculum
as a basis. Instead the tests used assess the extent to whi 15-year-old

students are equipped to meet the demands of postsool life as full
participants in society. Baground questionnaires are also used to provide
information about the context and aid in the interpretation of the ﬁndings.
Surveys are conducted every three years with a sample of 15-year-old
students, and in ea survey one particular topic—reading, science, or
mathematics—is the focus, although the other two are also tested to provide
intermediate data. e tests are scaled using Ras measurement so that the
outcomes are directly comparable over time, giving governments an
opportunity to monitor progress.
PISA has a strong theoretical framework. e focus is mathematical
literacy, defined as
e capacity to identify, to understand, and to engage in mathematics and make well-founded
judgements about the role that mathematics plays, as needed for an individual’s current and
future private life, occupational life, and social life with peers and relatives, and life as a
constructive, concerned, and reflective citizen.
(OECD, 2003, p.10)
Underpinning this deﬁnition is the concept of mathematization (de Lange,
1987), a notion founded in the European tradition of mathematics teaing
(Jablonka & Gellert, 2007). Mathematization involves perceiving the
mathematics inherent in a situation and using these mathematics to then
solve authentic (in the sense of real-world) problems. In PISA, the
constraints of the testing format does not permit a full assessment of the
capacity to mathematize; a compromise is made by identifying elements of
the process and developing items that address these elements (OECD,
2003). Over time the theory behind PISA has developed. In 2012, the most
recent assessment, ﬁnancial literacy and problem solving were also
considered, in line with participating countries’ interests in these areas. At
ea iteration of the project, the theoretical framework is reconsidered and
items are wrien to address the speciﬁc elements of the framework used

for a particular survey.
ere have been criticisms of PISA. Most recently Heinz-Dieter Meyer
(2014) wrote an open leer to the director of PISA that focused largely on
the uses of PISA data. Meyer criticized, among other aspects, the
development of international rankings; short-term policy ﬁxes to improve
standings; and the focus on narrow, measurable domains rather than su
aributes as “physical, moral, civic, and artistic development.” Other
criticisms have been of a tenical nature (e.g., Goldstein, 2004; Kreiner &
Christensen, 2014). ese tenical criticisms focus on the nature of the
Ras model used for scaling including issues su as ﬁt to the model and
item bias (DIF). All of these issues, in both social and tenical domains,
become important when ranking becomes the predominant focus. It is
worth noting, however, that ranking was never the intention behind PISA
but political, social, and economic environments have driven this agenda.
In terms of Soenfeld’s (2008) criteria, PISA has a clearly deﬁned scope,
based on a framework agreed to by participating countries. e study has
rigor and speciﬁcity in both the methodology and reporting. Breaes of
the sampling frame, for example, are considered and reported, and
tenical reports are provided that detail the analyses conducted. e
collection of multiple sources of data, including detailed context
questionnaires and surveys about special topics from students as well as
teaers, helps to provide both descriptive and explanatory power. e
criticism of PISA demonstrates the capacity for falsiﬁability, but may, to
some extent, allenge its trustworthiness even though the methodology
provides replicability, and generality. PISA may also fall down on
predictive power, although it should be remembered that the purpose is to
provide systems and governments with a snapshot of performance, not to
predict future development or to provide a ranking system.

Case Study 2: The Learners’ Perspective Study
e Learners’ Perspective Study (www.lps.iccr.edu.au) aims to examine
paerns of participation in “competently taught eighth-grade mathematics
classrooms.” ere are now 16 international teams participating in the
study, in countries as diverse as Australia, Japan, Norway, Israel, the UK,
and the United States. Using a systematic approa, a series of lessons is
videotaped for analysis, to answer six general research questions:
1. Within the classrooms studied in ea country, is there evidence of a
coherent body of student practice(s), and to what extent are these
practices culturally specific?
2. What are the antecedent and consequent conditions and actions
(particularly learner actions) associated with teaer practices
identiﬁed in earlier studies as culturally speciﬁc and nationally
characteristic?
3. To what extent does an individual teaer employ a variety of
pedagogical approaches in the course of teaching a lesson sequence?
4. What degree of similarity or diﬀerence (both locally and
internationally) can be found in the learner (and teaer) practices
occurring in classrooms identified by the local education community as
constituting sites of competent teaching practice?
5. To what extent are teaer and learner practices in a mutually
supportive relationship?
6. To what extent are particular documented teaer and learner
practices associated with student construction of valued social and
mathematical meanings?
(Learners’ Perspective Study, n.d.)
More speciﬁc resear questions may also be posed by local teams. e

focus is on what actually happens in mathematics classrooms taught by
teaers deemed by local standards as competent in teaing mathematics.
Results have been widely disseminated in a series of books (Clarke, Keitel,
& Shimizu, 2006; Clarke, Emanuelsson, Jablonka, & Mok, 2006; Kaur,
Anthony, Ohtani, & Clarke, 2013; Shimizu, Kaur, Huang, & Clarke, 2010).
and other publications.
Multiple sources of data are collected about ea lesson sequence. ese
sources include videos of the classroom using three cameras, one focused on
the teaer, one on a pair of target students, and one on the whole class;
ﬁeld notes; video-stimulated recall interviews with teaers and students;
teaer questionnaires; students’ work samples; and teaer resources.
ese data are analyzed collaboratively, using frameworks developed by
the project.
Unlike PISA, the study is not government or system focused, although
there are implications for professional learning and teaer education. As
su, it aracts less high-stakes aention. e study provides useful,
detailed information about classroom discourse in cultural seings in ways
that allow comparisons of practice without making judgements about
whether one practice is beer than another. e local culture may well
influence how data of this type are interpreted. Clarke (2013) stated
Any demands for evidence-based instructional advocacy must anowledge the cultural
speciﬁcity of the analytical tools by whi su evidence is generated. It follows that the
advocacy arising from such research will also be culturally framed and constrained.
(p. 32)
e value of resear su as the Learners’ Perspective Study is in pointing
out the cultural diﬀerences in situations where there is a risk that familiar
practice is assumed as the best or only way of teaing. It reminds us to
examine our own biases as mathematics education researchers.
e Learners’ Perspective Study has valuable descriptive power arising

from multiple data sources that are collected in the same way, and analyzed
collaboratively, across diverse cultures. e scope is broad, encompassing
both teaer actions and student discourse, and the complexity of classroom
interactions among teaers and students. e trustworthiness arises from
the collaborative endeavor—there is no aempt to impose a particular
cultural lens, but the data collection and analysis promote replicability. e
design of the study is rigorous and has a speciﬁc focus, despite the breadth.
It does not pretend to provide predictive or explanatory power, although
the outcomes may give rise to conjectures that address these aspects of
Soenfeld’s (2008) criteria. e falsiﬁability of the study is low. As a cross-
cultural, descriptive study it is diﬃcult to see how the resear could be
allenged in a general sense, although details can always be questioned.
e Learners’ Perspective Study provides a good example of qualitative
research that meets high standards of research endeavor.
Case Study 3: StatSmart
e third case study is typical of resear funded at a local level. StatSmart
was a three-year Australian study that aimed to collect longitudinal data
about the eﬀects of a professional learning program for teaers on their
students’ learning outcomes. Statistics was the target understanding,
because this is an area of the mathematics curriculum in whi teaers
were known to la conﬁdence. e study had a complex design
(Callingham & Watson, 2007) in whi data were collected from students
twice in their ﬁrst year of the project, before and aer they had undertaken
a statistics unit. Typically this testing was about six months apart. All
students then did a follow-up longitudinal test one year aer their posest.
Teaers also undertook a proﬁling instrument (Watson, 2001) and care was
taken to be able to link individual teaers to the students in their classes.

Most teaers completed this at least twice and many three times over the
three years of the project. In addition data were collected through
interviews with teaers, and at the professional learning sessions presented
as part of the study. Altogether data were collected from 34 teaers in 15
sools representative of all types of sool, in three diﬀerent states in
Australia, together with nearly 1,000 of their students in Grades 5–10.
Students and teaers were traed across time. In addition to reports to
the Australian Resear Council and project partners who funded the study,
ﬁndings were disseminated through publications and conference
presentations.
e extent of StatSmart was similar to many nationally funded studies
around the world. Although the study had limited scope, within the focus
on statistics it did address both students’ and teaers’ understanding.
Generalizability was limited because of the nature of the teaer sample. It
was not possible to recruit a random sample of teaers, and those that did
participate were highly experienced and interested in teaing statistics.
e student data, however, together with the baground data on their
teaers and sools did provide explanatory power, and results on earlier
tests did predict outcomes on later ones. ere was also evidence that
teaers inﬂuenced their students, although this outcome was far from
clear. e overall design provided rigor. e study provided limited
descriptive power but the quantitative approa taken, underpinned by
Ras measurement, was open to falsiﬁability. e multiple sources of data
collected over three years provided some triangulation, although the
outcomes might have been enhanced by additional observational data. For
a small-scale study typical of those funded to small resear teams,
StatSmart was able to meet many of Schoenfeld’s (2008) criteria.
All three case studies met some aspects of Soenfeld’s criteria, and it is
unlikely that any one would meet all of them. Of particular note is that all
these studies had a strongly articulated theoretical framework and clear

intentions. e methodology used was osen to best answer the resear
questions that arose from the aims of the studies.
estions could be asked about the utility of these studies. e two more
academic studies (the Learners’ Perspective Study and StatSmart) have
potential to inform policy makers’ decisions about professional learning, but
may not have been able to realize that potential. PISA, however, does have
impact—sometimes in inappropriate ways, whi was the issue at the heart
of Heinz-Dieter Meyer’s open leer. ere is lile doubt, however, that
through judicious use of the data, some countries have been able to
improve those mathematics education outcomes measured by PISA. e
use of the data by policy makers and others is out of the hands of
researchers to a large extent.
If mathematics education resear is to have the impact it deserves,
researers have to become more aware of directly marketing their
ﬁndings outside the world of academia. As illustrated by the case studies,
mathematics education resear can meet high standards internally, using
sound methods that support any claims that are made. Selling this quality to
nonresearers in the education ﬁeld is one of the next big allenges for
mathematics education.

References
Aiken, L. R., Jr. (1970). Aitudes toward mathematics. Review of Educational Resear, 40(4), 551–
596.
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it so
special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389–407.
Baumert, J., Kunter, M., Blum, W., Brunner, M., Voss, T., Jordan, A., Klusmann, U., Krauss, S.,
Neubrand, M., & Tsai, Y-M. (2010). Teaers’ mathematical knowledge, cognitive activation in
the classroom, and student progress. American Educational Research Journal, 47(1), 133–180.
Beer, W. C. (1992). Direct instruction: A twenty year review. In R. P. West, & L. A. Hamerlyn
(Eds.). Designs for excellence in education: e legacy of B. F. Skinner (pp. 71–112). Longmont,
CO: Sopris West.
Berliner, D. (2011). Rational responses to high stakes testing: the case of curriculum narrowing and
the 
harm 
that 
follows. Cambridge 
Journal 
of 
Education, 
41:3, 
287–302.
doi:10.1080/0305764X.2011.607151
Bishop, A. J. (1985). e social construction of meaning—a signiﬁcant development for mathematics
education. For the Learning of Mathematics, 5(1), 24–28.
Bishop, A. J. (1988). Mathematical enculturation: A cultural perspective on mathematics education.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Boaler, J. (2002). Experiencing sool mathematics: Traditional and reform approaes to teaing
and their impact on student learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bond, T. G., & Fox, C. M. (2007). Applying the Ras model: Fundamental measurement in the
human sciences (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bredo, E. (2012). Philosophies of educational resear. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, & P. B. Elmore (Eds.)
Handbook of complementary methods in education research. New York: Routledge.
Brown, M., Askew, M., Hodgen, J., Rhodes, V., & Wiliam, D. (2003). Individual and cohort
progression in learning numeracy ages 5–11: Results from the Leverhulme 5-year longitudinal
study. Proceedings of the International Conference on Mathematics and Science Learning (pp.
81–109). Taiwan, Taipei.
Burkhardt, H., & Soenfeld, A. H. (2003) Improving educational resear: Toward a more useful,

more influential, and better-funded enterprise. Educational Researcher, 32(9), 3–14.
Callingham, R. (2013). Chinese students and mathematical problem solving. In S. Phillipson, H.
Stoeger, & A. Ziegler (Eds.) Exceptionality in East Asia. Explorations in the actiotope model of
giftedness (pp. 86–99). Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Callingham, R., & Bond, T. G. (2006). Resear in mathematics education: Insights from Ras
measurement. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 18(2), 1–10.
Callingham, R., & Watson J. M. (2007, December). Overcoming resear design issues using Ras
measurement: e StatSmart project. Paper presented at the Australian Association for Resear
in Education International Educational Resear Conference 2007, Fremantle, Australia.
Retrieved from www.aare.edu.au/07pap/cal07042.pdf.
Callingham, R., & Watson, J. M. (2011). Measuring levels of statistical pedagogical content
knowledge. In C. Batanero, G. Burrill, & C. Reading (Eds.) Teaing statistics in sool
mathematics—Challenges for teaching and teacher education: A joint ICMI/IASE study (pp. 283–
293). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Carraher, T. N., Carraher, D. W., & Sliemann, A.D. (1985). Mathematics in the streets and sools.
British Journal of Psychology 3, 21–29.
Cherryholmes, C. H. (1988). Construct validity and discourses of resear. American Journal of
Education, 96(3), 421–457.
Chick, H. L. (2011). God-like educators in a fallen world. In J. Wright (Ed.) Proceedings of the annual
conference of the Australian Association for Resear in Education. Retrieved from
www.aare.edu.au/publications-database.php/6143/god-like-educators-in-a-fallen-world.
Chi, H. L., Baker, M., Pham, T., & Cheng, H. (2006). Aspects of teaers’ pedagogical content
knowledge for decimals. In J. Novotná, H. Moraová, M. Krátká, & N. Stehliková (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 30th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 297–304). Prague: PME.
Chick, H. L., Pham, T., & Baker, M. (2006). Probing teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge: Lessons
from the case of the subtraction algorithm. In P. Grootenboer, R. Zevenbergen, & M. Chinnappan
(eds.), Identities, cultures and learning spaces. Proceedings of the 29th annual conference of
Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia (pp. 139–146). Sydney: MERGA.
Clarke, D. J. (2013). Contingent conceptions of accomplished practice: e cultural speciﬁcity of

discourse in and about the mathematics classroom. ZDM: e International Journal in
Mathematics Education 45(1), 21–33.
Clarke, D. J., Emanuelsson, J., Jablonka, E., & Mok, I.A.C. (2006). Making connections: Comparing
mathematics classrooms around the world. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Clarke, D. J., Keitel, C., & Shimizu, Y. (2006). Mathematics classrooms in twelve countries: e
insider’s perspective. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Clements, M. A. (Ken) (2004). Perspective on “Mathematics in the streets and sools.” In T. P.
Carpenter, J. A. Dossy, & J. L. Koehler (eds.) Classics in mathematics education resear. Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Sauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational
research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9–13.
D’Ambrosio, B. (1985). Ethnomathematics and its place in the history and pedagogy of mathematics.
For the Learning of Mathematics, 5, 44–8.
de Lange, J. (1987). Mathematics, insight and meaning. Utret, e Netherlands: Utret
University.
Eisenhart, M. A. (1988). e ethnographic resear tradition and mathematics education resear.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 19(2), 99–114.
Ewing, B., (2011). Direct instruction in mathematics: Issues for sools with high indigenous
enrolments: A literature review. Australian Journal of Teacher Education, 36(5), 63–91.
Fisher, W. P., Jr. (2004). Meaning and method in the social sciences. Human Studies: A Journal for
Philosophy and the Social Sciences, 27(4), 429–54.
Goldin, G. A. (2003). Developing complex understandings: On the relation of mathematics education
research to mathematics. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 54, 171–202.
Goldstein, H. (2004). International comparisons of student aainment: Some issues arising from the
PISA study. Assessment in Education, 11, 319–330.
Harris, M. (1997). Common threads: Women, mathematics and work. London, UK: Trentham Books.
Hill, H. C., Silling, S. G., & Ball, D. L. (2004). Developing measures of teaers’ mathematics for
teaching. Elementary School Journal, 105, 11–30.
Hoyles, C., Noss. R., Kent, P. & Bakker, A. (2010). Improving mathematics at work: e need for
techno-mathematical literacies. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.

International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Aievement. (2007). TIMSS 2003.
Mathematics items. Chestnut Hill, MA: Boston College.
Jablonka, E. & Gellert, U. (2007). Mathematisation—demathematisation. In E. Jablonka & U. Gellert
( Ed s.) Mathematisation and demathematisation. Social, philosophical and educational
ramifications. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Kaur, B., Anthony, G., Ohtani, M., & Clarke D. J. (2013). Student voice in mathematics classrooms
around the world. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Kelly, G. J. (2012). Epistemology and educational resear. In J. L. Green, G. Camilli, & P. B. Elmore
(Eds.) Handbook of complementary methods in education research. New York: Routledge.
Klein, D. (2007). A quarter century of US ‘math wars’ and political partisanship. BSHM Bulletin:
Journal of the British Society for the History of Mathematics, 22(1), 22–33.
Kreiner, S., & Christensen, K. B. (2014). Analyses of model ﬁt and robustness. A new look at the
PISA scaling model underlying ranking of countries according to reading literacy.
Psychometrika, 79(2), 210–231.
Krutetskii, V. A. (1976). e psyology of mathematical abilities in soolildren . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Learners’ 
Perspective 
Study 
(n.d.). About 
the 
study. 
Retrieved 
from
www.lps.iccr.edu.au/index.php/about-the-project
Leder, G. (1985). Measurement of aitude to mathematics. For the Learning of Mathematics, 5(3),
18–21.
Lerman, S. (2010). eories of mathematics education: Is plurality a problem? In Sririman, B. &
English, L. (Eds.) Theories of mathematics education. Seeking new frontiers. Heidelberg: Springer.
Leung, K.S.F. (2005a, August). In the books there are golden houses: Mathematics assessment in East
Asia. Plenary address to the ICMI 3rd East Asian Regional Conference on Mathematics
Education, Shanghai.
Leung, K.S.F. (2005b). Some aracteristics of East Asian classrooms based on data from the 1999
TIMSS video study. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 60, 199–215.
Li, J. (2004). A Chinese cultural model of learning. In L. Fan, N-Y, Wong, J. Cai, & S. Li (Eds.) How

Chinese learn mathematics: Perspectives from insiders (pp. 124–156). Singapore: World Scientiﬁc
Publishing.
Lietz, P. (2009). Variance in performance between students within sools and between sools.
Melbourne, 
VIC: 
Australian 
Council 
for 
Educational 
Resear. 
Retrieved 
from
www.ican.sa.edu.au/files/links/ACER_DECS_variance_report.pdf.
Long, C., Wendt, H., & Dunne, T. (2011). Applying Ras measurement in mathematics education
resear: steps towards a triangulated investigation into proﬁciency in the multiplicative
conceptual ﬁeld. Educational Resear and Evaluation: An International Journal on eory and
Practice, 17(5), 387–407.
Ma, L. (1999). Knowing and teaing elementary mathematics: Teaers’ understanding of
fundamental mathematics in China and the United States. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Ma, X. & Kishor, N. (1997). Assessing the relationship between aitude toward mathematics and
aievement in mathematics: A meta-analysis. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
28(1), 26–47.
Mason, J. (2002). Researing your own practice: e discipline of noticing . London: Routledge
Falmer.
Mason, J. & Johnston-Wilder, S. (2004). Fundamental constructs in mathematics education. London:
Routledge.
Messi, S. (1991). Validity of test interpretation and use. In M. C. Alkin, (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
Educational 
Resear 
(6th 
ed.), 
New 
York: 
Macmillan. 
Retrieved 
from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED395031.pdf.
Meyer, 
H-D. 
(2014) Open leer to Andreas Sleier, OECD, Paris . Retrieved from
www.ilsole24ore.com/pdf2010/Editrice/ILSOLE24ORE/ILSOLE24ORE/Online/_Oggetti_Correlati/D
pisa.pdf?uuid=AB212FIB.
Mundey, B. (1986). On the general theory of meaningful representation. Synthese, 67, 391–437.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2014). e condition of education: Mathematics
performance. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education
Sciences, 
US 
Department 
of 
Education. 
Retrieved 
from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cnc.asp.

Neale, D. (1969). e role of aitudes in learning mathematics. e Arithmetic Teaer, 16 (8), 631–
641.
Niss, M. (1999). Aspects of the nature and state of resear in mathematics education. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 40, 1–24.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2003). The PISA 2003 assessment
framework. 
Paris: 
OECD. 
Retrieved 
from
www.oecd.org/education/school/programmeforinternationalstudentassessmentpisa/33692793.pdf.
Owens, K. (2001). e work of Glendon Lean on the counting systems of Papua New Guinea and
Oceania. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 13(1), 47–71.
Piaget, J. (1941/1952). The child’s conception of number. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (Original
work published 1941.)
Piaget, J. & Inhelder, B. (1947/1956). e ild’s conception of space . London: Routledge. (Original
work published 1947.)
Powell, A., & Frankenstein, M. (1997). Ethnomathematics: Challenging Eurocentrism in mathematics
education. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Presmeg, N. (2014). A dance of instruction with construction in mathematics education. In U
Kortenkamp, B. Brandt, C. Benz, G. Krummheuer, S. Ladel, & R. Vogel. (Eds.) Early mathematics
learning. Selected papers of the POEM conference 2012 (pp. 9–17). New York: Springer. Retrieved
from www.springer.com/gp/book/9781461446774.
Ross, A., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2014). Complexity of quantitative analyses used in mixed resear
articles published in a ﬂagship mathematics education journal. International Journal of Multiple
Research Approaches, 8(1), 80–90.
Rowland, T., Hustep, P., & waites, A. (2005). Elementary teaers’ mathematics subject
knowledge: e knowledge quartet and the case of Naomi. Journal of Mathematics Teaer
Education, 8, 255–281.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2004). The math wars. Educational Policy 18(1), 253–286.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2008). Resear methods in (mathematics) education. In L. D. English (Ed.),
Handbook of international research in mathematics education (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Seldon, A. (2002). Two resear traditions separated by a common subject: Mathematics and
mathematics education. Cookeville, TN: Tennessee Tenological University. Retrieved from

https://www.tntech.edu/files/math/reports/TR_2002_2.pdf.
Shimizu, Y., Kaur, B., Huang, R., & Clarke, D. J. (2010). Mathematical tasks in classrooms around the
world. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and teaing: Foundations of the new reform. Harvard
Educational Review, 57, 1–22.
Siemon, D. (2013). Launing mathematical futures: e key role of multiplicative thinking. In S.
Hernert, J. Tillyer & T. Spencer. (Eds.) Mathematics: Launing Futures, Proceedings of the 24th
Biennial Conference of the Australian Association of Mathematics Teaers (pp. 36–52).
Adelaide, Australia: AAMT.
Siemon, D., Blely, J. & Neal, D. (2012). Working with the big ideas in number and the Australian
Curriculum Mathematics. In W. Atweh, M. Goos, R Jorgensen, & D. Siemon (Eds.) Engaging the
Australian Curriculum Mathematics—Perspectives from the ﬁeld (pp. 19–46). Mathematical
Education 
Resear 
Group 
of 
Australasia. 
Retrieved 
from
www.merga.net.au/sites/default/files/editor/books/1/Chapter%202%20Siemon.pdf.
Skemp, R. (1971). The psychology of learning mathematics. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.
Sririman, B., & English, L. D. (2010). Surveying theories and philosophies of mathematics education.
In B. Sririman, & L. D. English (Eds.), eories of mathematics education. Seeking new frontiers.
Heidelberg: Springer.
Sririman, B., & Törner, G. (2008). Political union/mathematics educational disunion. In L. D. English
(Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd ed.). New York:
Routledge.
Stacey, K., & Steinle, V. (2006). A case of the inapplicability of the Ras model: Mapping conceptual
learning. Mathematics Education Research Journal 18(2), 77–92.
Tsatsaroni, A., Lerman, S., & Xu, G. (2003). A sociological description of anges in the intellectual
ﬁeld of mathematics education resear: Implications for the identities of academics. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Resear Association, Chicago.
ERIC# ED482512.
Walshaw, M. (2004) Introduction: Postmodernism meets mathematics education. In M. Walshaw
(Ed.) Mathematics education within the postmodern. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Wardlaw, C. (2006, September). Mathematics in HK/China. Improving on being ﬁrst in PISA.

Address to the 50th Anniversary Meeting of the Australian Mathematical Society, Sydney.
Watson, J. M. (2001). Proﬁling teaers’ competence and conﬁdence to tea particular mathematics
topics: The case of chance and data. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 4, 305–337.
Wilson, L., Andrew, C., & Below, J. (2006). A comparison of teaer/pupil interaction within
mathematics lessons in St Petersberg, Russia and North-East of England. British Educational
Research Journal, 32(3), 411–441.

20 Design Research
An Analysis and Critique
Paul Cobb
Vanderbilt University
Kara Jackson
University of Washington
Charlotte Dunlap
Vanderbilt University
In this apter, we delineate the prototypical aracteristics of the design
resear methodology and describe what is involved in conducting a design
study to investigate either students’ learning in a particular mathematical
domain or teaers’ development of increasingly sophisticated forms of
practices. In addition, we discuss some of the common limitations of design
studies, thereby identifying areas for attention in future studies of this type.
Design studies entail “engineering” participants’ development of
particular forms of practice while systematically studying the development
of those practices and the context in whi they emerge, whi includes the
designed means of support (Soenfeld, 2006). Design studies are therefore
both pragmatic and theoretical in orientation (Design-Based Resear
Collaborative, 2003). Pragmatically, they involve investigating and
improving a design for supporting learning. eoretically, they involve
developing, testing, and revising conjectures about both learning processes
and the means of supporting that learning (Gravemeijer, 1994b). e

resulting theory then constitutes the rationale for the design.
Design studies can be conducted in a diverse range of seings that vary
in type and scope. At one end of the spectrum, in one-on-one design studies
a researer conducts a series of individual teaing sessions with ea of a
small number of students in order to study the process of learning in a
particular mathematical domain (e.g., Cobb & Steﬀe, 1983; Simon et al.,
2010). At the other end of the spectrum, in organizational design studies a
resear team collaborates with teaers, sool administrators, and other
stakeholders to investigate and support the development of sool and
sool district capacity for instructional improvement in mathematics (e.g.,
Cobb & Jason, 2012; Fishman, Marx, Blumenfeld, & Krajcik, 2004). In this
chapter, we focus on two common types of design studies:
Classroom design studies in whi a resear team collaborates with a
mathematics teaer (who might be a resear team member) to
assume responsibility for instruction in order to investigate the process
of students’ learning in a particular mathematical domain (e.g.,
Lamberg & Middleton, 2009; Lehrer & Kim, 2009; Simpson, Hoyles, &
Noss, 2006; Stephan & Akyuz, 2012).
Professional development design studies in whi a resear team
works with a group of practicing mathematics teaers to support
their development of increasingly sophisticated instructional practices
(e.g., Cobb, Zhao, & Dean, 2009; Lesh & Kelly, 1997; Zawojewski,
Chamberlin, Hjalmarson, & Lewis, 2008).
In general, it is appropriate to conduct these two types of design studies
when resear problems have the following two aracteristics. First, the
goal is to understand either how students develop speciﬁc forms of
mathematical practice or how teaers develop particular forms of
instructional practice. However, these developments rarely occur in situ and

are therefore diﬃcult if not impossible to study by conducting
observational investigations. An interventionist methodology such as design
resear that aims to bring about the intended developments in order to
study them is therefore appropriate. Second, current research on the process
of supporting the development of the focal practice is inadequate and
cannot inform the formulation of viable instructional or professional
development designs. A bootstrapping methodology su as design
resear in whi designs are improved in the course of iterative cycles of
design and analysis is therefore appropriate.
Five crosscuing features aracterize all types of design studies,
including those that investigate students’ and teaers’ learning. Although
some of these features are shared with other methodologies, when taken
together they diﬀerentiate design resear from other approaes. e ﬁrst
crosscuing feature is that, ideally, design studies address the types of
problems that arise for practitioners as they aempt to support students’ or
teaers’ learning, and thus contribute directly to improving the quality of
educational practice.
e second feature is the highly interventionist nature of the
methodology. e intent when conducting a design study is to investigate
the possibilities for educational improvement by supporting either students’
or teaers’ development of relatively novel forms of practice in order to
study their development. Consequently, the type of instruction or
professional development enacted in the course of a study usually diﬀers
signiﬁcantly from typical instructional or teaer education practice. e
process of engineering the forms of learning being studied provides the
resear team with both considerable control compared with naturalistic
investigations, and with the opportunity to identify forms of supports that
are necessary for the development of the focal practices.
e third feature is that design studies have a strong theoretical as well
as a pragmatic orientation. A primary purpose when conducting a design

study is to develop theory that comprises substantiated conjectures about
both processes of learning and the means of supporting that learning. ese
theories are modest in scope and focus on either students’ development of
particular types of mathematical reasoning in the classroom or teaers’
development of particular forms of instructional practice in the context of
professional development.
e fourth feature is that design studies involve testing and, if necessary,
revising or abandoning conjectures about students’ or teaers’ learning
processes and the means of supporting that learning. is process of testing
and revising conjectures and thus of improving the associated design for
supporting participants’ learning involves iterative cycles of design and
analysis. At any point in a design study, the evolving instructional or
professional development design reﬂects then-current conjectures about the
process of the participating students’ or teaers’ learning and the means of
supporting it. Ongoing analyses of both the participants’ activity and of the
enacted supports for their learning provide opportunities to test, reﬁne, and
revise the underlying conjectures, and these revisions in turn inform the
modification of the design.
e ﬁh crosscuing feature is that, as a consequence of the concern for
theory, design studies aim for generalizability. Although a design study is
conducted in a limited number of seings, the intent is not merely to
investigate the process of supporting a particular group of students’ or
teaers’ learning. Instead, the resear team frames the initial design
formulated when preparing for a study and the learning processes it is
intended to support as an instance of a broader class of phenomena, thereby
making them susceptible to theoretical analysis.
In the following sections, we ﬁrst give a brief historical overview of the
design resear methodology to clarify its antecedents in both the learning
sciences and mathematics education. We then discuss, in turn, classroom
design studies and professional development design studies. For ea type

of study, we ﬁrst consider a key resear tool, the interpretive framework
that the resear team uses to make ongoing interpretations of participants’
activity, and the enacted supports for their learning. For ea, we then
discuss the phases of preparing for a study, experimenting to support
learning, and conducting retrospective analyses of data generated in the
course of the study. Finally, we take a critical perspective by discussing
some of the common limitations of ea type of design study, thereby
indicating areas for improvement in future studies of this type.

Historical Overview
e ﬁve deﬁning features of design studies foreground the intimate relation
between theory and practice. Methodologies in whi instructional design
serves as a context for the development of theories of learning and
instruction have a long history, particularly in the former Soviet Union
(Meninskaya, 1969). However, the term design resear emerged
relatively recently in the learning sciences and is most closely associated
with Ann Brown (1992) and Alan Collins (1992). In proposing design studies
that investigated learning as it occurred in complex seings su as
classrooms, Brown and Collins sought to overcome the perceived
limitations of traditional studies of cognition that involve the control of
variables in relatively artiﬁcial laboratory seings. ey developed an
analogy with design sciences su as aeronautical engineering to emphasize
that the methodology is highly interventionist and has a theoretical as well
as a pragmatic intent. As they explained, an aeronautical engineer creates a
model that embodies theoretical conjectures, investigates how the model
behaves under certain conditions, and generates data in order to test and
revise the conjectures inherent in the model. Similarly, researers
conducting a design study create an initial design for supporting envisioned
learning processes, investigate how the design plays out in practice, and
generate data in order to test and revise theoretical conjectures inherent in
the design.
Although design resear in the learning sciences and in mathematics
education is highly compatible, the histories diﬀer. e emergence of the
learning sciences from cognitive science signaled a relatively radical ange
of priorities (cf. DeCorte, Greer, & Versaﬀel, 1996). In contrast, the
development of design resear in mathematics education has been more
evolutionary and builds on two prior lines of resear: the constructivist
teaing experiment and Realistic Mathematics Education developed at the

Freudenthal Institute in The Netherlands.
Steﬀe and his colleagues drew heavily on earlier Soviet work when they
developed the constructivist teaing experiment methodology in the late
1970s and early 1980s (Cobb & Steﬀe, 1983; Steﬀe, 1983; Steﬀe & Kieren,
1994; Steﬀe & ompson, 2000). e purpose of the teaing experiment as
formulated by Steffe was to enable researchers to investigate the process by
whi individual students reorganize their mathematical ways of knowing.
To this end, a researer typically interacts with students one-on-one and
aempts to precipitate their learning by posing theoretically motivated
tasks and by asking follow-up questions, oen with the intention of
encouraging the student to reﬂect on her or his mathematical activity. e
primary products of a constructivist teaching experiment typically consist of
conceptual models composed of theoretical constructs that account for the
learning of the participating students. Su constructs prove useful when
accounting for the learning of other students, and can thus inform teaers’
decision making (ompson & Saldanha, 2000). Although the researer
acts as a teaer in this methodological approa, the primary emphasis is
on the interpretation of students’ mathematical reasoning rather than on
the development of instructional designs.
Subsequent aempts to adapt the constructivist teaing experiment
methodology to the classroom seing involved creating sets of instructional
activities. However, the primary focus of these classroom experiments was
on the development of explanatory constructs rather than the improvement
of instructional designs (Cobb, Yael, & Wood, 1995). For example, the
intent of one series of analyses was to develop an interpretive framework
that situated students’ mathematical learning within the social context of
the classroom (Cobb & Yackel, 1998). In retrospect, it is now apparent that a
limitation in this work was the la of speciﬁc, empirically grounded design
heuristics that could inform the development of instructional activities.
e second line of resear on whi design resear in mathematics

education draws, Realistic Mathematics Education (RME), complemented
the constructivist teaing experiment by focusing primarily on the design
of instructional sequences rather than the development of explanatory
theoretical constructs (cf. Gravemeijer, 1994b; Streeﬂand, 1991; Treﬀers,
1987). RME researers’ work in developing, trying out, and modifying
instructional sequences in a wide range of mathematical domains was
oriented by Freudenthal’s (1973) notion of mathematics as a human activity
and informed by his didactical phenomenology of mathematics. e
heuristics for instructional design in mathematics education that RME
researers proposed were delineated by reﬂecting on the process of
designing 
and 
improving 
these 
speciﬁc 
instructional 
sequences
(Gravemeijer, 1994a; Treffers, 1987).
It should be apparent from this brief historical account of design resear
that the initial focus was on supporting and investigating students’ learning
and that the methodology was only later extended to investigate teaers’
learning. is historical overview also indicates that two types of
conceptual tools are essential when conducting a design study to investigate
and support either students’ or teaers’ learning: an interpretive
framework for making sense of participants’ activity in the complex
seings in whi design studies are conducted, and a set of design heuristics
or principles that can guide the development of specific designs.

Classroom Design Studies
Interpretive Framework
In conducting a classroom design study, the resear team makes ongoing
interpretations of both the students’ mathematical activity and the
classroom learning environment. ese interpretations necessarily involve
suppositions and assumptions about mathematical learning processes and
about the aspects of the classroom learning environment that are
potentially important supports for students’ learning. For example, some
researers assume that mathematical learning is a process of individual
cognitive reorganization that occurs as students aempt to solve tasks and
respond to the teaer’s questions in the classroom (Clements & Sarama,
2004; Saldanha & ompson, 2007). For these researers, aspects of the
classroom learning environment inﬂuence the process of students’ learning
by precipitating students’ internal reorganization of their reasoning.
Researers who adopt this perspective on learning tend to foreground
mathematical tasks together with physical, symbolic, and computer-based
tools, and the teaer’s questions, as key supports for students’ learning. In
contrast, other researers assume that students’ mathematical learning is
situated with respect to classroom mathematical practices that are
constituted collectively by the teaer and students (Doorman, Drijvers,
Gravemeijer, Boon, & Reed, 2013; Kwon, Ju, Kim, Park, & Park, 2013;
Lehrer, Kim, & Jones, 2011; Stephan & Akyuz, 2012). For these researers,
aspects of the classroom learning environment inﬂuence not merely the
process of students’ learning but its products, including the forms of
mathematical reasoning that they develop. Researers who take this laer
perspective on learning typically focus on the aﬀordances of classroom
tasks and tools, and on the nature of classroom norms and the quality of
classroom discourse as potential supports for students’ learning.

A resear team’s suppositions and assumptions about mathematical
learning are consequential because they inﬂuence ongoing design and
instructional decisions. For example, Stephan and Akyuz (2012) conducted a
classroom design study in whi they supported the development of
seventh-grade students’ understanding of integers and the meaning of the
minus sign. ese concepts are typically included in elementary and
middle-grades curricula but continue to prove problematic for students, in
part because they are oen reduced to procedures whose meaning can be
lost (Byrnes, 1992). Stephan and Akyuz’s (2012) design for supporting the
participating students’ learning involved problem scenarios that focused on
monetary transactions and the use of the vertical number line as a tool for
solving these problems. e authors drew on the emergent interpretive
perspective that treats individual students’ mathematical reasoning as acts
of 
participating 
in 
collective 
classroom 
mathematical 
practices.
Operationalizing this perspective involved strategic collection and analysis
of classroom video data in addition to individual student interviews.
Documenting shis in classroom mathematical practice involved analyzing
classroom discourse as both an indicator of individual mathematical
reasoning and as a signal of what had become taken-as-shared within the
class.
As a further example, Kwon et al. (2013) used Toulmin’s (1958) seme
of argumentation as an overaring framework when they traced
developments in how eighth-grade students justiﬁed their reasoning about
geometric paerns. Using this framework, the researers made
interpretations of classroom events that informed the design of the various
components of the classroom learning environment whi were central to
the design. Components included tasks that necessitated students’ explicit
justiﬁcation of their reasoning, the organization of classroom activities, and
the teaer’s use of discursive moves that supported students’ development
of more complex and elaborated forms of argumentation. In addition,

Kwon et al. used this framework when they conducted retrospective
analyses of data generated during the study to connect the students’
increasingly sophisticated mathematical arguments to the designed supports
for their learning.
In our view, it is essential that researers conducting a classroom design
study make explicit the theoretical commitments inherent in their
interpretive perspective, given the role of these commitments in orienting
the design of supports for students’ learning. By articulating the key
constructs used when interpreting the students’ mathematical activity and
the classroom learning environment, the resear team subjects these
constructs to public debate and scrutiny. Classroom design studies
conducted from a range of diﬀerent perspectives can make important
contributions. However, we also note that a considerable body of evidence
has accumulated in the years since Brown’s (1992) and Collins’ (1992)
pioneering work that indicates the forms of mathematical reasoning
ildren and adults develop are shaped by the seings of their learning and,
in particular, by the collective practices in whi they participate while
learning (Doorman et al., 2013; Hall, 2001; Hoyles, Noss, & Pozzi, 2001;
Kwon et al., 2013).
Preparing for a Classroom Design Study
Specifying Goals for Students’ Mathematical Learning
As we have indicated, classroom design studies are useful in testing and
revising conjectures about students’ development of domain-speciﬁc forms
of reasoning that rarely occur in situ. In specifying the forms of
mathematical reasoning that constitute the goals for students’ learning, it is
therefore critical to question how the mathematical domain under
consideration is typically represented in curricula by identifying the central,

organizing mathematical ideas. Clearly, any prior studies that have
investigated the possibilities for students’ mathematical learning in the focal
mathematical domain are relevant in this regard. A signiﬁcant number of
classroom design studies have been conducted that focus on elementary
domains su as early number, whereas the relevant resear base of some
secondary and university level domains is extremely thin.
Although the formulation of student learning goals might also be
informed by national or state policy documents that detail standards for
students’ mathematical learning, the goals proposed for a design study
typically involve a signiﬁcant reconceptualization of the relevant standards.
For example, the learning goals that Stephan and Akyuz (2012) formulated
for their seventh-grade design study in whi they investigated students’
learning in the domain of integers departed from then-current state
standards by emphasizing how students come to reason quantitatively
about integers.
In addition to taking account of policy recommendations, the delineation
of learning goals might draw on analyses of the disciplinary practice of
professionals. For example, Lehrer, Sauble, Strom, and Pligge (2001)
discussed a series of design studies conducted in elementary classrooms in
whi they ﬁrst supported students’ development of mathematical models
that involved similarity and ratio so that students could then investigate the
volume, weight, and density of diﬀerent types of materials. ey explained
that their decision to introduce mathematical modeling and the
investigation of physical aributes of materials sequentially rather than
simultaneously was in response to “typical forms of integration” (p. 43) of
mathematical tools and scientiﬁc contexts, whi oen underestimate the
power of students’ conceptual reasoning about the former and reduce the
laer to an inauthentic context for employing procedures. As a
consequence, the design studies they conducted aimed to support students’
development of practices that are nearly invisible in sool science but are

central to the work of practicing scientists: using mathematics as a tool to
reason about and model diﬀerences in the properties of materials. As a
further example, Cheeseman, McDonough, and Ferguson (2012) allenged
the contention that the ﬂexible use of formal units for measuring mass is
beyond ﬁrst-grade students. eir design study resulted in an instructional
sequence that took students from concrete and comparative heuristic
measurement routines to more formalized use of tools and units, and
resulted in student learning about mass and measurement typically
reserved for students in older grade levels. In both of these examples, the
learning goals that oriented the entire instructional design eﬀort took
account of disciplinary practice.
Documenting Instructional Starting Points
In addition to specifying explicit learning goals, it is also important to
identify the aspects of students’ current reasoning on whi instruction can
build before aempting to formulate conjectures about students’
development and the means of supporting it. Prior resear, su as
interview and observational studies, can be useful in indicating students’
initial reasoning. However, it is oen necessary to create additional forms
of assessments when preparing for a design study, especially if lile prior
work has been conducted in the relevant domain or if the proposed
learning goals diﬀer signiﬁcantly from those addressed by typical
instruction. ese assessments usually take the form of one-on-one
interviews but might also involve observations of students as they aempt
to reason through tasks. In addition, wrien assessments can be used if the
resear base is strong enough to guide the development of tasks that are
aligned with the overall intent of the study. For example, Stephan and
Akyuz (2012) used interviews and wrien assessments both to identify
instructional starting points and to complement classroom observations as a

way of traing developments in the participating students’ reasoning
during the study.
Delineating an Envisioned Learning Trajectory
e next step in preparing for a classroom design study is to develop an
initial design by specifying an envisioned or hypothetical learning trajectory
that comprises testable conjectures about both signiﬁcant developments in
students’ reasoning and the speciﬁc means of supporting these
developments (Simon, 1995). In this regard, it is important to clarify the
design heuristics or principles that informed the development of the initial
design. For example, Stephan and Akyuz’s (2012) envisioned trajectory for
students’ learning was informed by RME and included explicit conjectures
about how students’ reasoning about integers might develop as they used a
series of increasingly sophisticated symbolic tools to solve a sequence of
instructional tasks. Similarly, Wawro, Rasmussen, Zandieh, and Larson
(2013) drew on RME as they formulated their initial design for supporting
college students’ learning in linear algebra. For their part, Lehrer et al.’s
(2001) initial conjectures included possible benmarks in students’
developing reasoning about volume and similarity together with possible
types of tasks and symbolic tools. eir design of instructional tasks was
informed by the heuristic that mathematical models of scientiﬁc
phenomena are analogies that show and hide (or distort) diﬀerent aspects
of a reality (cf. Hesse, 1965). e instructional sequence that they tested and
improved exploits this “mismat, or residual between the model and the
world” (Lehrer et al., 2001, p. 52) in order to support students in
formulating, critiquing, and revising models of the relations between
volume, weight, and density.
It is worth noting that the intent when assessing the potential of
particular types of tasks and of physical or symbolic tools is to anticipate

the student learning opportunities that might arise if they were to be used
in the classroom. In our view, it is therefore essential to envision how the
tasks and tools might actually be enacted in the classroom by considering
the nature of classroom norms and discourse (Gravemeijer & Cobb, 2006).
This attention to the means of support sets an envisioned learning trajectory
apart from the notion of a developmental trajectory as typically used in
cognitive and developmental psyology by underscoring that the
envisioned developments will not occur unless appropriate supports are
enacted in the classroom. It is in this sense that the forms of learning being
investigated are “engineered” in the course of a design study.
In our experience, prior studies that are useful in informing the
delineation of an envisioned learning trajectory focus on learning goals that
are at least partially compatible with those of the planned study and include
reports of the process of students’ learning, the instructional seing, and the
supports for that learning. Because the number of su studies is limited in
many domains, the initial conjectures about students’ learning and the
means of supporting it are oen provisional and eminently revisable. e
process of formulating the envisioned learning trajectory is nonetheless
valuable because the resear team is then in a position to improve its
initial design in a data-driven manner once it begins experimenting in the
classroom.
Placing the Study in Theoretical Context
An overriding goal when conducting a classroom design study is to produce
“humble theory” (Cobb, Confrey, diSessa, Lehrer, & Sauble, 2003) that
can provide others with useful guidance as they aempt to support
students’ learning in other seings. It is therefore critical when preparing
for a design study to place it in a larger theoretical context by framing it as
a paradigmatic case of a broader class of phenomena. For example, Stephan

and Akyuz (2012) and Lehrer et al. (2001) both sought to develop a domain-
speciﬁc instructional theory. Stephan and Akyuz (2012) framed their study
as a case of supporting the development of middle-grades students’
reasoning about integers, and Lehrer et al. (2001) framed their study as a
case of supporting elementary students’ learning in particular mathematical
and science domains.
ese illustrations do not, of course, exhaust the possibilities. A series of
design studies can, for example, serve as the context in whi to revise and
reﬁne an initial interpretive framework that does useful work in informing
the generation, selection, and assessment of design alternatives. Examples
of frameworks developed in this way include the theory of meta-
representational competence (diSessa, 1992, 2002, 2004), the theory of
quantitative reasoning (Smith & ompson, 2007; ompson, 1994, 1996),
the theory of actor-oriented abstraction (Lobato, 2003, 2012), and the
emergent perspective on students’ mathematical learning in the social
context of the classroom (Cobb, Stephan, McClain, & Gravemeijer, 2001). In
ea of these cases, the framework was revised in response to issues
encountered while using it to make sense of classroom events. As a
consequence, the resulting framework does not stand apart from the
practice of experimenting to support learning but is instead grounded in it.
Su frameworks can function both as a source of guidance for instructional
design and as tools for making sense of what is happening in the complex
setting of the classroom (diSessa & Cobb, 2004).
Experimenting to Support Learning
e objective when conducting any type of design study is not to
demonstrate that the envisioned learning trajectory works. e primary
goal is not even to assess whether it works, although the resear team will

necessarily do so. Instead, the purpose when experimenting to support
learning is to improve the envisioned trajectory developed during the
preparation phase of the study. Improvement happens through testing and
revising conjectures about both students’ prospective learning processes and
the specific means of supporting it.
Data Collection
Decisions about the types of data that need to be generated in the course of
a study depend on the theoretical intent of the design study. e data have
to make it possible for the resear team to address the broader theoretical
issues of whi the learning seing under investigation is a paradigm case
when subsequently conducting retrospective analyses. At a minimum, the
resear team has to collect data that allows them to document both the
process of students’ learning in the classroom sessions and the evolving
classroom learning environment, whi includes the enacted supports for
the students’ learning. us, as we have noted, Stephan and Akyuz (2001)
conducted pre- and post-interviews and also used wrien assessments to
assess shis in individual students’ reasoning about integers. Additionally,
they video-recorded all classroom sessions and made copies of all the
students’ wrien work so that they could document the classroom
mathematical practices that were established in the course of the study. e
analysis of these data allowed the resear team to investigate how the
students’ participation in successive practices both supported and
constrained the development of the students’ reasoning about integers.
Existing instruments are oen not adequate because classroom design
studies typically aim at novel learning goals. As a consequence, the resear
team usually has to devise ways of documenting the students’ developing
reasoning and key aspects of the classroom learning environment. e data
collected in the course of a classroom design study are therefore usually

qualitative for the most part. For example, one of the goals of Lehrer et al.’s
(2001) study was to investigate how students might come to reason about
density quantitatively. It would have been relatively straightforward to
develop a pencil-and-paper assessment of students’ proﬁciency in executing
procedures for ﬁnding and comparing the densities of diﬀerent materials.
However, the allenge of documenting how the students’ reasoning about
density developed in relation to the designed classroom learning
environment required that the resear team conduct video-recorded one-
on-one pre- and post-interviews with the participating students, video-
record all classroom sessions, and make copies of all the artifacts that the
students produced during the study.
Iterative Cycles of Design and Analysis
e iterative nature of a design study is a key aspect of the methodology.
Ea cycle involves designing instruction, enacting that design during a
classroom session, and then analyzing what transpired in the classroom in
order to plan for upcoming sessions. e overall goal in enacting successive
design and analysis cycles is to test and improve the envisioned learning
trajectory formulated during the preparation phase. As part of this testing
and revision process, it is essential to have debrieﬁng meetings aer ea
classroom session in whi members of the resear team share and debate
their interpretations of classroom events. Once the team has reaed
consensus, it can then prepare for upcoming classroom sessions by
designing (or revising existing designs for) instructional tasks and
considering other means of support (e.g., the renegotiation of classroom
norms).
It is also useful to have longer resear team meetings periodically in
order to take sto of the ongoing process of testing and revising
conjectures. e purpose of these meetings is to outline a revised learning

trajectory for the entire study that takes account of the revisions made thus
far. In our view, ensuring that there is a reﬂexive relationship between local
judgments (e.g., the speciﬁc tasks that will be used in a particular session
and the mathematical issues on whi the teaer might press students) and
the longer term learning goals and overall learning trajectory should be a
basic tenet of design research (Simon, 1995).
Conducting Retrospective Analysis
e ﬁnal phase of a design study involves conducting retrospective analyses
by drawing on the entire data set generated while experimenting in the
classroom. e ongoing analyses conducted while the study is in process
usually relate directly to the immediate pragmatic goal of supporting the
participating students’ learning. In contrast, retrospective analyses seek to
place this learning and the means by whi it was supported in a broader
theoretical context by framing it as a paradigmatic case of a more
encompassing phenomenon. For ease of explication, we assume that one of
the primary theoretical goals of a classroom design study is to develop a
domain-specific instructional theory.
Kelly (2004) observed that methodologies are underpinned by distinct
argumentative grammars that link resear questions to data, data to
analysis, and analysis to ﬁnal claims and assertions. He noted that the
argumentative grammar of mature methodologies, su as randomized
ﬁeld trials, can be described separately from the details of any particular
study, and then went on to observe that there is no agreed-upon
argumentative grammar for design resear. As a consequence, “design
studies la a basis for warrant for their claims” (p. 119). is is clearly a
severe weakness of the methodology. We therefore propose an
argumentative grammar for classroom design studies and then discuss

issues of trustworthiness speciﬁc to classroom design studies in the
following paragraphs.
Argumentative Grammar
e ﬁrst step in the proposed argumentative grammar is to demonstrate
that the students would not have developed the documented forms of
mathematical reasoning but for their participation in the design study.
Assuming that sound procedures have been employed to assess
developments in the students’ reasoning, this step in the argument is usually
straightforward because classroom design studies aim to investigate
students’ development of novel forms of reasoning that rarely emerge in
the context of typical mathematics instruction. e team can therefore
draw on prior interview and observational studies to show that the
documented forms of reasoning are relatively rare. As Brown (1992) made
clear, the suggestion that the students’ learning can be aributed to the
Hawthorne Eﬀect is not viable because the resear team has predicted the
forms of reasoning the students would develop when preparing for the
study.
e second, more demanding, step in the proposed argumentative
grammar is to show that the ﬁndings are potentially generalizable by
delineating the aspects of the investigated learning process that can be
repeated in other seings. is concern for replicability does not imply that
a design should be realized in precisely the same way in diﬀerent
classrooms. Instead, the intent is to inform others as they customize the
design to the seings in whi they are working by diﬀerentiating between
the necessary and the contingent aspects of the design. A primary concern
when conducting a retrospective analysis of the entire data corpus is to
document how ea successive form of reasoning emerged as a
reorganization of prior forms of reasoning, and to identify the aspects of the

classroom learning environment that supported the students’ development
of these successive forms of reasoning. e resulting domain-speciﬁc
instructional theory explains how the students’ learning was engineered by
explicating what Brown (1992) aracterized as the coupling between
successive developments in their reasoning and the relevant aspects of the
classroom learning environment, including the designed supports as they
were enacted in the classroom. e likelihood that the resear team will
be able to construct a robust theory of this type is greater if it takes a broad
view of possible supports that extends beyond instructional tasks and tools,
and if it employs an interpretive framework that treats students’
mathematical learning as situated with respect to the classroom learning
environment.
It is important to note that in explaining how students’ learning was
supported in the design study classroom, retrospective analyses of the type
that we have outlined diﬀerentiate the necessary aspects of the classroom
learning environment from those that are contingent and might be varied
by researers working in other seings. For example, the sequence of
instructional tasks that Stephan and Akyuz (2012) used took the notion of
net worth as a grounding context for reasoning about positive and negative
integers. eir retrospective analysis indicated that this task context directly
supported and was necessary for the students to come to reason about
integers quantitatively. Their analysis also indicated that the students’ use of
particular symbolic tools (su as the vertical number line), teaer press on
particular issues (e.g., “Who is worth more?”), and students’ use of certain
gestures to indicate diﬀerences and anges in quantities were also
necessary, whereas the speciﬁc number combinations used in tasks were
contingent and might be varied by others building on their work.
It should be clear that the generalizability of the ﬁndings of a design
study is not based on a representative sample and what Maxwell (2004)
called a regularity type of causal description that captures observed

regularities across a number of cases. Instead, it is based on a process-
oriented explanation of a single case “that sees causality as fundamentally
referring to the actual causal meanisms and processes that are involved in
particular events and situations” (Maxwell, 2004, p. 4). In this regard,
Maxwell drew on Shadish, Cook, and Campbell (2002) to clarify that
process-oriented explanations are concerned with “the meanisms through
whi and the conditions under whi the causal relationship holds” (p. 4).
In the case of a domain-speciﬁc instructional theory, the meanisms are
the processes by whi speciﬁc aspects of the learning environment support
particular developments in students’ reasoning, and the conditions are the
students’ reasoning at a particular point in a learning trajectory.
In summary, the argumentative grammar that we have outlined
involves:
Demonstrating that the students would not have developed particular
forms of mathematical reasoning but for their participation in the
design study.
Documenting how ea successive form of reasoning emerged as a
reorganization of prior forms of reasoning.
Identifying the speciﬁc aspects of the classroom learning environment
that were necessary rather than contingent in supporting the
emergence of these successive forms of reasoning.
In presenting this argumentative grammar, we have spoken as though a
robust instructional theory can be developed in the course of a single study.
However, this is not always the case, especially if the resear base on
whi the team can build when formulating initial design conjectures is
thin. Instead, it is sometimes necessary to conduct a series of studies in
whi the ﬁndings of one study inform the initial design for the next study
(Gravemeijer & Cobb, 2006). For example, the domain-speciﬁc instructional

theories that Stephan and Akyuz (2012) and Lehrer et al. (2001) developed
were reﬁned while conducting a series of studies. Even when a single study
does appear to be suﬃcient, we believe it is useful to conduct follow-up
trials with a range of participants in a variety of seings. ese trials are
not necessarily full-scale design studies but focus on customizing the design
while working in a new setting.
Trustworthiness
Trustworthiness is concerned with the reasonableness and justiﬁability of
claims and assertions about both successive developments in the
participating students’ reasoning and the aspects of the classroom learning
environment that supported those developments. Clearly, a discussion of
the basic tenets of qualitative data analysis is beyond the scope of this
apter. However, we should anowledge that analyzing the large
longitudinal data set generated in the course of a classroom design study
can be allenging. It is nonetheless essential to analyze the entire data
corpus systematically while simultaneously documenting all phases of the
analysis process, including the evidence for particular inferences. Only then
can ﬁnal claims and assertions be justiﬁed by batraing through the
various levels of the analysis, if necessary, to the original data sources (e.g.,
video recordings of classroom sessions and audio-recorded student
interviews). It is the documentation of the resear team’s data analysis
process that provides an empirical grounding for the analysis. e
documentation of this process enables other researers to diﬀerentiate
systematic analyses in whi sample episodes are used to illustrate general
assertions from untrustworthy analyses in whi a few possibly atypical
episodes are used to support unsubstantiated claims. Additional criteria that
enhance the trustworthiness of a retrospective analysis include both the
extent to whi it has been critiqued by other researers who do not have

a stake in the success of the study, and the extent to whi it derives from a
prolonged engagement with students and teachers (Taylor & Bogdan, 1984).
is laer criterion is typically satisﬁed in the case of classroom design
studies and constitutes a strength of the methodology.

Professional Development Design Studies
As we have indicated, classroom design studies are frequently conducted to
develop domain-specific instructional theories that consist of:
A substantiated learning process that culminates with students’
aainment of signiﬁcant learning goals in a particular mathematical
domain.
The demonstrated means of supporting that learning process.
Similarly, a primary goal when conducting a professional development
design study is to develop what we call a practice-speciﬁc professional
development theory that consists of:
A substantiated learning process that culminates with mathematics
teachers’ development of particular forms of instructional practice.
The demonstrated means of supporting that learning process.
Pragmatically, professional development design studies involve supporting
teaers in improving speciﬁc aspects of their instructional practice.
Following Ball and Cohen (1999), we take it as given that teaer
professional development should center on “the critical activities of the
profession” and “emphasize question, investigations, analysis, and criticism”
(p. 13). eoretically, professional development design studies involve
developing, testing, and revising conjectures about both the process by
whi teaers develop increasingly sophisticated instructional practices
and the means of supporting that development. In this regard, Grossman,
Compton, et al. (2009) observed that “practice in complex domains involves
the orestration of skill, relationship, and identity to accomplish particular
activities with others in speciﬁc environments” (p. 2059). As a consequence,
the conjectures about teaers’ learning are not restricted to directly

observable aspects of teaing (e.g., questioning students) but can include a
focus on the development of particular types of knowledge (e.g.,
knowledge of students’ mathematical reasoning in a particular domain) and
beliefs (e.g., beliefs about the mathematical capabilities of particular groups
of students) that are implicated in the enactment of particular instructional
practices (cf. Bannan-Ritland, 2008).
As a point of clariﬁcation, we use the term professional development
(PD) to refer to activities that are intentionally designed to support
teaers’ learning. PD therefore includes both pull-out sessions for teaers
from a number of sools or from a single sool that are led by a
researer or by a facilitator who is a member of the resear team, and
one-on-one support in whi a researer or a coa who is a member of
the research team works with individual teachers in their classrooms.
e number of PD design studies that have been conducted is relatively
small compared with classroom design studies. However, many of the basic
tenets of PD design studies parallel those of classroom design studies. We
will therefore focus primarily on the instances in whi tenets have to be
modiﬁed signiﬁcantly and on additional issues that need to be addressed
when conducting a PD design study.
Interpretive Framework
e interpretive framework that a resear team uses when conducting a
PD design study explicates its suppositions and assumptions about the
process of teaers’ learning and about aspects of the PD learning
environment that are necessary rather than contingent in supporting that
learning. is framework should address two issues that do not typically
arise when conducting classroom design studies: situating participants’
activity with respect to sool seings and accounting for the relations

between their activity across two settings.
Situating Teachers’ Activity with Respect to School Settings
A key diﬀerence between classroom design studies and PD design studies
concerns the extent to whi it is possible (and desirable) to insulate
participants from the requirements and expectations of their sools. In
classroom design studies, researers typically isolate the study classroom
to the greatest extent possible when negotiating entrée to the site. In
contrast, it is usually not possible to renegotiate the sool seings in whi
the participating teaers work when developing sites for a PD design
study. We view this as an advantage given that the inﬂuence of professional
development on what teaers do in their classrooms is mediated by the
sool seings in whi they tea (e.g., Bryk, Sebring, Allensworth,
Luppesco, & Easton, 2010; Cobb, McClain, Lamberg, & Dean, 2003; Coburn,
2003; Grossman, O’Keefe, Kantor, & Delgado, 2013). Key aspects of sool
seings include the instructional materials and associated resources to
whi teaers have access and that they are expected to use (e.g., pacing
guides and curriculum frameworks), the people to whom teaers are
accountable and for what they are held accountable (e.g., sool principals’
expectations for mathematics instruction), and the formal and informal
sources of support on whi teaers can draw to improve their
instructional practices (e.g., sool and district PD, colleagues to whom they
can turn for advice about instruction).
In light of this diﬀerence between classroom and PD design studies, it is
important that the interpretive framework a resear team uses when
conducting a PD study situates the participating teaers’ activity with
respect to key aspects of the seings in whi they work (cf. Zawojewski et
al., 2008). For example, the framework that Cobb, McClain, et al. (2003)
used in a PD design study that focused on teaing statistical data analysis

in the middles grades drew primarily on Wenger’s (1998) theoretical
analysis of communities of practice. is approa involved documenting
the practices of members of distinct communities that had a stake in
middle-grades mathematics teaing and learning (e.g., sool leaders,
district math leaders), and analyzing the connections between communities
in terms of boundary encounters, brokers, and boundary objects. is
aention to the sool seings in whi the teaers worked resulted in
greater explanatory power when accounting for the teaers’ activity in
both PD sessions and their classrooms. is in turn enabled the resear
team to adjust their PD design accordingly.
Situating Teachers’ Activity with Respect to the PD Learning Environment
It is also important that the interpretive framework the resear team uses
situates teaers’ activity with respect to the PD learning environment,
including the social norms established in the sessions, the PD activities in
whi they engage, the tools they use, and the terminology and discourse
constituted during sessions. e resear team’s design eﬀorts should focus
on these aspects of the PD learning environment, as a considerable body of
evidence indicates that they inﬂuence the practices and associated forms of
reasoning that the participating teaers develop (e.g., Horn, 2005; Kazemi
& Franke, 2004; Putnam & Borko, 2000; Sherin & Han, 2004). e resear
teams’ assumptions about teaers’ learning and the PD learning
environment are therefore consequential because they inﬂuence ongoing
design decisions.
Accounting for the Relations Between Teachers’ Activity Across Settings
In a classroom design study, the resear team typically focuses on
supporting students’ learning within a single seing, the classroom. In
contrast, the intent of a PD design study is to engage teaers in activities in

one seing, the PD sessions, with the explicit goal of supporting their
reorganization of their activity in another seing, the classroom. As a
consequence, designs for supporting teaers’ learning necessarily involve
suppositions and assumptions about the relations between teaers’ activity
across these two seings (Cobb, Zhao, et al., 2009; Kazemi & Hubbard,
2008). As Kazemi and Hubbard (2008) and Cobb, Zhao, et al. (2009) observe,
PD has traditionally reﬂected an assumption that the relation between a PD
session and a teaer’s classroom is unidirectional; teaers’ activity in PD
sessions is assumed to impact what they do in their classrooms. However, a
model of practice-based PD allenges this assumption by proposing that
teaers’ ongoing practice serves as an important resource for teaers’
learning (Cobb, Zhao, et al., 2009; Kazemi & Hubbard, 2008).
e assumptions a resear team makes about the relations between
teaers’ activity across the two seings impacts both the design and the
interpretation of teaers’ activity. It is therefore important for researers
conducting PD design studies to be explicit about how they conceptualize
these relations. For example, in the PD design experiment that focused on
statistical data analysis, Cobb, Zhao, et al. (2009) found that although the
participating teaers readily analyzed student work in PD sessions, they
did not view this activity as relevant to their classroom practice. It
subsequently became apparent that while the resear team assumed the
teaers would view student work as a “resource for the prospective
planning of future instruction” (p. 188), they used it in the classroom solely
for “retrospective assessment.” is ﬁnding led the resear team to modify
their interpretive framework to take account of how artifacts were used in
ea seing, and how ea inﬂuenced the other. ey were then in a
position to adjust their design for supporting the teaers’ learning to take
account of this relation.

Preparing for a PD Design Study
To avoid repetition, we take our discussion of classroom design studies as a
point of reference and limit our discussion to issues that are speciﬁc to PD
design studies.
Specifying Goals for Teachers’ Learning
Parallel to classroom design studies, PD design studies are useful in testing
and revising conjectures about teaers’ development of forms of
instructional practice that rarely occur in situ and for whi viable designs
do not currently exist for supporting the development of the focal practices
and associated forms of beliefs and forms of knowledge. e forms of
instructional practice that constitute the goals of a PD design study should
be speciﬁed in as mu detail as possible to orient the formulation of an
initial design. In our view, it is essential that the targeted forms of practice
can be justiﬁed in terms of student learning opportunities. is implies that
the ﬁrst step in delineating the goals for teaers’ learning is to clarify goals
for students’ mathematical learning (e.g., develop conceptual understanding
as well as procedural ﬂuency, explain and justify solutions, make
connections among multiple representations). e second step is to then
draw on current resear on mathematics teaing to identify instructional
practices that have been shown to support students’ aainment of these
mathematics learning goals. For example, current resear suggests that if
students are to develop conceptual understanding as well as procedural
ﬂuency, it is important that teaers routinely pose and maintain the rigor
of cognitively demanding tasks (Henningsen & Stein, 1997), elicit and build
on student thinking to advance an instructional agenda (Franke, Kazemi, &
Baey, 2007), and orestrate whole-class discussions in whi students are
pressed to make sense of ea other’s solution in relation to important

mathematical ideas (Stein, Engle, Smith, & Hughes, 2008). ese (and other)
findings can inform the specification of goals for teachers’ learning.
Documenting Instructional Starting Points
In addition to specifying explicit learning goals, it is important to identify
aspects of teaers’ current practices and relevant forms of knowledge on
whi PD can build before aempting to formulate conjectures about
teaers’ development of the target forms of practice and the means of
supporting that development. Determining whi instructional starting
points to document will depend on the goals of the study. For example, it
may be important to document the participating teaers’ mathematical
knowledge for teaing (Hill, Silling, & Ball, 2004) or their conceptions of
the mathematical capabilities of traditionally underserved groups of
students (Jason & Gibbons, 2014). Documenting starting points usually
involves classroom observations, assessments (of mathematical knowledge
for teaing, for example), and interviews. In addition, it is important
(though atypical) to document the sool seings in whi the participating
teaers work as these seings will mediate the inﬂuence of the PD on the
participating teachers’ classroom practices.
Delineating an Envisioned Learning Trajectory
e next step in preparing for an experiment is to delineate an envisioned
learning trajectory by formulating testable conjectures about signiﬁcant
developments in teaers’ classroom practices, knowledge, and beliefs, and
the means of supporting these developments. In doing so, it is necessary to
consider how their learning in the PD sessions might relate to anges in
their classroom practices as they are situated in the sool seings in whi
they work. e current literature on teaer learning and on professional
development includes only a few analyses that report actual trajectories of

mathematics teachers’ development of particular forms of practice (see, e.g.,
Franke, Carpenter, Levi, & Fennema, 2001; Kazemi & Franke, 2004; van Es
& Sherin, 2008). However, the literature on teaer learning and on
professional development is useful in suggesting potentially productive
means of supporting teaers’ learning. For example, there is some
evidence that in-service teaer PD that impacts classroom instruction
shares the following qualities: it is sustained over time, involves the same
group of teaers working together, is focused on issues central to
instruction, and is organized around the instructional materials that teaers
use in their classrooms (Darling-Hammond, Wei, Andree, Riardson, &
Orphanos, 2009; Garet, Porter, Desimone, Birman, & Yoon, 2001; Kazemi &
Franke, 2004; Little, 2003).
In our view, the ﬁndings of recent resear on practice-based preservice
teaer education (e.g., Ball, Sleep, Boerst, & Bass, 2009; Lampert, Beasley,
Ghousseini, Kazemi, & Franke, 2010; Lampert et al., 2013; McDonald,
Kazemi, & Kavanagh, 2013) is particularly relevant in informing the design
and enactment of supports for in-service teaers’ learning and merits
further investigation in the context of in-service teaer PD. is body of
resear, whi is grounded theoretically in analyses of how professionals
develop complex forms of practice, suggests it is crucial that teaers are
provided opportunities to engage in both pedagogies of investigation and
enactment (Grossman, Compton, et al., 2009; Grossman, Hammerness, &
McDonald, 2009) that are organized around target instructional practices
(e.g., eliciting and building on student thinking to accomplish an
instructional agenda). Pedagogies of investigation involve analyzing and
critiquing representations of practice su as student work and video-cases
of teaing (Borko, Jacobs, Eiteljorg, & Piman, 2009; Kazemi & Franke,
2004; Sherin & Han, 2004). Pedagogies of enactment involve planning for,
rehearsing, and enacting aspects of practice in a graduated sequence of
increasingly complex seings (e.g., teaing other teaers who play the

role of students, working with a small group of students, teaing an entire
class). Opportunity for teaers to co-participate in activities that
approximate the targeted practices with more accomplished others are
crucial to pedagogies of enactment (Bruner, 1996; Forman, 2003; Lave &
Wenger, 1991).
In addition to indicating potentially productive types of PD activities, the
current literature on teaer learning and professional development can
inform the practices of facilitators in leading the enactment of those
activities that can be justiﬁed in terms of teaer learning opportunities. In
our view, the recent developments in preservice teaer education that we
have cited are particularly promising for in-service teaer education
because they reﬂect a bidirectional view of the relation between teaers’
activity in PD sessions and their classrooms. However, because resear on
the processes by whi teaers develop particular forms of practice is
relatively thin, initial design conjectures will almost certainly be provisional
and thus eminently revisable.
Placing the Study in Theoretical Context
e intent of a PD design study is to produce knowledge that will be useful
in providing guidance to others as they aempt to support teaers’
learning in other seings. As is the case with classroom design studies, it is
therefore important to frame a PD design study explicitly as a paradigmatic
case of a broader class of phenomena, for example, teaers’ development
of particular practices (e.g., eliciting and responding to student thinking),
knowledge (e.g., of students’ reasoning in a particular mathematical
domain), and/or beliefs (e.g., about the mathematical capabilities of
particular groups of students).

Experimenting to Support Learning
e objective when experimenting to support the participating teaers’
learning is to improve the envisioned trajectory by testing and revising
conjectures about both the prospective learning processes and the speciﬁc
means of supporting it.
Data Collection
e data collected have to make it possible for the resear team to address
the broader theoretical issues under investigation when conducting
retrospective analyses. At a minimum, researers will need to collect data
to document:
Relevant aspects of the sool context that might mediate the impact
of the PD on teaers’ resulting practices, knowledge, and/or
conceptions.
Relevant aspects of the PD learning environment, including the
enacted supports for the participating teachers’ learning.
The process of the teachers’ learning in the PD sessions.
Developments in the teachers’ classroom practices.
e data are likely to be primarily qualitative, given the focus on
accounting for the process by which teachers learn, and the means by which
it is supported. However, it is reasonable to include validated quantitative
instruments, su as an assessment of teaers’ mathematical knowledge
for teaing (Hill, Ball, & Silling, 2008), if they ﬁt with the theoretical
intent of the study and contribute to the resear team’s understanding of
teachers’ ongoing learning (cf. Lesh & Kelly, 1997).
Cycles of Design and Analysis

In PD design studies, the cycles comprise a PD session together with the
researers’ debrieﬁng meetings held aer the meeting to conduct an initial
(ongoing) analysis of what transpired and to plan for future sessions. e
cycles depend on the frequency of the PD sessions and are therefore usually
less frequent than the daily cycles of a classroom design study. In the
debrieﬁng meetings, it is important to take account of the sool seings in
whi the teaers work when developing explanations of their activity in
PD sessions as well as of their classroom instruction.
Conducting Retrospective Analysis
As is the case for classroom design studies, ongoing analyses conducted
while a PD design study is in progress contribute to the immediate
pragmatic goal of supporting the participating teaers’ learning, whereas
retrospective analyses treat the teaers’ learning and the means by whi
it was supported as paradigmatic of a more encompassing phenomenon. In
discussing retrospective analyses, we assume that one of the primary goals
of the study is to develop a practice-specific PD theory.
Argumentative Grammar
e argumentative grammar that we propose for PD design studies
parallels that for classroom design studies. e two major diﬀerences
concern accounting for anges in the teaers’ activity across seings, and
the need to take account of the mediating role of the sool context.
Although trustworthiness is central to the argumentative grammar for PD
design studies, we do not discuss it explicitly because the issues addressed
when discussing classroom design studies apply equally to PD design
studies.
Similar to classroom design studies, the ﬁrst step in the proposed

argumentative grammar is to demonstrate that the teachers would not have
developed the documented forms of instructional practice but for their
participation in the design study. is is usually straightforward because PD
design studies typically investigate teaers’ development of forms of
instructional practice that rarely occur in situ and for whi viable designs
do not currently exist.
e second step in the argumentative grammar involves showing that
the ﬁndings are potentially generalizable. is can be accomplished by
delineating the aspects of the investigated learning processes and the means
of supporting them that are necessary rather than merely contingent, and
by reporting how the sool seings in whi the teaers worked
mediated the inﬂuence of the PD on their classroom practices. Similar to
classroom design studies, this does not imply that a design should be
repeated with absolute ﬁdelity. Instead, the intent is to inform others of the
necessary aspects of the PD design and of the sool seings so that they
can customize the design to the seings in whi they are working. is
entails conducting an analysis of the entire data corpus to document how
the teaers developed increasingly sophisticated forms of instructional
practice, to identify aspects of the PD learning environment that supported
the teaers’ development of these practices, and to clarify the mediating
role of the school settings in which the teachers worked.
e resulting practice-based professional development theory explains
how the teaers’ learning was engineered by specifying relations between
successive developments in teaers’ practice and the relevant aspects of
the PD learning environment and the sool seings. e likelihood that
the resear team will be able to construct a robust theory of this type is
greater if they take a broad view of the sool seings in whi teaers
work and if they employ an interpretive framework that treats teaers’
learning as situated with respect to the PD learning environment and sool
settings.

Similar to classroom design studies, the generalizability of the ﬁndings of
a PD design study is based on a process-oriented explanation, in whi the
meanisms through whi and the conditions under whi teaers
developed the documented forms of practice are reported. In the case of a
practice-speciﬁc professional development theory, the meanisms are the
process by whi speciﬁc aspects of the PD learning environment support
teaers’ successive reorganizations of their practices. e conditions are
the teaers’ practices at a particular point in the substantiated learning
trajectory and specific aspects of the school settings.
In summary, the argumentative grammar for a PD design study involves:
Demonstrating that the participants would not have developed
particular forms of practice but for their participation in the design
study.
Identifying the speciﬁc aspects of the PD learning environment that
were necessary rather than contingent in supporting the emergence of
these successive forms of practice.
Clarifying how speciﬁc aspects of the sool seings mediated the
inﬂuence of the teaers’ learning in PD sessions on their classroom
practice.
Given that the resear base on whi a team can build when
formulating initial design conjectures for a PD design study is thin, it is
unlikely that a robust practice-speciﬁc PD theory can be developed in the
course of a single study. erefore, as is the case for classroom design
studies, it is probably necessary to conduct a series of studies in whi the
findings of one study inform the initial PD design for the next study.
As an additional observation, mu of what we have said about
investigating and supporting teaers’ learning can be generalized to the
investigation of the learning of members of other role groups whose

practices are implicated in sool and district instructional improvement
eﬀorts, including mathematics coaes, sool leaders, or professional
development facilitators. e goal of su studies would be to develop a
practice-specific professional development theory that consists of:
A substantiated learning process that culminates with the target role
group’s development of a particular form of (coaing, sool
leadership, or facilitation) practice.
The demonstrated means of supporting that learning process.
In our view, it is reasonable to extrapolate from the teaer learning
literature because there is lile resear on supporting coaes’, sool
leaders’, and professional development facilitators’ learning.

Current Limitations of Design Studies
To this point, we have focused on the potential contributions of design
studies. It is also important to take a critical stance by considering general
limitations of su studies. In discussing classroom design studies, we
highlighted a major current limitation that applies to the design resear
methodology more generally: the la of an explicit, agreed-upon
argumentative grammar. As we indicated, this is a severe weakness that
must be addressed if design resear is to become a mature methodology
with explicitly codiﬁed standards that can be used to judge the quality of
proposals for and reports of particular classroom and professional
development design studies.
A second major limitation of both types of design studies concerns the
limited aention that is typically given to issues of equity. It is important to
anowledge that the complexity of students’ and teaers’ learning, and of
the designed learning environments, makes it impossible to specify
completely everything that transpires in the course of a design study (Cobb,
Confrey, et al., 2003). Choices therefore have to be made when framing a
design study as a paradigmatic case of a broader class of phenomena. It is
nonetheless striking that few classroom and professional development
design studies have been conducted that focus explicitly on equity in
student learning opportunities. In this regard, a classroom design conducted
by Enyedy and Mukhopadhyay (2007) is a rare exception: they aempted
to support students in making increasingly sophisticated statistical
arguments by drawing on their out-of-sool knowledge of city
neighborhoods. In reporting their ﬁndings, Enyedy and Mukhopadhyay
observed that there was an inherent tension between honoring the students’
local knowledge while establishing disciplinary norms of argumentation.
e failure to aend explicitly to issues of equity reﬂects the assumptions
that designs that eﬀectively support all students’ learning can be developed

without aending explicitly to issues of equity, and that designs and forms
of instructional practice that are judged to be productive are necessarily
equitable. In our view, both these assumptions are suspect. In our view,
aending to issues of equity in classroom design studies entails
documenting the distribution of students’ learning opportunities and,
perhaps, the development of their mathematical identities (cf. Cobb,
Gresalﬁ, & Hodge, 2009). In the case of professional development studies, it
entails specifying intended instructional practices for participating teaers
for whi there is evidence that these practices will support the learning of
diverse groups of students or, at a minimum, a conceptual analysis that
indicates they have this potential.
A third major weakness concerns the frequent failure of researers
conducting classroom and PD design studies to design for scale when
preparing for studies, thereby limiting the potential pragmatic payoﬀ and
relevance of their work beyond the resear community. is weakness is
especially evident in many classroom design studies, as researers
conducting su studies oen give lile consideration to the knowledge and
skill that teaers would have to develop to enact the design eﬀectively. In
many cases, the learning demands appear to be unrealistic for most teachers
given their current instructional practices. is weakness is also evident in
many PD design studies, though in a less extreme form because researers
conducting this type of study cannot typically insulate teaers from the
sool seings in whi they work. However, members of the resear
team oen “camp out” in a small number of sools as central providers of
support, failing to take account of the atypical expertise they bring to
supporting the participating teaers’ learning. One of the strengths of the
design resear methodology is that it enables researers to explore what
is possible in students’ or teaers’ learning. As a consequence, there is
typically a signiﬁcant discontinuity between typical forms of education and
those that are the focus of classroom and PD design studies. However, the

possibility that the design developed and reﬁned in the course of a design
study might contribute to improvements in classroom teaching and learning
on a large scale will be signiﬁcantly reduced unless researers consider not
merely their own but others’ capacity to support students’ or teaers’
learning when formulating the design.
One approa for circumventing this limitation is to give at least as mu
weight to the problems of practice that sool personnel identify as to
researers’ assessments of what counts as theoretically interesting
problems about students’ or teaers’ learning (cf. Bannan-Ritland, 2008). In
this approa, researers might take practitioners’ concerns as their
starting point and negotiate how those issues are framed so that the study is
both pragmatically and theoretically signiﬁcant. For example, a study that
begins with teaers’ concern about motivating students might reframe the
focal issue in terms of cultivating students’ mathematical interests or
supporting their development of productive mathematical identities. In this
and similar instances, the design resear methodology would approa its
full potential by exploring what is possible in students’ or teaers’ learning
in a manner that is likely to have implications for educational improvement
more generally.
e fourth limitation that we identiﬁed is speciﬁc to classroom design
studies and concerns the la of aention to the instructional practices of
the teaer in the study. Most researers who conduct classroom design
studies would readily anowledge that the study teaer plays a central
role in supporting the participating students’ learning. However, these
teaers’ instructional practices are rarely the focus of explicit analysis. is
is unfortunate because these teaers typically enact relatively sophisticated
practices. Analysis of their practice could therefore contribute to the
delineation of key aspects of inquiry-oriented mathematics instruction. is
would in turn help clarify the goals for teaers’ learning that should be
targeted in teaer professional development in general, and in professional

development design studies in particular. Kwon et al.’s (2013) investigation
of the development of mathematical argumentation is a rare exception as
they framed the study teaer’s discursive moves as a key designed support
for the participating students’ learning. Su aention to the study teaer’s
practices can inform eﬀorts to support the implementation of instructional
sequences developed during a classroom design study in other contexts.
e ﬁnal limitations are speciﬁc to PD design studies. Most of the small
number of studies of this type that have been conducted have focused
exclusively on teaers’ participation in the PD sessions. In our view, it is
also essential to document anges in the quality of the participating
teaers’ instructional practices by, at a minimum, conducting pre- and
post-observations of their classroom teaing. In addition, researers
conducting PD design studies have rarely aempted to document the
seings in whi the participating teaers work. As a consequence, the
teaer group is, in eﬀect, located in an institutional vacuum. e
generalizability of study findings is thus threatened, making it difficult if not
impossible for other researers to adapt the PD design to the sool
contexts in whi they are working. In reviewing reports of professional
development design studies, it also became apparent that clear standards
should be established for reporting su studies. A signiﬁcant proportion of
the reports we reviewed failed to provide information about the design
principles that underpin the PD design, the conjectures about teaers’
learning and the speciﬁc means of supporting their learning, the relation
between teaers’ participation in professional development activities and
their classroom practice, and the aspects of sool seings that mediate
teaers’ development of the intended forms of instructional practice.
Carefully planned and executed PD design studies that are adequately
reported are urgently needed as they can make critical contributions to the
development and reﬁnement of practice-speciﬁc professional development
theories. e failure to include this essential information in published

reports makes it diﬃcult for resear teams to learn from and build on
prior studies. is, in turn, limits the possibility that the ﬁeld will develop
robust theories regarding how teaers can be supported to develop
productive forms of practice.

References
Ball, D. L., & Cohen, D. K. (1999). Developing practice, developing practitioners: Toward a practice-
based theory of professional education. In G. Sykes & L. Darling-Hammond (Eds.), Teaing as
the learning profession: Handbook of policy and practice (pp. 3–32). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Ball, D. L., Sleep, L., Boerst, T., & Bass, H. (2009). Combining the development of practice and the
practice of development in teacher education. Elementary School Journal, 109(5), 458–474.
Bannan-Ritland, B. (2008). Teaer design resear: An emerging paradigm for teaers’ professional
development. In A. E. Kelly, R. Lesh & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of design resear methods in
education: Innovations in science, tenology, engineering and mathematics learning and
teaching (pp. 246–262). New York: Routledge.
Borko, H., Jacobs, J., Eiteljorg, E., & Piman, M. E. (2009). Video as a tool for fostering productive
discussions in mathematics professional development. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 417–
436.
Brown, A. L. (1992). Design experiments: eoretical and methodological allenges in creating
complex interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 141–178.
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryk, A. S., Sebring, P. B., Allensworth, E., Luppesco, S., & Easton, J. Q. (2010). Organizing sools for
improvement: Lessons from Chicago. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Byrnes, J. P. (1992). e conceptual basis of procedural learning. Cognitive Development, 7(2), 235–
257.
Cheeseman, J., McDonough, A., & Ferguson, S. (2012). e eﬀects of creating ri learning
environments for ildren to measure mass. In J. Dindyal, L. P. Cheng & S. F. Ng (Eds.),
Mathematics education: Expanding horizons (Proceedings of the 35th annual conference of the
Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia). Singapore: MERGA.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2004). Learning trajectories in mathematics education. Mathematical
Thinking and Learning, 6, 81–89.
Cobb, P., Confrey, J., diSessa, A., Lehrer, R., & Sauble, L. (2003). Design experiments in educational
research. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 9–13.
Cobb, P., Gresalﬁ, M., & Hodge, L. L. (2009). An interpretive seme for analyzing the identities that

students develop in mathematics classrooms. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 40,
40–68.
Cobb, P., & Jason, K. (2012). Analyzing educational policies: A learning design perspective. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 21(4), 487–521.
Cobb, P., McClain, K., Lamberg, T., & Dean, C. (2003). Situating teaers’ instructional practices in
the institutional setting of the school and district. Educational Researcher, 32(6), 13–24.
Cobb, P., & Steﬀe, L. (1983). e constructivist researer as teaer and model builder. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 14, 83–94.
Cobb, P., Stephan, M., McClain, K., & Gravemeijer, K. (2001). Participating in classroom
mathematical practices. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10(1–2), 113–163.
Cobb, P., & Yael, E. (1998). A constructivist perspective on the culture of the mathematics
classroom. In F. Seeger, J. Voigt & U. Wasescio (Eds.), e culture of the mathematics
classroom: Analysis and changes (pp. 158–190). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cobb, P., Yael, E., & Wood, T. (1995). e classroom teaing experiment. In P. Cobb & H.
Bauersfeld (Eds.), Emergence of mathematical meaning: Interaction in classroom cultures (pp.
17–24). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cobb, P., Zhao, Q., & Dean, C. (2009). Conducting design experiments to support teaers’ learning:
A reflection from the field. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 18, 165–199.
Coburn, C. E. (2003). Rethinking scale: Moving beyond numbers to deep and lasting ange.
Educational Researcher, 32(6), 3–12.
Collins, A. (1992). Toward a design science of education. In T. Scanon & T. O’Shey (Eds.), New
directions in educational technology (pp. 15–22). New York: Springer.
Darling-Hammond, L., Wei, R. C., Andree, A., Riardson, N., & Orphanos, S. (2009). Professional
learning in the learning profession: A status report on teaer development in the United States
and abroad. Dallas, TX: National Staff Development Council.
DeCorte, E., Greer, B., & Versaﬀel, L. (1996). Mathematics learning and teaing. In D. Berliner &
R. Calfee (Eds.), Handbook of educational psychology (pp. 491–549). New York: Macmillan.
Design-Based Resear Collaborative. (2003). Design-based resear: An emerging paradigm for
educational inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.
diSessa, A. A. (1992). Images of learning. In E. d. Corte, M. C. Linn, H. Mandl & L. Versaﬀel (Eds.),

Computer-based learning environments and problem solving (pp. 19–40). Berlin: Springer.
diSessa, A. A. (2002). Students’ criteria for representational adequacy. In K. Gravemeijer, R. Lehrer, B.
v. Oers & L. Versaﬀel (Eds.), Symbolizing, modeling and tool use in mathematics education
(pp. 105–129). Dortrecht: Kluwer.
diSessa, A. A. (2004). Metarepresentation: Native competence and targets for instruction. Cognition
and Instruction, 22(3), 293–331.
diSessa, A. A., & Cobb, P. (2004). Ontological innovation and the role of theory in design
experiments. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 77–103.
Doorman, M., Drijvers, P., Gravemeijer, K., Boon, P., & Reed, H. (2013). Design resear in
mathematics education: The case of an ict-rich learning arrangement for the concept of function.
In T. Plomp & N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational design resear—Part B: Illustrative cases (pp. 425–
446). Enschede, The Netherlands: SLO.
Enyedy, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2007). ey don’t show nothing I didn’t know: Emergent
tensions between culturally relevant pedagogy and mathematics pedagogy. Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 16, 139–174.
Fishman, B., Marx, R. W., Blumenfeld, P., & Krajcik, J. S. (2004). Creating a framework for resear
on systemic technology innovations. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13, 43–76.
Forman, E. A. (2003). A sociocultural approa to mathematics reform: Speaking, inscribing, and
doing mathematics within communities of practice. In J. Kilpatri, W. G. Martin, & D. Sier
(Eds.), A resear companion to principles and standards for sool mathematics (pp. 333–352).
Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T. P., Levi, L., & Fennema, E. (2001). Capturing teaers’ generative ange:
A follow-up study of professional development in mathematics. American Educational Resear
Journal, 38(3), 653–689.
Franke, M. L., Kazemi, E., & Baey, D. (2007). Mathematics teaing and classroom practice. In F. K.
Lester (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 225–256).
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishers.
Freudenthal, H. (1973). Mathematics as an educational task. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
Garet, M., S., Porter, A. C., Desimone, L., Birman, B. F., & Yoon, K. S. (2001). What makes
professional development eﬀective? Results from a national sample of teaers. American

Educational Research Journal, 38, 915–945.
Gravemeijer, K. (1994a). Developing realistic mathematics education. Utret, e Netherlands: CD-
ß Press.
Gravemeijer, K. (1994b). Educational development and developmental resear. Journal for Resear
in Mathematics Education, 25, 443–471.
Gravemeijer, K., & Cobb, P. (2006). Design resear from the learning design perspective. In J. v. d.
Akker, K. Gravemeijer, S. McKenney, & N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational design resear (pp. 17–
51). London: Routledge.
Grossman, P., Compton, C., Igra, D., Ronfeldt, M., Shahan, E., & Williamson, P. W. (2009). Teaing
practice: A cross-professional perspective. Teachers College Record, 111(9), 2055–2100.
Grossman, P., Hammerness, K., & McDonald, M. (2009). Redeﬁning teaing, re-imagining teaer
education. Teachers and teaching: Theory and practice, 15(2), 273–289.
Grossman, P., O’Keefe, J., Kantor, T., & Delgado, P. C. (2013, April). Seeking coherence:
Organizational capacity for professional development targeting core practices in English
language arts. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Resear
Association, San Francisco, CA.
Hall, R. (2001). Sedules of practical work for the analysis of case studies of learning and
development. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 10, 203–222.
Henningsen, M., & Stein, M. K. (1997). Mathematical tasks and student cognition: Classroom-based
factors that support and inhibit high-level mathematical thinking and reasoning. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 28(5), 524–549.
Hesse, M. B. (1965). Forces and ﬁelds: A study of action at a distance in the history of physics.
Totowa, NJ: Littlefield, Adams. & Co.
Hill, H. C., Ball, D. L., & Silling, S. G. (2008). Unpaing pedagogical content knowledge:
Conceptualizing and measuring teaers’ topic-speciﬁc knowledge of students. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 372–400.
Hill, H. C., Silling, S. G., & Ball, D. L. (2004). Developing measures of teaers’ mathematics
knowledge for teaching. The Elementary School Journal, 105(1), 11–30.
Horn, I. S. (2005). Learning on the job: A situated account of teaer learning in high sool
mathematics departments. Cognition and Instruction, 23, 207–236.

Hoyles, C., Noss, R., & Pozzi, S. (2001). Proportional reasoning in nursing practice. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 32(1), 4–27.
Jason, K., & Gibbons, L. (2014, April). Accounting for how practitioners frame a common problem
of practice—students’ struggle in mathematics. Paper presented at the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics Research Conference, New Orleans, LA.
Kazemi, E., & Franke, M. L. (2004). Teaer learning in mathematics: Using student work to promote
collective inquiry. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 7, 203–235.
Kazemi, E., & Hubbard, A. (2008). New directions for the design and study of professional
development: Aending to the coevolution of teaers’ participation across contexts. Journal of
Teacher Education, 59, 428–441.
Kelly, A. E. (2004). Design resear in education: Yes, but is it methodological? Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 13, 115–128.
Kwon, O. N., Ju, M-K., Kim, R. Y., Park, J. H., & Park, J. S. (2013). Design resear as an inquiry into
students’ argumentation and justiﬁcation: Focusing on the design of intervention. In T. Plomp &
N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational design resear—Part B: Illustrative cases. Ensede, e
Netherlands: SLO.
Lamberg, T., & Middleton, J. A. (2009). Design resear perspectives on transitioning from individual
microgenetic interviews to a whole-class teaing experiment. Educational Researer, 38 (4),
233–245.
Lampert, M., Beasley, H., Ghousseini, H., Kazemi, E., & Franke, M. L. (2010). Using designed
instructional activities to enable novices to manage ambitious mathematics teaing. In M. K.
Stein & L. Kucan (Eds.), Instructional explanations in the disciplines (pp. 129–141). New York:
Springer.
Lampert, M., Franke, M. L., Kazemi, E., Ghousseini, H., Chan Turrou, A., Beasley, H., … Crowe, K.
(2013). Keeping it complex: Using rehearsals to support novice teaer learning of ambitious
teaching. Journal of Teacher Education, 64(3), 226–243.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. London:
Cambridge University Press.
Lehrer, R., & Kim, M. J. (2009). Structuring variability by negotiating its measure. Mathematics
Education Research Journal, 21(2), 116–133.

Lehrer, R., Kim, M. J., & Jones, S. (2011). Developing conceptions of statistics by designing measures
of distribution. ZDM: The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 43, 723–736.
Lehrer, R., Sauble, L., Strom, D., & Pligge, M. (2001). Similarity of form and substance: Modeling
material kind. In S. M. Carver & D. Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and Instruction: Twenty-ﬁve years of
progress (pp. 39–74). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lesh, R., & Kelly, A. E. (1997). Teaers’ evolving conceptions of one-to-one tutoring: A three-tiered
teaching experiment. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28(4), 398–430.
Lile, J. W. (2003). Inside teaer community: Representations of classroom practice. Teachers
College Record, 105, 913–945.
Lobato, J. (2003). How design experiments can inform a rethinking of transfer and vice versa.
Educational Researcher, 32(1), 17–20.
Lobato, J. (2012). The actor-oriented transfer perspective and its contributions to educational research
and practice. Educational Psychologist, 47(3), 232–247.
Maxwell, J. A. (2004). Causal explanation, qualitative resear, and scientiﬁc inquiry in education.
Educational Researcher, 33(2), 3–11.
McDonald, M., Kazemi, E., & Kavanagh, S. S. (2013). Core practices and pedagogies of teaer
education: A call for a common language and collective activity. Journal of Teaer Education,
64(5), 378–386.
Meninskaya, N. A. (1969). Fiy years of Soviet instructional psyology. In J. Kilpatri & I.
Wirzup (Eds.), Soviet studies in the psyology of learning and teaing mathematics (Vol. 1, pp.
5–27). Stanford, CA: School Mathematics Study Group.
Putnam, R. T., & Borko, H. (2000). What do new views of knowledge and thinking have to say
about research on teacher learning? Educational Researcher, 29(1), 4–15.
Saldanha, L., & ompson, P. (2007). Exploring connections between sampling distributions and
statistical inference: An analysis of students’ engagement and thinking in the context of
instruction involving repeated sampling. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics
Education, 2, 270–297.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2006). Design experiments. In P. B. Ellmore, G. Camilli, & J. Green (Eds.),
Complementary methods for resear in education. Washington, DC: American Educational
Research Association.

Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs
for generalized causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sherin, M. G., & Han, S. Y. (2004). Teaer learning in the context of video club. Teaing and
Teacher Education, 20, 163–183.
Simon, M. A. (1995). Reconstructing mathematics pedagogy from a constructivist perspective.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 26, 114–145.
Simon, M. A., Saldanha, L., McClinto, E., Karagoz Akar, G., Watanabe, T., & Ozgur Zembat, I.
(2010). A developing approa to studying students’ learning through their mathematical
activity. Cognition and Instruction, 28, 70–112.
Simpson, G., Hoyles, C., & Noss, R. (2006). Exploring the mathematics of motion through
construction and collaboration. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 22(2), 114–136.
Smith, J. P., & ompson, P. W. (2007). antitative reasoning and the development of algebraic
reasoning. In J. J. Kaput, D. W. Carraher, & M. L. Blanton (Eds.), Algebra in the early grades (pp.
95–132). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Steﬀe, L. (1983). e teaing experiment methodology in a constructivist resear program. In M.
Zweng, T. Green, J. Kilpatri, H. Pollak, & M. Suydam (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourth
International Congress on Mathematical Education (pp. 469–471). Boston: Birhauser.
Steﬀe, L., & Kieren, T. E. (1994). Radical constructivism and mathematics education. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 25, 711–733.
Steﬀe, L., & ompson, P. W. (2000). Teaing experiment methodology: Underlying principles and
essential elements. In A. E. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of resear design in mathematics
and science education (pp. 267–307). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stein, M. K., Engle, R. A., Smith, M. S., & Hughes, E. K. (2008). Orestrating productive
mathematical discussions: Five practices for helping teaers move beyond show and tell.
Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 10(4), 313–340.
Stephan, M., & Akyuz, D. (2012). A proposed instructional theory for integer addition and
subtraction. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 43, 428–464.
Streeﬂand, L. (1991). Fractions in realistic mathematics education. A paradigm of developmental
research. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Taylor, S. J., & Bogdan, R. (1984). Introduction to qualitative resear methods: e sear for

meanings (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Thompson, P. W. (1994). Images of rate and operational understanding of the Fundamental Theorem
of Calculus. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 26, 229–274.
ompson, P. W. (1996). Imagery and the development of mathematical reasoning. In L. P. Steﬀe, P.
Nesher, P. Cobb, G. Goldin, & B. Greer (Eds.), eories of mathematical learning (pp. 267–283).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
ompson, P. W., & Saldanha, L. A. (2000). Epistemological analyses of mathematical ideas: A
resear methodology. In M. Fernandez (Ed.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Annual
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 403–407). Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse for Science,
Mathematics, and Environmental Education.
Toulmin, S. E. (1958). The uses of argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Treﬀers, A. (1987). ree dimensions: A model of goal and theory description in mathematics
instruction—The Wiskobas Project. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Reidel.
van Es, E. A., & Sherin, M. G. (2008). Mathematics teaers’ “learning to notice” in the context of a
video club. Teaching and Teacher Education, 24, 244–276.
Wawro, M., Rasmussen, C., Zandieh, M., & Larson, C. (2013). Design resear within undergraduate
mathematics education: An example from introductory linear algebra. In T. Plomp & N. Nieveen
(Eds.), Educational design resear—Part B: Illustrative cases (pp. 905–925). Ensede, e
Netherlands: SLO.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Zawojewski, J., Chamberlin, M., Hjalmarson, M. A., & Lewis, C. (2008). Developing design studies in
mathematics education professional development: Studying teaers’ interpretive systems. In A.
E. Kelly, R. Lesh, & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of design resear methods in education:
Innovations in science, tenology, engineering and mathematics learning and teaing (pp.
219–245). New York: Routledge.

21 The Intertwining of Theory and
Practice
Influences on Ways of Teaching and
Teachers’ Education
Annalisa Cusi
University of Torino
Nicolina A. Malara
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

Introduction
In the last decades the role of theory in Mathematics Education (ME) has so
increased that Artigue (2011) speaks of “theoretical explosion in ME,” and
surveys and books about theories of ME have been published with the aim
of comparing and reﬂecting on diﬀerent studies and trying to constitute a
common ground for solars (Lerman, 2006; Cobb, 2007; Simon, 2009;
Sriraman & English, 2010).
Niss (2007) stresses the beneﬁts that theory oﬀers: it provides
explanations or predictions of certain phenomena; it helps and guides action
and behavior in speciﬁc implementations in order to aieve certain goals;
but, most importantly, it provides a structured set of lenses through which it
is possible to look at phenomena and methods in order to answer resear
questions. Silver and Herbst (2007) underline that at the beginning resear
in ME has been done to respond to problems derived from practice but, in
time, theory has assumed its own aracter, becoming central in ME
resear. ey also highlight a widespread prejudice about theory among
teaers and practitioners, who oen conceive it as irrelevant for practice.
is fact has been also stressed by Roesken (2011) and Boaler (2008), who
declare that few researers manage to uncover something that makes a
real diﬀerence to ildren and adults in their experience of mathematics.
Sowder (2007) observes that the reason why many teaers do “not believe
theories about student learning” is that oen researers do not “work with
teaers on classroom resear that builds on and tests the theories about
student learning” (p. 214).
In the resear arena, in some cases ME tends to be accepted at the level
of pure scientiﬁc speculation, with no connection to the most pressing needs
of teaers and without taking into account the teaers’ reality and the
constraints of their environment. Kieran, Krainer, and Shaughnessy (2013)
claim that a distinctive gap between resear and practice is created

because too often in ME research teachers are viewed as “recipients.”
Since the 1980s, some important solars, su as Kilpatri (1981) and
Freudenthal (1983), pinpointed this separation. Wimann (2001), quoting
also other researers, argues in favor of a reorientation of resear
towards practice. Other solars underline that the communication of
resear results must be increased among teaers (Bishop, 1998; Lester &
Wiliam, 2002; Boaler, 2008). In particular Boaler (2008) observes that the
impact of resear on practice would be stronger if researers, in the
planning of their studies, would consider what are the arguments that may
engage teachers and the issues with which they may identify.
Yet, other solars underline the beneﬁts for teaers arising from their
interaction with researers on theoretical questions related to the
classroom activity in the realm of teaer education programs (Jaworski,
2008; Kieran et al., 2013; White, Jaworski, Agudelo-Valderrama, & Gooya,
2013).
In tune with these and other studies (see for instance Mason, 1990), we
are convinced that theory could play the role of a fundamental mediator in
reducing the gap between resear and practice, and that a fruitful
interrelation between these two poles could be fostered if suitable resear
projects and teaer education programs were conceived with the aim of
both actively involving teaers in the ﬁeld of practice and, at the same
time, motivating them to approa theory to elicit indications and tools to
analyze their own practice.
In a previous work (Malara & Zan, 2008), it has been suggested that a
possible way of minimizing the resear/practice gap could be to focus, in
tune with an idea of teaer as a decision maker, on teaer education
programs where teaers and researers are dialogically involved. In
particular, it has been stressed that teaers and researers play a
fundamental role within these programs in mediating between theory and
practice, highlighting how, on one side, the contact with theory anges

teaers’ decision processes, and therefore their practice, and, on the other
side, the contact with practice anges researers’ decision processes, and
therefore theory.
For these reasons, in this apter we discuss the relationship between
theory and practice, looking at the resear on mathematics teaer
education that underlines the role of theory in restructuring both the
teaer’s knowledge for teaing and the teaer education practice.1
Speciﬁcally, we will discuss two main themes: (1) the implications, for both
resear and teaer education, of the idea of teaer as a decision maker;
(2) the use of theory as a lens to reﬂect on teaers’ practice in teaer
education programs, with a focus on the results from our experience and on
the new research perspectives offered by these results.

The Teacher as a Decision Maker: Implications for
Both Teacher Education and Research on It
In a previous work (Malara & Zan, 2008) a vision of teaing as an activity
of problem solving and problem posing has been proposed, stressing that
the complexity of teaing processes implies that every teaer is required
not only to ﬁnd a solution to the problems arising in the classroom, but ﬁrst
of all to identify them. One of the main implications of this vision is that in
teaing mathematics a teaer must do mu more than merely convey
knowledge through the “right” words or actions. He/she has the
responsibility not only of creating an environment that allows pupils to
build up mathematical understanding, but also of making hypotheses about
pupils’ conceptual constructs and the possible didactical strategies to help
them modify su constructs. erefore, in agreement with some U.S.
solars (see for instance Carpenter, 1988), we focus on the role played by
the teaer as a decision maker. With this expression we intend a
thoughtful professional who brings into the class a socio-constructive and
evolutive vision of mathematics, who is aware of his/her role, and who is
able to consciously observe and control his/her behavior when facing
contingent actions and making sudden decisions. In our educational
programs we work with and for teaers with the aim of making them
become more sensitive and effective decision makers.
In the last decades, researers have underlined the need of considering
teaer and students variables in the contexts in whi they are placed, as
Lerman (2000) stresses, speaking of a “social turn in mathematics education
resear.” is new perspective has led, initially to studies on students’
learning in social seings through nonroutine tasks and, more recently, to
the study of teaers’ learning and ange, professional growth and
identity. In tune with this evolution, we will focus on this second aspect.
Starting with Shulman’s work (1986), many researers have considered

the manifold components of the knowledge necessary to the teaers
practice (Coran-Smith & Lytle, 1999; Sowder, 2007; Ball, ames, &
Phelps, 2008). Recently Barwell (2013) has wrien on the importance of
focusing on teaers’ knowledge about the dynamics that aracterize
students’ thought processes during class activities. Moreover, Soenfeld
(2013) has stressed the importance of studying the interaction between
teaers’ knowledge, resources, goals, beliefs, and orientations and their in-
the-moment decision making. is position is consistent with the studies
(Malara & Zan, 2008; ames & Van Zoest, 2013; Sowder, 2007; Roesken,
2011) that discuss the crucial role played by an investigation in situ of the
interrelationships between teaer knowledge, beliefs, and emotions
because it allows the teaers to become aware of the mismat between
their espoused beliefs and the beliefs that emerge from practice.
Two themes can be considered the most relevant trends of the studies on
and with teaers: (1) to understand how teaers learn from their
experiences; and (2) to ange teaers’ knowledge, beliefs, and practice
(Goos, 2013).
With reference to these themes, we agree with ames and Van Zoest
(2013), who stress the need of developing studies aimed at the analysis of
the eﬀects of speciﬁc teaer actions on students’ learning. We are, in fact,
convinced that these kinds of studies may engender what Goos (2013) calls
“productive tensions between teaers’ thinking, actions, and professional
environments” that “can become opportunities for teaer ange” (p. 521).
We refer to the term teaer ange in the sense of “teaer’s aware
professional evolution” that occurs in time and that can imply a shi of
his/her paradigms.2 Chapman and Heater (2010), studying teachers involved
in a developmental program, state that the ange needed to traditional
teaers to become nontraditional inquiry-oriented teaers is not simple to
aieve because the level of ange that the teaers desire is oen
different.

e problematic questions linked to an eﬀective teaer ange have
been discussed also by Simon (2013), who explains teaers’ resistance to
ange, admiing that it is very diﬃcult for any experience to profoundly
aﬀect the complex structures that constitute the basis for teaers’ practices
and strictly inﬂuence what teaers do and their way of interpreting
everything that happens (“major assimilatory structures of teaers”). He
therefore recognizes the importance of the role played by researers in
promoting effective opportunities for teacher change.
We are convinced that in order to foster teaer ange it is necessary to
study individual teaers in depth and to provide detailed analyses of their
teaing processes, sharing with them this analysis and helping them to
develop resulting reﬂections (Malara & Zan, 2008; Cusi & Malara, 2012,
2013). e role played by teaers’ reﬂection and awareness for eﬀective
changes will be discussed in the next section.

The Role of Theory for the Development of
Teachers’ Awareness: A Focus on Teacher
Education Programs
Since the 1990s, resear in mathematics teaing insists on the need for
teaers’ reﬂection about their own practice (Mason, 1998, 2002; Jaworski,
1998). Referring to Sön, Jaworski introduces the term reﬂective practice
to deﬁne the kind of practice that results from this reﬂection: “e essence
of reﬂective practice in teaing might be seen as the making explicit of
teaing approaes and processes so that they can become the objects of
critical scrutiny” (1998, p. 7). rough reﬂective practice teaers become
aware of what they are doing and why: awareness is therefore the product
of a process of reflection.
Mason (1990, 1998, 2002) emphasizes the role of awareness in teaing.
He distinguishes between (1) awareness-in-action, whi is deﬁned as “the
powers of construal and of acting in the material world”; (2) awareness-in-
discipline, that is, the awareness of awareness-in-action; and (3) awareness-
in-counsel, which represents the awareness of the whole educative project.
According to Mason (1998, 2008), fostering students’ development of an
explicit awareness of their awareness-in-action requires teaers to become
aware “not simply of the fact of diﬀerent ways of intervening, but of the
fact of subtle sensitivities that guide or determine oices between types
and timings of interventions” (2008, p. 49). erefore teaer educators
should foster in teachers relevant shifts of attention, directing their attention
toward constructs, theories, and practices that can inform and guide their
future choices.
Jaworski (2004) has stressed the value not only of teaers’ critical
reﬂection about their practice, but also of the sharing of these reﬂections
between teaers and between researers and teaers within a

community of inquiry. She stresses that this dialogical model is particularly
relevant to teaer professional development because it makes teaers
conduct resear on their own practice and, consequently, develop a critical
intelligence and an increasing awareness of the diﬀerent aspects to be faced
during the teaching processes.
Boaler (2008) states that it is necessary to build a “culture in whi
teaers see themselves as needing to learn from resear on a regular
basis” (p. 100) because, in this way, teaers may be encouraged to think
that resear results would be helpful to their teaing. She therefore
stresses the need of a radical shi that involves “anging the teaing
profession to be one that conducts its own resear” (p. 101). Lerman
(2013), too, underlines the need of involving teaers in the analysis of their
practice, making them active parts of research projects.
We are in tune with these positions and believe that suitable resear
projects and teaer education programs should be conceived with the aim
of actively involving teaers in the ﬁeld of practice and, at the same time,
motivating them to approa theory to elicit useful tools to analyze their
own practice. In the last decade, diﬀerent teaer education paths have
been planned with the aim of fostering a real teaers’ involvement and
their active collaboration with researers. In these cases the teaer
education process acquires the typical aracteristics of a path of
introduction to resear (Jaworski, 2006; Cusi & Malara, 2011, 2012;
Mellone, 2011; Potari, 2013). In most of these projects the teaers play the
role of “teaer-researers.” is term has been used with diﬀerent
meanings, but in our view a distinctive aracter of the teaer-researer
is his/her conquest of an autonomous relationship with theory, as a result of
an effective long-term dialogue with researchers.
In a recent work Jaworski (2012) uses the term teacher-as-inquirer to
indicate the role played by teaers who collaborate in resear projects
and are motivated to undertake inquiry-based practice, to give time to

collaboration with didacticians,3 and to engage seriously with reﬂective
developmental practice. Also the work done by Goodild (2008) can be
considered in this perspective. Goodild claims that “developmental
resear in communities of inquiry is ‘good’ resear in the ethical sense”
because “it empowers teaers, students, and didacticians, to begin to take
control of their professional practices and empowers them to be, in their
school teams, self-sufficient in development” (2008, pp. 214–215).
Potari (2013) has implemented a course for teaers aimed at fostering
their construction of bridges between the activity of resear and the
activity of teaing, where the reference to the theory is fundamental. She
states that during the course the teaers undertook actions su as
“reading and presenting resear papers focusing on the resear goals, the
tasks used, and the main ﬁndings; reﬂecting on what ways they could use
resear ﬁndings in their teaing; designing mathematical examples and
tasks and justifying their oices based on resear; analyzing mathematics
tasks, classroom dialogues, and students’ work by using analytical models
oﬀered by resear; collaborating with other teaers on designing,
implementing, and evaluating a classroom intervention based on resear
ﬁndings with a focus on students’ mathematical understanding” (Potari,
2013, p. 512).
As we will explain in the following section, our approa is in tune with
the oice of working on theory in order to make the teaers acquire new
useful tools that can help them become more sensitive in perceiving and
interpreting class processes.

Theory as a Lens to Reflect on Teachers’ Practice:
Our Methodology of Work With and for Teachers
In our previous studies (Malara, 2003; Malara & Zan, 2008; Cusi & Malara,
2008, 2012; Cusi, Malara, & Navarra, 2011)—realized in the realm of the
Aral Project4—we have introduced our methodology of work with and for
teaers. In tune with what we have presented here, our resear is based
on the hypothesis that observation and critical-reﬂective study of socio-
constructive classroom processes are necessary conditions to foster teachers’
development of awareness about the roles they must play in the class, the
dynamics that aracterize the mathematical collective construction, and
the variables that intervene (Malara, 2003). In the perspective of
constituting a community of inquiry, the teaers are organized in groups
according to the activities that they experiment with in their classes. Ea
group is coordinated by a researer-mentor, who frequently has face-to-
face and e-mail exanges with the teaers. Periodically, work sessions
conducted by the project leader, and joint meetings with all the teaers
and researchers involved in the research are realized.
Our aim is to make teaers: (a) acquire an increasing capability of
interpreting the complexity of class processes and reﬂecting on the
eﬀectiveness of the role they play; (b) develop awareness about the eﬀects
of their micro-decisions; (c) become able to beer control their behaviors
and communicative styles; and (d) observe, during the development of class
activities, the inﬂuence of this critical-reﬂective study on students’
behaviors and learning.
In order to fulﬁll these objectives, we involve teaers in a complex
activity of critical analysis of the transcripts of audio recordings5 concerning
classroom processes and associated reﬂections. is activity is aimed at
throwing light on the interrelation between students’ construction of
knowledge and the teaer’s behaviors in guiding them perform this

construction. e analysis is carried out by developing what we call Multi-
commented Transcripts (MT).
e development of MT starts when the experimenters-teaers send the
transcripts of their lessons, together with their comments and reﬂections, to
mentors-researers. Subsequently, the mentors-researers make their
own comments and send them ba to the authors, to other teaers
involved in similar activities, and sometimes to other researers. Oen, the
authors make further interventions in this cycle, commenting on comments
or inserting new ones.
The main characteristic of this methodology is the “choral” exchange that
is at the basis of MT and of the riness of the reﬂections that emerge from
the comments. Since MT outline an overall frame of teaer’s didactical
action, they could help in highlighting if the didactical praxis is coherent
with the references to the involved theory. In this way, MT become useful
working tools for teaers and researers, providing them with new
elements that can help enhance their interventions. Moreover, they foster—
through a comparison between diﬀerent teaers and periodic shared
reﬂections—the identiﬁcation of the distinctive elements of teaers’ actions
and a reflection on their effectiveness.
e critical analysis we developed with teaers through the MT
methodology enabled us to perceive, in spite of the support given by
theoretical studies, some teaers’ incapability of critically controlling class
processes (see for example, in Cusi et al., 2011, our categorization of
metacognitive and nonmetacognitive teaers in their action in the
classroom and in the a posteriori reﬂection upon their action). For this
reason, our objective in the work with teaers is to provoke shis of
aention for them in the reﬂection on their actions, moving from a focus on
student behaviors to a focus on teaers’ aitudes and behaviors, and on
their effects on students (Malara & Navarra, 2011).
In order to promote these shis of aention, we have recently modiﬁed

our methodology for working with teaers. e hypothesis underlying this
methodology is that the development of teaers’ awareness-in-discipline
could be fostered if the usual activities of reﬂection on their practice are
carried out in reference to speciﬁc indicators. ese indicators provide
teaers with “theoretical lenses” to whi they can refer as interpretative
keys in the analysis of class processes.
As we will clarify in the following, this approa is in tune with both the
learning study’s distinguishing features (Marton & Morris, 2002) and with
the approa presented by Potari (2013), whi shares the same objective of
supporting “teaers to develop an inquiry stance of mathematics teaing
that could form a solid base for their autonomous development as
mathematics teachers” (p. 512).
Our current teaer education processes are aracterized by a constant
dialectic between theoretical aspects related to classroom actions and
didactical implementations. Before describing this new methodology in
detail, we present a theoretical construct we have shared with teaers for
the analysis of their practices.

A Theoretical Construct for the Analysis of
Teacher’s Actions
During our previous studies aimed at fostering a constructive didactic of
algebra as a tool for thinking (Cusi & Malara, 2009, 2013), we developed a
theoretical construct conceived as a means to study the teaer’s actions
during class activities. In the analysis performed through this theoretical
construct, the speciﬁc mathematical content (in our case the construction of
proofs through algebraic language) is taken into account.
In our resear work, in fact, our constant objective is to combine two
poles that seem to be “dangerously” separated in literature (Harel, 2010 6;
Roesken, 20117): content to be taught and teacher’s actions.
is construct, whi will be referred to as M-AEAB (acronym for Model
of Aware and Eﬀective Aitudes and Behaviors), speciﬁes a set of
aracters and actions that outline a proﬁle of a teaer who is able to
eﬀectively guide his/her students in the processes of reasoning’s
construction through algebraic language (see Cusi & Malara, 2009, 2013;
Cusi, 2008).
e M-AEAB construct has been conceived within a theoretical frame
essentially constituted by two triads of components: the ﬁrst triad is related
to the development of the mathematical content in the teaing/learning
process and refers to the role played by algebraic language in the
construction of thinking; the second triad refers to the social dimension of
the teaing/learning processes and to the role played by the teaer during
class activities.
e ﬁrst triad considers three aspects that are connected to students’
development of reasoning through algebraic language: (a) the idea of
conceptual frames introduced by Arzarello, Bazzini, and Chiappini (2001),8
who have highlighted the importance of activating diﬀerent conceptual

frames and of anging from one frame to another in order to correctly
interpret the diﬀerent algebraic expressions constructed while solving a
problem; (b) the concept of anticipating thought developed by Boero (2001),
who has focused on the role it plays in the construction of reasoning
through processes of transformation; (c) the concept of representation
register analyzed by Duval (2006), who has identiﬁed in the coordination of
different registers a key aspect for the learning of mathematics.
Our resear work (Cusi, 2009) has enabled us to show that an eﬀective
use of algebraic language for the construction of proofs requires the
application and combination of three main key components: (a) the
appropriate activation and coordination between diﬀerent conceptual
frames; (b) the activation of appropriate anticipating thoughts; and (c) the
coordination between algebraic and verbal registers.
Since we are convinced that students’ development of these
competencies is strictly related to both the teaer’s way of acting while
he/she faces the class activities and the time he/she devotes to meta-aspects
and to reﬂections, the second triad of our theoretical frame refers to
methodological aspects and to the socio-constructive dynamics involved in
the teaing/learning processes. It therefore considers three main
components that have to be conceived on the same level.
e ﬁrst component of this triad is Vygotskyan. Our source of inspiration
was Vygotsky’s emphasis (1978) on the central role that the child’s imitation
of the adult’s actions plays in his/her mental development. Vygotsky
stresses the importance of an instruction aimed at stimulating students’
activation of internal learning processes through their interaction with the
teaer and/or with more expert classmates, because this interaction
enables them to rea an higher level of mental development. As regards
the activities that involve the construction of reasoning through algebraic
language, we are convinced that it is necessary for students to be immersed
into contexts (su as those advocated by Soenfeld (1992) within whi

mathematical sense-making is practiced and developed in a way that
fosters students’ conquest of a real awareness of the meaning of class
activities. For this reason, the second component of our second triad is
Leont’ev’s work (1978) on the interrelation between the activities realized
in social contexts and the development of a real awareness about the
meaning of these activities. Leont’ev stresses, in particular, that the
knowledge assimilated by students can really educate them only if they are
previously educated to an aware relationship with knowledge.
Vygotsky and Leont’ev ideas on the centrality of interaction in both the
learning processes and the processes of construction of meaning about
learning represent an important reference for our planning of class
activities.
Moreover, Vygotsky’s stress on the importance of the role played by the
adult in encouraging the ild’s transition from a potential to an actual
mental development led us to deﬁne a ﬁrst idea of the teaer’s action. is
idea is in tune with the theory of cognitive apprenticeship (Collins, Brown,
& Newman, 1989), the third component of the second triad.
rough this theory, Collins et al. (1989) propose a model of instruction
that takes inspiration from apprenticeship in practical professions. e
authors highlight some key aspects of apprenticeship that could become
useful references in the teaing of speciﬁc subjects su as problem
solving, reading comprehension, or writing. In particular, they focus on the
fact that, diﬀerently from those students who receive a traditional
“transmissive” teaing, apprentices can “see” the processes of work in the
same moment in whi they are realized. But, while manual labor activities
—the object of traditional apprenticeship—are directly observable, the
practice of problem solving, reading comprehension, and writing is not
directly observable because thinking processes are mainly invisible.
e cognitive apprenticeship theory intends to “make thinking visible.”
Collins et al. (1989) identiﬁed four dimensions (content, method,

sequencing, and sociology) to whi they associate a set of meaningful
aracters for constructing and evaluating learning contexts. We focus on
two dimensions in particular that constitute the main reference in our
analysis of teaching/learning processes: method and sociology.
Method refers to those teaing methods that, according to Collins et al.
(1989), should be designed to give students the opportunity to observe,
engage in, and invent or discover expert strategies in context. Among them,
modeling, coaing, scaﬀolding, and fading play key roles in fostering
students’ development of grounded abilities through processes of
observation and guided practice. Modeling requires an expert to carry out a
task externalizing his/her internal processes—that is, the heuristics and the
activated control processes—in order to enable students construct a
conceptual model of the processes required to perform a task. Coaching is
the expert’s observation of students while they are facing a task, in order to
give them stimuli, supports, feedba, and possibly new tasks aimed at
making them improve their performance. Scaffolding refers both to the
support the teaer gives students in carrying out a task and to the gradual
removal of this support to enable students to autonomously complete the
task. Collins et al. (1989) introduce the term fading to objectify this second
significant aspect of scaffolding.
e methods referred to as articulation and reflection aracterize the
activities aimed at making students both focus on their observation of
experts’ approaes and learn how to consciously control their own
strategies. Articulation involves those methods aimed at geing students to
articulate their knowledge, reasoning, or problem-solving processes.
Reﬂection involves those methods that are aimed at making students
compare their own problem-solving processes with those of an expert,
another student, and even an internal cognitive model of expertise.
e sociology dimension refers to the social aspects of the learning
environment: in cognitive apprenticeship, apprentices learn to develop

abilities in the context of their application to problems, within a culture
focused on and defined by expert practice.
We think that the cognitive apprenticeship paradigm could also be a
useful reference for both teaers and researers in their planning,
implementation, and joint analysis of the teaing/learning processes aimed
at fostering an eﬀective use of algebraic language as a thinking tool. We
believe that the games of interaction and coordination between the
syntactical level, the interpretative level, and the level of activation of
anticipating thoughts (whi can be automatically set up by an expert)
should be “made visible” to novices in order to make them acquire and
understand their meaning. erefore the hypothesis on whi our resear
is based is that students should acquire the teaer’s aitudes and behaviors
during class interaction through a process of cognitive apprenticeship that
enables students to progressively construct the competencies and awareness
necessary to eﬀectively face proofs through algebraic language. In this way
students can internalize the teaer’s strategies and develop (thanks to the
meta-reﬂections about the actions that they have performed) a real
awareness of the activities realized in the class.
e idea of a teaer who is able to activate in his/her students processes
of “imitation,” in a Vygotskyan9 sense, to foster their assimilation of speciﬁc
suitable strategies for an eﬀective approa to problem-solving activities,
led us to focus on one of the possible roles that a teaer could play in
his/her classes: the role of model (that becomes particularly meaningful in
relation to the activities on whi our resear is focused). is idea is also
in tune with what Lerman (2000) suggests: “e teaer may perform the
role of ‘master’ for some students in relation to some aspects of what we
might call the mathematical identities produced” (p. 33).
Mason’s (2008) interpretation of the role played by the mathematics
teaer during class activities is also consistent with this idea. Mason
stresses that, in order to realize real mental development, it is important not

to underestimate the problem of the widespread discrepancy between what
the teacher thinks he/she is communicating to students and what they really
understand. According to Mason, this problem can be solved if the teaer
works in his/her class with the constant aim of “educating awareness,”
initially using particular repeated prompts, and then using less and less
direct prompts, or using meta-questions aimed at helping students
internalize these prompts so that they can autonomously refer to these
stimuli in speciﬁc situations, even when the teaer does not explicitly
remind students of them.
e aracters highlighted by the M-AEAB construct are those of a
teaer who acts with the main aim of “making thinking visible” and, at the
same time, is aware of the incidence of his/her actions for the students’
development of awareness. ese aracters have been identiﬁed thanks to
the analysis of both small group activities carried out by students aged 15–
16 and the collective discussions conducted by their teaers during
teaing experiments aimed at introducing activities of proof construction
through algebraic language. is analysis enabled us to show the eﬀects of
the diﬀerent approaes of the teaers involved in our experimentations,
from the point of view of both students’ manifested awareness and their
aieved competencies. rough the comparison between teaers’
diﬀerent approaes we were able to make clearly evident that
inappropriate teacher choices prevent students from acquiring the necessary
competencies and from developing awareness; at the same time it allowed
the identiﬁcation of the teaer’s aracters that foster the construction of
the key competencies for an eﬀective development of algebraic thinking
(Cusi, 2008; Cusi & Malara, 2009).
A ﬁrst group of these aracters refer to the roles that a teaer should
play in order to pose him/herself not as a “mere expert” who proposes
eﬀective approaes, but as a learner who faces problems with the main
aim of making visible the hidden thinking, with the aims, the meaning of

the strategies, and the interpretation of results. ese roles, whi could be
placed within the categories of modeling and coaing, are that of: (a)
investigating subject, who stimulates an aitude of resear towards the
problem being studied, and as a constituent part of the class in the resear
work being activated; (b) practical/strategic guide, who shares (rather than
transmits) with his/her students the adopted strategies and the knowledge
to be locally activated; (c) activator of interpretative processes and activator
of anticipating thoughts, who simulates and provokes the construction of
the key-competencies for the development of thought processes through
algebraic language.
e second group of aracters refers to the roles that the teaer plays
when he/she becomes a point of reference for students to help them clarify
salient aspects at diﬀerent levels and become aware of the meaning of the
realized activities and of the learning processes themselves. ese roles,
whi could be placed within the categories of articulation and reﬂection,
are that of: (a) guide in controlling the meaning of the constructed algebraic
expressions, at both the syntactical and the semantic level, in order to
maintain a harmonized balance between these two aspects; (b) reflective
guide, who makes students reﬂect on the eﬀective approaes carried out
during class activities and helps them identify eﬀective practical/strategic
models from whi they can draw their inspiration; (c) activator of
reﬂective aitudes and activator of meta-cognitive acts, with the aim of
instilling the control of the global sense of the activated processes (see also
Cusi & Malara, 2013, where these two groups of roles are presented
showing the links with the underpinning two triads of theoretical
components).

A Path for Teacher Education Aimed at Making
Teachers Develop New Awareness
We can now present in detail the activities—preliminary to those devoted to
a shared critical reﬂection (through the MT methodology)—that we have
inserted within our methodology of work with teaers. ey are
aracterized by a moment of study/reﬂection and a moment of
action/reflection.
e moment of study/reﬂection is subdivided into two phases: (1) the
theoretical study of resear papers; and (2) the analysis of the practice of
others, namely activities of analysis of extracts of class discussions
conducted during previous experimentations, aimed at showing how the
use of the theoretical constructs previously introduced enables us to
highlight problematic or effective aspects related to the teacher’s actions.
e theoretical study (Phase 1) is at three levels: the sense of the
discipline, the study of the processes that intervene, and the modeling of the
teacher’s actions (in particular, the M-AEAB construct is introduced).
During the activities of analysis of the practice of others (Phase 2),
teaers are required to analyze the extracts of collective discussions about
the construction of proofs through algebraic language, focusing on the
approa of the teaer and on students’ interventions, trying to
individuate, referring to the identiﬁed lenses: (a) the moments in whi the
teaer plays roles in tune with the M-AEAB construct; (b) the moments in
whi the teaer’s approa distances itself from the one that could be
aracterized through the M-AEAB construct; (c) the positive and/or
negative eﬀects of the teaer’s work on students, in terms of competencies
and awareness shown by students during the collective discussion.
e teaers are involved in two further interrelated phases, constituting
the moment of action/reﬂection: (3) the phase of planning/action, namely
the design of activities to be proposed to their classes, planning the

methodology to be adopted referring to the introduced theoretical
constructs (planning), and the subsequent implementation of the activities
in the classes (action); (4) the phase of analysis of one’s own practice, i.e. the
analysis of the activities planned during Phase 3, to be developed through
reﬂections generated by an observation of class processes referring to
specific theoretical lenses.
During the phase of planning/action (Phase 3), in particular, teaers are
asked to work on some proof problems that require students to identify
regularities, and to construct conjectures starting from numerical
explorations and prove the conjectures.
Before the action in the classes, teaers have also to develop: (a) an a
priori analysis of the problems to be proposed, considering in particular the
possible conjectures that students can produce and the main diﬃculties they
can face, especially during the proving phase; and (b) the planning of the
methodology to be adopted with the objective of acting in tune with the
M-AEAB construct in facing proof problems. Aer the action in the classes,
during the phase of analysis of one’s own practice (Phase 4), the teaers
have to propose an a posteriori analysis of the transcripts of the activities
they have carried out, similar to the one developed during Phase 2.
We think that the work developed during Phases 2 and 4 of our path is in
tune with what Sowder (2007) observes (quoting Riert’s, 1991, resear)
about the role played by the study of wrien cases of classroom events,
whi “present the dilemmas of teaing, the tradeoﬀs, the uncertainties.
ey capture teaer actions as they exist in the uncertain context where
those actions occur … [they] provide the potential for connecting the act of
teaing with the cognitions and feelings that both motivate and explain
the act. ey oﬀer a vehicle for making the tacit explicit” (Riert, 1991, p.
117).
anks to the enhancement of the preliminary moment of
study/reﬂection and action/reﬂection—according to the above-mentioned

modalities—our methodology of work with teaers can be now outlined
with this structure (whi is sematized in Figure 21.1): (1) theoretical
study; (2) analysis of the practice of others; (3) planning/action in the classes;
(4) analysis of one’s own practice; and (5) critical shared reﬂection through
the MT.
Our approa is consistent with the cyclic path of planning-
implementation-reﬂection that, according to ames and Van Zoest (2013),
“can lead teaers to revisit and substantially expand on, and demand more
of, their mathematical understanding in ways that maer for their learning
and their teaing” (p. 589). We must however notice that, in our case, the
phases of planning-implementation-reﬂection are part of a wider path,
within whi the theoretical study and analysis play an essential role. We
can therefore again notice the aﬃnity between our work with teaers and
the methodology adopted by Potari (2013), whi is aracterized by phases
of reading and analysis of resear papers, designing of mathematical tasks
on the basis of resear results, and analysis of mathematics tasks and
classroom activities using analytical models offered by research.
If we consider what Sowder (2007) states (quoting Borko & Putnam,
1995), we can observe that making teaers analyze their own practice
through theoretical lenses could enable them to contextualize resear
results and therefore their new theoretical knowledge. According to
Sowder, in fact, an approa that gives “opportunities to construct
knowledge of subject maer and pedagogy in an environment that
supports and encourages risk taking and reﬂection” (Sowder, 2007, p. 11)
can foster ange, and can make teaers aware that they are both objects
and agents of change.

Figure 21.1 Our methodology of work with teachers.
In the next section we will present an example of the work carried out
by a teaer during the Phase 4 of our teaer education path. We ose
this extract because it testiﬁes: (a) the support given by the theoretical
lenses in enabling the teaers to analyze in detail their own actions, (b) the
difficulties that teachers could face during this type of activity.

An Example of “Analysis of One’s Own Practice”
and Some Meta-Theoretical Considerations on Our
New Methodology of Work With and for Teachers
e example we are presenting involves a teaer (T) who appears both to
have really understood the roles that should be played in order to act in
tune with the typical aracters of the M-AEAB construct and to be able to
critically analyze her approa during class activities. However, she reveals
some blocks in using the construct itself in the analysis she develops.
e following discussion concerns the analysis of the strategies carried
out by groups of students of T’s class to face this problem: “Consider a
natural number. Calculate the sum between this number and its two
consecutive numbers. What can you observe? Can you prove what you
assert?”10
e extract of the discussion is shown in the ﬁrst column of Table 21.1.11
e second column contains the comments proposed by T in the a
posteriori analysis she developed during Phase 4 of our path, referring to
the theoretical lenses provided by the M-AEAB construct. (Ea comment is
inserted next to the intervention it refers to.) Our comments, developed
referring to the same theoretical lenses, are included in the third column.
We have proposed them at a later stage in order to recognize harmony or
contrast between T’s interpretations of her interventions and our
interpretations. Our comments were shared with T later in Phase 5 of our
path. At the boom of the table there is a spontaneous reﬂection, proposed
by T when she sent us her analysis.
As our comments in the third column highlight, T’s approa testiﬁes
that she has really internalized the typical aracters highlighted by the
M-AEAB construct. Focusing, till the beginning of this discussion’s excerpt,
on the objective of the formalization and manipulation that the class is

carrying out, T poses herself as an activator of anticipating thoughts and
interpretative processes. At the same time, she does not lose sight of the
meta-dimension of the activity, posing herself as a reﬂective guide and
proposing questions aimed at enabling students make the meaning of the
adopted approach explicit.
ese observations enable us to understand the level of awareness
developed by T—thanks to the previous activities of our teaer education
path—about the aitudes and behaviors to be activated when these speciﬁc
activities are proposed.
Despite the interesting reﬂections she proposes, T does not use the
theoretical terms of the M-AEAB construct to describe and objectify her
approa. For example, she makes use of the term “model of reasoning,”
recalling the idea of M-AEAB, instead of specifying that her intervention
reveals an aempt of posing herself as an “activator of anticipating
thoughts.” Similarly, she observes that her intervention has the aim of
“activating a reﬂection,” without objectifying her role through the concept
of “activator of reﬂective aitudes.” Even if she proposes correct reﬂections
from a practical point of view, she therefore hasn’t yet developed the
necessary self-conﬁdence to analyze her actions according to these
theoretical terms. T, in fact, is able to “describe” her own practice, but she
does that without referring to general terms. She is able to recognize the
typical aracters of the M-AEAB construct, but she does not make them
explicit, choosing to refer to them through concrete examples.
Table 21.1  An example of “Analysis of One’s Own Practice.”
Discussion
extract
T’s interpretation of her roles
referring to the M-AEAB construct
Our interpretation
of T’s roles
referring to the
M-AEAB construct
In a first phase of the discussion, the class agrees upon this conjecture:

the sum is always a multiple of 3 (the conjecture has been proposed
by the student F). Another student (L) declares that she has also found
that it is not a simple multiple of 3, but the product between 3 and the
consecutive of the initial number. In the following, the teacher (T)
begins the discussion about the possible construction of the proof of
this conjecture.
T 46: Let’s
start from
this sum,
which must
be a
multiple of
3. F, if you
propose me
this
conjecture,
what is the
starting
point and
what is your
objective?
Attempt to pose myself as a model
of reasoning.
Focus on the
objective: T
poses herself
as an
activator of
anticipating
thoughts.
F8: I first
considered
some
examples,
then I found
the
conjecture
and I started
to
generalize.
T 47: What did
T poses herself
as an

you try to
reach?
activator of
anticipating
thoughts.
F9: A rule that
is invariant
for every
example.
T 48: A rule
that is
always valid
… but what
do I have to
read? Where
do I want to
go? …
mixing in
order to go
… where?
You want a
multiple of
three, so
what do you
want?
Intervention strong conditioning, as
the student’s replay shows.
Focus on the
objective,
with an
attempt to
highlight and
explain the
effective
strategies to
be carried
out (she
poses herself
as a
reflective
guide).
F11: I want … I
want a 3n
T 50: A 3n
because I
want a 3
multiplied
by
something.
And you, L,
according to
Intervention that is not meaningful
with respect to a situation that
should have required an in-
Focus on the
objective,
with an
attempt to
highlight and
explain the

what you
have
proposed,
what do you
want to
have in the
end? …
What must
the mixing
give you?
depth analysis. The attempt itself
of using a certainly not technical
term—“mixing”—does not help
and creates additional confusion
(even though it wasn’t the first
time I used it).
effective
strategies to
be carried
out (she
poses herself
as a
reflective
guide).
L8: It must
give nx + 1
…
After a long discussion the class propose the following initial expression:
n + (n + 1) + (n + 1 + 1). T makes students reflect on how this
expression can be transformed, with the aim of reaching the
predetermined objective, applying suitable properties of numerical
operations (associative, commutative, distributive). The students
correctly suggest to transform the initial expression into 3n + 3.
T 93: So, F, we
have now
3n + 3.
F29: I wasn’t
able to go
further than
this.
Actually it is
enough for
me to say
that the final
number is
always a

multiple of
3. It is
enough.
This intervention is aimed at
activating a global reflection, in
order also to stimulate a point of
the justification that (in the a-
priori analysis of the problem)
was considered a delicate one. In
fact, in contrast with the
conclusion expressed in F31—
according to which the thesis
was proved even if the expected
expression wasn’t obtained—the
intervention T95 aims at
provoking a further reflection,
posing herself as a model.
T poses herself
as an
activator of
interpretative
processes.
T poses herself
as an
activator of
reflective
attitudes.
T 94: Why?
F31: Because
3n is a
multiple of 3
and, if we
sum 3 to 3n
we obtain
the
following
multiple of
3.
T 95: But we
haven’t
arrived to
what we
wanted. We
fixed an
objective,
but we
stopped
before. Is
there a
reason to
arrive to 3
multiplied
by
something?
…
T’s a posteriori reflections:
With respect to the previous laboratoryi, the analysis of my
interventions in the class was more difficult and complex. Even

though my memory helped me in integrating the too restrictive vision
provided by the mere discussion’s transcripts, the self-criticism and/or
the need of avoiding critiques forced me to not propose an objective
analysis. What I said is not meant to be an excuse for what I am going
to write. On the contrary, it represents the requirement of an external
point of view, an eye, complementary to mine, that could help me
more objectively analyze my way of proceeding during the class
discussion.
We must stress that this problem did not emerge during the phase of
“analysis of others’ practice” (Phase 2), during whi T was able to directly
refer to the terms of the M-AEAB construct. We think that this missed
objectiﬁcation of the activated processes should be ascribed to diﬃculties
with the passage from an experience of observation of others to an
experience of observation of self, as T’s a posteriori reﬂection testiﬁes: “the
self-criticism and/or the need of avoiding critics forced me to not propose
an objective analysis.” With regard to T’s way of analyzing her own
practice (referring to shared theoretical lenses), she can be described as a
“teaer in transition.” However, at the same time, T shows that she is
aware she is, if we use Vygotskyan terms, in a zone of proximal
development.
We can recall some of these considerations to reﬂect on our teaer
education path and on the highlighted problems. T’s request for an
“external point of view,” of an eye complementary to hers that could help
her to develop an objective analysis of her “way of proceeding during the
class discussion” testiﬁes that overcoming this phase of transition requires
the intervention of one or more external observers, who guide the teaer,
through a continuous comparison, in the work of making the activated
processes explicit. is kind of path requires, therefore, the constitution of a
dialogical relationship between teaers and researers, within whi (in

tune with the paradigm of developmental resear) the analysis of micro-
situations is carried out with the aim of developing teaers’ real awareness
of their own practice. is awareness can be obtained through the
objectiﬁcation realized thanks to the use of theoretical constructs, whi can
therefore play the role not only of tools of analysis but also of ways to
communicate with teachers and to model the processes of reflection.
For this reason we must stress the need and the value of a dialogical
comparison between teaers and researers, whi enables researers to
guide teaers in the complex work of theoretical analysis of their own
practice, helping them describe and comment on their actions through the
theoretical lenses for observation, in a scaﬀolding process aimed at a
modeling of reflection. Researers’ interventions have to aim at provoking
the necessary shis of aention for teaers, in order to produce a real
awareness-in-discipline about their capability of both acting in the class and
reﬂecting (a-posteriori) on their own practice. anks to this work, teaers
can progressively become capable of performing an auto-analysis and
aware of the aracter of their actions, learning how to autonomously
control them.
As Mason (2008) observes when he describes what happens to a student
who internalizes the stimuli received by his/her teaer, this process fosters
the teaer’s internalization of the researers’ stimuli, so that the activity
of reﬂection moves from a process “in themselves” to a process “for
themselves.”

Final Reflections
Starting from some reﬂections on the recognized relevance of addressing
theory with reference to the teaer’s practice, in this apter we have
focused on the theme of the integration of resear and practice in teaer
education programs. Potari (2013) stresses some fundamental questions
related to this theme. Among them: “Can the ﬁndings and methodological
as well as theoretical tools that have been developed in the community of
researers be meaningful for the teaers? What kind of conﬂicts and
contradictions seem to emerge from this integration?” (p. 2).
Our vision of the teaer as a decision maker and our experience as both
researers and teaer educators has suggested to us how to address these
resear questions. In order for theoretically relevant resear to have a
direct and eﬀective inﬂuence on teaers, some fundamental conditions
have to be met: (1) teaers must be able to “absorb” this resear and
become aware of its incidence in their professionalism and “decision
making”; (2) the resear itself must be conveyed in forms that are
accessible also to practitioners; and (3) institutional initiatives have to be
promoted, in a perspective of long-life learning, to increase knowledge,
exange, and communication between teaers and researers so that
consolidated resear results can become constructs and terms used for
practice and in practice. In tune with these ideas, the methodology that
aracterizes our work with teaers is, therefore, conceived as a way of
fostering teaers’ development of a “theoretical awareness” (i.e. an
awareness of the usefulness of theory in their professionals experience) that
could enable him/her become a more effective decision maker.
e approa we have presented is in tune with the evolution of those
theoretical studies that have led to an improvement of the teaers’
developmental practices in the realm of educational projects realized by
means of activities of joint actions and reﬂections between researers.

rough the support that researers give to teaers in their approa to
the theoretical study, the acquired theoretical references frame and scaﬀold
the teaers’ analysis of their own practice, helping the gradual
development of self-awareness and the growth of a new identity.
The M-AEAB theoretical construct—a resear product initially conceived
as a tool for researers in their analysis of the teaing/learning processes
—has now become, thanks to the evolution of our methodology, a tool for
teaer education practice. e example we have proposed shows how this
construct could be used by teaers (initially in the “analysis of the practice
of others” and then also in the “analysis of one’s own practice”) to identify
their aitudes and behaviors in guiding students toward an aware and
eﬀective construction of mathematical meanings. is observation enables
to focus on a ﬁrst signiﬁcance of this example: the evolution of a dialogic
comparison between researers and teaers can reduce the separation
between theory and practice.12 For this reason, our approa could be
considered a meaningful prototype of desirable training processes, since it
represents an example of the kind of resear that, according to Goodild
(2008), can have a positive inﬂuence on both resear and practice for
teachers, students and researchers themselves.
However, our example also testiﬁes the diﬃculties faced by teaers in
overcoming the gap between analyzing the practice of others and analyzing
their own practice. Despite the real appreciation of theory that teaers
display, their assimilation of the theoretical lenses seems to be slow and
diﬃcult, probably because of the emotional distance it requires and because
of the diﬃculties they face in confronting themselves. is diﬃcult
assimilation could be explained by referring to Simon’s (2013) idea of
“major assimilatory structures of teaers.” Simon, indeed, highlights that
these structures, whi determine what teaers perceive and the sense
made of these perceptions, are unlikely to be aﬀected directly by a single
type of teaer professional development experience. He stresses that “the

allenge is to develop comprehensive approaes to teaer education and
professional development that are monitored in terms of teaers’ ongoing
assimilation of these experiences” (Simon, 2013, p. 581).
is consideration enables us to shi our aention to the possible ways
in whi the kind of resear we are performing can really aﬀect practice,
overcoming what Simon calls “teachers’ resistance to change.”
A possible focus of our future studies could be to plan appropriate
training activities in preservice education, with the aim of enabling future
teaers to develop those sensitivities that could minimize the gap between
the analysis of the other practice and the analysis of their own practice.
Another possible answer to the question of developing a resear that
could really aﬀect practice is developing these educational activities in the
long term. However a long-term development requires a socio-educational
political plan that involves a sharp dialogue between the resear world
and the world of educational institutions, at all levels (local, national and
international). is would involve also the training of teaer educators in
order to allow a real circulation of these methodologies. As regards these
aspects, aention has recently been focused on the institutional contexts of
reference for teaers and on the inﬂuences of the practice they promote in
order to foster teaer professional development (Krainer, 2011; Arzarello
et al., 2014).
A fundamental—and still open—aspect to be considered is how to test the
teaer ange and the stability of this ange, considering the long time
this complex process requires. Although many studies have proposed
diﬀerent ways of describing teaer ange (see for instance Sowder, 2007),
the problem of how to test teaer ange is still open, as Koellner et al.
(2007) testify, stating that most of professional development programs “are
still in their infancy with respect to resear data on their enactment and
impact” (p. 300). Moreover, even if sometimes teaer ange could be
observed, the constitution of a new stable teaer identity is diﬃcult to

highlight, because of the la of both long-term institutional teaer
education paths and effective tools to analyze this complex evolution.
Another ﬁnal reﬂection could be made in relation to the way that the
eﬀects of teaer education on student learning are measured. An analytical
study of the interrelationships between the teaer’s evolution and the
mathematical growth of students, to be developed within communities of
inquiry through articulated experimentations, is required. is kind of
investigation is complex but desirable.

Notes
1. e concept of teaer’ s practice to whi we will refer is an open and complex one by Simon
and Tzur (1999): “By teaers’ practice, I mean not only everything teaers do that contributes
to their teaing (planning, assessing, interacting with students) but also everything teaers
think about, know, and believe about what they do. In addition, teaers’ intuitions, skills,
values, and feelings about what they do are part of their practice. us, we see a teaer’s
practice as a conglomerate that cannot be understood by looking at parts split oﬀ from the
whole (i.e., looking only at beliefs or methods of questioning or mathematical knowledge)” (pp.
253–254).
2. Roesken (2011) stresses that terms su as “teaer ange,” “professional development,”
“professional growth,” “teaer development … are used simultaneously but not consistently in
the international discussion to describe the ﬁeld of providing help for practicing teaers” (p. 7).
She develops a detailed study on the diﬀerences and the interconnections among these notions,
to which we refer for an in-depth analysis.
3. In this apter and also in Goodild (2008) university researers are referred to as didacticians
because teachers are also held to be researchers.
4. e ArAl Project (Malara & Navarra, 2003) is a wide and articulated project devoted to the
renewal of arithmetic and algebra teaing, as well as to the professional development of
teaers. It promotes, since early grades, a relational view of arithmetic and a linguistic and
socio-constructive approa to algebra conceived as a tool for reasoning. It develops through two
intertwined educational paths: the ﬁrst one is devoted to the planning and the implementation
of class activities and to the analysis of students learning; the second is aimed at a renovation of
teaer professionalism through individual and shared reﬂective practices on the activated
didactical processes.
5. As it has also been stressed in Malara and Zan (2008), we think that the use of videos of
classroom processes in teacher education is important because it can help teachers analyse the use
and incidence of nonverbal language, as well as the participation of the whole class. However we
believe that the videos, because of their dynamicity, do not enable an analytical study of class
processes. Moreover, as observed by Coles (2013), during the analysis of videos teaers oen

divert from the objective of their observation, making judgments instead of trying to interpret
the reasons of their actions. anks to the transcripts, the interaction process becomes
crystallized, enabling both to analyze the diﬀerent micro-situations and the speciﬁc expressions
used and to connect and globally control them.
6. Harel (2010) stresses that “aention to mathematical content is peripheral in many current
frameworks and studies in mathematics education…. Oen, upon reading a report on su a
study, one is le with the impression that the report would remain intact if ea mention of
diﬀerent academic subject su history, biology, or physics. ere is a risk that, if this continues,
mathematics education research will likely lose its identity”(p. 343).
7. Roesken (2011) states that the issue raised by Ball (2000) should not be neglected, that our
tendency to focus either on the cognitive domain (e.g. knowledge) or teaers’ action “is yet one
more recent form of fragmentation in teaers education, and in particular, in our eﬀorts to help
teachers acquire usable content knowledge” (p. 246).
8. Arzarello et al. (2001) deﬁne conceptual frames as an organized set of notions (mathematical
objects, properties, algorithms to be used, reasoning strategies, and so on), whi suggests how to
reason, manipulate formulas, and anticipate results while coping with a problem.
9. In order to beer highlight the meaning of this term, we quote Vygotsky’s words: “Children can
imitate a variety of actions that go well beyond the limits of their own capabilities. Using
imitation, ildren are capable of doing mu more in collective activity or under the guidance
of adults” (1978, p. 88).
10. Once the required conjecture has been formulated (that is: the sum is always a multiple of 3 and
in particular, the triple of the consecutive of the initial number), the student has to activate the
frame “consecutive number” in order to generate the expression n + n + 1 + n + 2. Aerward, if
the expression 3n + 3 is produced by a correct syntactical transformation, the frame “multiple”
(and a consequent correct anticipating thought) must be activated in order to become aware of
the need of factorizing the expression into the new expression 3(n + 1), whi can beer
highlight, through a good coordination between the frame “multiple” and the frame
“consecutive number,” what has been conjectured.
11. e teaer ose to separately enumerate in sequence her interventions (indicated with T) and
her students’ interventions (every student is represented with a different letter).

12. is is in tune with what has been discussed in Malara and Zan (2008), where the positive
eﬀects, on both theory and practice, of the dialogical interanges between teaers and
researchers are highlighted.

References
Artigue, M. (2011). Review of Bharath Sriraman & Lyn English, “eories of mathematics education
—seeking new frontiers.” Research in Mathematics Education, 13(3), 311–316.
Arzarello, F., Bazzini, L., & Chiappini, G. (2001). A model for analyzing algebraic thinking. In R.
Sutherland, T. Rojano, A. Bell, & R. Lins (Eds.), Perspectives on sool algebra (pp.61–81).
Dortrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Arzarello, F., Robui, O., Sabena, C., Cusi, A., Garuti, R., Malara, N. A., & Martignone, F. (2014).
Meta-didactical transposition: a theoretical model for teaer education programs. In A. Clark-
Wilson, O. Robui, & N. Sinclair (Eds.), e mathematics teaer in the digital era: Vol. 2. An
international perspective on tenology focused professional development (pp. 347–372).
Dordrecht: Springer.
Ball, D. (2000). Bridging practices. Intertwining content and pedagogy in teaing and learning to
teach. Journal of Teacher Education, 5(3), 241–247.
Ball, D. L., ames, M. H., & Phelps, G. (2008). Content knowledge for teaing: What makes it
special? Journal of Teacher Education, 59(5), 389–407.
Barwell, R. (2013), Discursive psyology as an alternative perspective on mathematics teaer
knowledge. ZDM: The International Journal of Mathematics Education, 45, 595–606.
Bishop, A. J. (1998). Resear and practioners. In J. Kilpatri & A. Sierpinska (Eds.), Mathematics
education as a resear domain: A sear for identity  (pp. 33–45). Dordret: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Boaler, J. (2008). Bridging the gap between resear and practice: International examples of success.
In M. Menghini, F. Furinghei, L. Giacardi, & F. Arzarello (Eds.), e ﬁrst century of the
international commission on mathematical instruction (1908–2008) (pp. 91–112). Roma: Instituto
della Enciclopedia Italiana.
Boero, P. (2001). Transformation and anticipation as key processes in algebraic problem solving. In R.
Sutherland, T. Rojano, A. Bell, & R. Lins (Eds.), Perspectives on sool algebra (pp. 99–119).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Borko, H., & Putnam, R. (1995). Expanding a teaers’ knowledge base: A cognitive psyological
perspective on professional development. In T. Guskey & M. Huberman (Eds.), Professional

development in education: New paradigms and practices (pp. 35–65). New York: Teaers College
Press.
Carpenter, T. (1988). Teaing as problem solving. In R. Charles & E. Silver (Eds.), e teaing and
assessing of mathematical problem solving (pp. 187–202). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Chapman, O., & Heater, B. (2010). Understanding ange through a high sool mathematics
teaer’s journey to inquiry-based teaing. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 13,
445–458.
Cobb, P. (2007). Puing philosophy to work: Coping with multiple theoretical perspectives. In F. K.
Lester, Jr. (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning: A project of
the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (pp. 3–38). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.
Coran-Smith, M., & Lytle, S. (1999). Relationship of knowledge and practice. Teaer learning in
communities. In A. Iran-Nejad & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Review of Resear in Education (Vol. 24,
pp. 249–305). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Coles, A. (2013). Using video for professional development: the role of the discussion facilitator.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 16, 165–184.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaing the cra of
reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnik (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction (pp.
453–494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cusi, A. (2008). An approa to proof in elementary number theory focused on representation and
interpretation aspects: e teaer’s role. In B. Czarnoa (Ed.), Handbook of mathematics
teaching research (pp. 107–122). Rzeszów: Rzeszów University Press.
Cusi, A. (2009). Interrelation between anticipating thought and interpretative aspects in the use of
algebraic language for the construction of proofs. In V. Durand-Guerrier, S. Soury-Lavergne, & F.
Arzarello (Eds.), Proceedings of 6th CERME Conference (pp. 469–478). Lyon: Service des
publications, INRP.
Cusi, A., & Malara, N. A. (2008). Approaing early algebra: Teaers educational process and
classroom experiences. Quadrante, 16(1), 57–80.
Cusi, A., & Malara, N. A. (2009). e role of the teaer in developing proof activities by means of
algebraic language. In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, & H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the

33rd Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol.
2, pp. 361–368). Thessaloniki, Greece.
Cusi, A., & Malara, N. A. (2011). Analysis of the teaer’s role in an approa to algebra as a tool for
thinking: problems pointed out during laboratorial activities with perspective teaers. In M.
Pytlak, T. Rowland, & E. Swoboda (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th Congress of the European
Society for Research in Mathematics Education (pp. 2619–2629). Rzeszow, Poland.
Cusi, A., & Malara, N. A. (2012). Educational processes in early algebra to promote a linguistic
approa: behavior and emerging awareness in teaers. In L. Coulange, J.P. Drouhard, J. L.
Dorier, & A. Robert (Eds.), Reeres en didactique des mathématiques, Numéro spécial hors-
série, Enseignement de l’algèbre élémentaire: bilan et perspectives (pp. 299–319). Grenoble: La
Pensée Sauvage.
Cusi, A., & Malara, N. A. (2013). A theoretical construct to analyze the teaer’s role during
introductory activities to algebraic modelling. In B. Ubuz, C. Haser, & M. A. Marioi (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 8th Congress of the European Society for Resear in Mathematics Education
(pp. 3015–3024). Antalya, Turkey.
Cusi, A., Malara, N. A., & Navarra, G. (2011). Early algebra: eoretical issues and educational
strategies for bringing the teaers to promote a linguistic and metacognitive approa to it. In J.
Cai & E. Knuth (Eds.), Early algebraization: Cognitive, curricular, and instructional perspectives
(pp. 483–510). Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer.
Duval, R. (2006). A cognitive analysis of problems of comprehension in a learning of mathematics.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 61, 103–131.
Freudenthal, H. (1983). Major problems of mathematics education. In M. Zweng, T. Green, J.
Kilpatri, H. Polla, & M. Suydam (Eds.), Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress on
Mathematical Education (pp. 1–7). Boston: Birkhäuser.
Goodild, S. (2008). A quest for ‘good’ resear: e mathematics teaer educator as practitioner
researer in a community of inquiry. In B. Jaworski & T. Wood (Eds.), International handbook
of mathematics teaers education: Volume 4. Mathematics teaer educator as a developing
professional (pp. 201–220). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Goos, M. (2013). Sociocultural perspectives in resear on and with mathematics teaers: a zone
theory approach. ZDM: The International Journal of Mathematics Education, 45, 521–533.

Harel, G. (2010). Commentary on ‘On the theoretical, conceptual, and philosophical foundations for
resear in mathematics education’. In B. Sriraman & L. English (Eds.), eories of mathematics
education: Seeking new frontiers (pp. 87–95). Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Science.
Jaworski, B. (1998). Mathematics teaer resear: Process, practice and the development of teaing.
Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 1, 3–31.
Jaworski, B. (2004). Grappling with complexity: Co-learning in inquiry communities in mathematics
teaing development. In M. J. Hoines & A. B. Fuglestad (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th
Conference of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1n pp.
17–36). Bergen, Norway.
Jaworski, B. (2006). eory and practice in mathematics teaing development: Critical inquiry as a
mode of learning in teaching. Journal of Mathematics Teacher, 9, 187–211.
Jaworski, B. (2008), Development of mathematics teaers educators and its relation to teaing
development. In B. Jaworski & T. Wood (Eds.), International handbook of mathematics teaers
education: Volume 4. Mathematics teaer educator as a developing professional (pp. 335–361).
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Jaworski, B. (2012). Mathematics teaing development as a human practice: Identifying and
drawing the threads. ZDM. The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 44, 613–625.
Kieran, C., Krainer, K., & Shaughnessy, J. M. (2013). Linking resear to practice: Teaers as key
stakeholders in mathematics education resear. In M. A. Clements, A. Bishop, C. Keitel-Kreidt,
J. Kilpatri, & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.), ird international handbook of mathematics education (pp.
361–392). New York: Springer Science & Business.
Kilpatri, J. (1981). e reasonable ineﬀectiveness of resear in mathematics education. For the
Learning of Mathematics, 2(2), 22–29.
Koellner, K., Jacobs, J., Borko, H., Sneider, C., Piman, M.E., Eiteljorg, E., Bunning, K., &
Frykholm, J. (2007). e problem-solving cycle: A model to support the development of teaers’
professional knowledge. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 9(3), 273–303.
Krainer, K. (2011). Teaers as stakeholders in mathematics education resear. In B. Ubuz (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 35th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp. 47–62). Ankara, Turkey.
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness and personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Lerman, S. (2000). e social turn in mathematics education resear. In J. Boaler (Ed.), Multiple
perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 19–44). Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing.
Lerman, S. (2006). eories of mathematics education: Is plurality a problem? ZDM: e
International Journal of mathematics Education, 38, 8–13.
Lerman, S. (2013). eories in practices: Mathematics teaing and mathematics teaers education.
ZDM: The International Journal of Mathematics Education, 45, 623–631.
Lester, F., & Wiliam, D. (2002). On the purpose of mathematics education resear: Making
productive contributions to policy and practice. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international
research in mathematics education (pp. 489–506). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Malara, N. A. (2003). Dialectics between theory and practice: eoretical issues and aspects of
practice from an early algebra project. In N. A. Pateman, B. J. Dougherty, & J. T. Zilliox (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 27th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of
Mathematics Education (Vol.1, pp. 33–48). Honolulu.
Malara, N. A., & Navarra, G. (2003). ArAl Project: Arithmetic pathways towards pre-algebraic
thinking. Bologna: Pitagora.
Malara, N. A., & Navarra, G. (2011). Multicommented transcripts methodology as an educational
tool for teaers involved in early algebra. In M. Pytlak, E. Swoboda, & T. Rowland (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 7th Congress of the European Society for Resear in Mathematics Education
(pp. 2737–2745). Rzezsow (Poland).
Malara, N. A., & Zan, R. (2008). e complex interplay between theory and practice: reﬂections and
examples. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd
ed., pp. 539–564). New York: Routledge.
Marton, F., & Morris, P. (2002). What maers? Discovering critical conditions of classroom learning.
Goteborg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensins.
Mason, J. (1990). Reﬂection on dialogue between theory and practice, reconciled by awareness. In F
Seeger & H. Steinbring (Eds.), e dialogue between theory and practice in mathematics
education: Overcoming the broadcast metaphor. Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on
Systematic Cooperation Between eory and Practice in Mathematics Education. Matherialen
und Studien, band 38 (pp. 177–192). Bielefeld: Institut für Didaktik der Mathematik.
Mason, J. (1998). Enabling teaers to be real teaers: Necessary levels of awareness and structure of

attention. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 1, 243–267.
Mason, J. (2002). Researching your own practice: The discipline of noticing. London: Falmer Press.
Mason, J. (2008). Being mathematical with and in front of learners. In B. Jaworski & T. Wood (Eds.),
International handbook of mathematics teaers education: Volume 4. Mathematics teaer
educator as a developing professional (p. 31–55). Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Mellone, M. (2011). e inﬂuence of theoretical tools on teaers’ orientation to notice and
classroom practice: A case study. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 14, 269–284.
Niss, M. (2007). Reﬂections on the state and trends in resear on mathematics teaing and
learning. From here to utopia. In F. K. Lester, Jr. (Ed.), Second handbook of resear on
mathematics teaing and learning: A project of the National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics (pp. 1293–1312). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Potari, D. (2013). e relationship of theory and practice in mathematics teaer professional
development: An activity theory perspective. ZDM: e International Journal of Mathematics
Education, 45, 507–519.
Riert, A. E. (1991). Using teaer cases or reﬂection and enhanced understanding. In A. Lieberman
& L. Miller (Eds.), Staﬀ development for education in the ’90s: New demands, new realities, new
perspectives (pp. 113–132). New York: Teachers College Press.
Roesken, B. (2011). Hidden dimension in the professional development of mathematics teaers.
Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Soenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, and
sense-making in mathematics. In D. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook for resear on mathematics
teaching and learning (pp. 334–370). New York: Macmillan.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2013). Classroom observations in theory and practice. ZDM: e International
Journal of Mathematics Education, 45, 607–621.
Shulman, L. S. (1986). ose who understand: Knowledge growth in teaing. Educational
Researcher, 15, 4–14.
Silver, E. A., & Herbst, P. G. (2007). eory in Mathematics Education Solarship. In F. K. Lester, Jr.
(Ed.), Second Handbook of Resear on Mathematics Teaing and Learning: A project of the
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics  (pp. 39–67). Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishing.

Simon, M. (2009). Amidst multiple theories of learning in mathematics education. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 40(5), 477–490.
Simon, M. (2013). Promoting fundamental ange in mathematics teaing: A theoretical,
methodological, and empirical approa to the problem. ZDM: e International Journal of
Mathematics Education, 45, 573–582.
Simon, M., & Tzur, R. (1999). Explicating the teaer’s perspective from the researers’ perspective:
generating accounts of mathematics teaers’ practice. Journal for Resear in Mathematics
Education, 30, 252–264.
Sowder, J. T. (2007). e mathematical education and development of teaers. In F. K. Lester, Jr.
(Ed.), Second handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning: A project of the
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics  (pp. 157–223). Charloe, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
Sriraman, B., & English, L. (2010). Series advances in mathematics education. eories of
mathematics education—Seeking new frontiers. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Science.
ames, M., & Van Zoest, L. (2013). Building coherence in resear on mathematics teaer
aracteristics by developing practice-based approaes. ZDM: e International Journal of
mathematics Education, 45, 583–594.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher mental processes. Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press.
White, A. L., Jaworski, B., Agudelo-Valderrama, C., & Gooya, Z. (2013). Teaers learning from
teaers. In M. A. Clements, A. Bishop, C. Keitel-Kreidt, J. Kilpatri, & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.),
ird international handbook of mathematics education (pp. 393–430). New York: Springer
Science & Business.
Wimann, E. C. (2001). Developing mathematics education in a systematic process. Educational
Studies in mathematics, 48, 1–20.

22 Knowledge Creation Through Dialogic
Interaction Between the Practices of
Teaching and Researching
Kenneth Ruthven
University of Cambridge, UK
Simon Goodchild
University of Agder, Norway

Introduction
is apter focuses on how the interplay between the practices of
researing and teaing can help to foster development of knowledge
about and for mathematics teaing. It will treat researching and teaching,
researcher and teacher, simply as convenient typiﬁcations, recognizing the
possibility that institutions and individuals may participate in both practices
and take on both roles. Moreover, as the previous sentence illustrates, this
apter will reserve practice for use in the sense of social practice; it will
employ the more direct terms teacher and teaching to refer to what some
sources speak of as practitioner and practice. Building on the view widely
held amongst mathematics educators that any communal knowledge base
for mathematics teaing should draw both on cra knowledge created
within the practice of teaing and on solarly knowledge created within
the practice of researing, the particular focus of this apter will be on
synergy between these practices, and on knowledge conversion between
them.

Knowledge Creation and Conversion Within
Teaching
Knowledge Creation Within Teaching: The
Significance of Craft Knowledge
Cra knowledge refers to the professional knowledge that teaers use in
their day-to-day classroom teaing, action-oriented knowledge that is not
generally made explicit by teaers, whi they may indeed ﬁnd diﬃcult to
articulate, or which they may even be unaware of using.
[C]ra knowledge describes the knowledge that arises from and, in turn, informs what teaers
do. As su, this knowledge is to be distinguished from other forms of knowledge that are not
linked to practice in this direct way. Cra knowledge is not, therefore, the kind of knowledge
that teaers draw on when explaining the thinking underlying their ideal teaing practices.
Neither is it knowledge drawn from theoretical sources. Professional cra knowledge can
certainly be (and oen is) informed by these sources, but it is of a far more practical nature than
these knowledge forms. Professional cra knowledge is the knowledge that teaers develop
through the processes of reflection and practical problem-solving that they engage in to carry out
the demands of their jobs.
(Cooper & McIntyre, 1996, p. 76)
ere is, then, a process of knowledge creation within teaing. rough
experimenting and problem solving in the course of teaing, and through
re-presenting teaing and reﬂecting on it, cra knowledge is developed
and shared within the profession. is can also incorporate a process of
knowledge conversion; by contextualizing and activating solarly
knowledge within teaing, it can be brought to contribute to the
development of craft knowledge.
From a cognitive point of view, professional knowledge is developed as a product of professional
action, and it establishes itself through work and performance in the profession, not merely
through accumulation of theoretical knowledge, but through the integration, tuning and
restructuring of theoretical knowledge to the demands of practical situations and constraints.

(Bromme & Tillema, 1995, p. 262)
Moreover, knowledge conversion can proceed in the opposite direction,
through eliciting cra knowledge and codifying it. us articulated through
researing, cra knowledge can be brought to contribute to the further
development of scholarly knowledge.
e next two sections illustrate knowledge conversion between teaers’
cra knowledge and researers’ solarly knowledge by considering two
projects osen because they are recognized as signiﬁcant pioneering
contributions to the ﬁeld, conducted in unusual depth. While the projects
share a concern with the teaing of mathematics at the elementary-sool
level, the second can be seen as providing a counterpoint to the ﬁrst, not
just in its pedagogical stance but in the form of knowledge conversion
involved. us, whereas the ﬁrst project illustrates an approa to eliciting
and codifying cra knowledge as solarly knowledge, the second,
conversely, illustrates an approa to contextualizing and activating
scholarly knowledge as craft knowledge.
Eliciting and Codifying Craft Knowledge: The
Example of Expert Direct Instruction
A program of resear that demonstrated the possibilities of eliciting and
codifying the cra knowledge of teaers was conducted by Leinhardt and
her associates (1988a; 1989; Leinhardt, Putnam, Stein, & Baxter, 1991),
employing concepts and methods drawn from a strand of cognitive science
resear that focuses on the analysis of expertise. Instruction was analyzed
by observing teaers in action in the classroom, and by interviewing them
about their thinking. Teaers were identiﬁed as “experts” on the basis of
their consistency in producing both high gains in student aievement and
high levels of ﬁnal aievement. Compared with novice teaers, the

instruction—and underlying cognition—of these expert teaers was
characterized in the following terms:
Expert teaers use many complex cognitive skills, weaving together elegant lessons that are
made up of many smaller lesson segments. ese segments, in turn, depend on small, socially
scripted pieces of behavior called routines, whi teaers… use extensively. Expert teaers also
have a ri repertoire of instructional scripts that are updated and revised throughout their
personal history of teaing. Teaers are ﬂexible, precise and parsimonious planners. at is,
they plan what they need to but not what they already know and do automatically. Experts
plan beer than novices in the sense of eﬃciency and in terms of the mental outline from whi
they operate… From that more global plan… they select an agenda for a lesson… e agenda
serves not only to set up and coordinate the lesson segments but also to lay out the strategy for
actually explaining the mathematical topic under consideration. e ensuing explanations are
developed from a system of goals and actions that the teaer has for ensuring that the students
understand the particular piece of mathematics.
(Leinhardt et al., 1991, p. 88)
As analyzed here, then, the expertise of outstanding teaers is many-
layered. Most readily articulated are the processes of deliberate analysis
involved in the pre-active framing of a lesson agenda, in its interactive
accomplishment—and adaptation—within the lesson, and in post-active
review. Most easily neglected are those largely reﬂex aspects of action and
interaction, exempliﬁed by the classroom routines through whi the
stability and predictability of classroom activity is produced. Leinhardt
suggests that: “[the] importance [of routines] is oen overlooked because
spontaneity, ﬂexibility and responsiveness are so highly valued in our
culture, especially by educators” (1988a, p. 49). Equally, one could
conjecture that routines receive less recognition precisely because they have
become so reﬂex for expert teaers, in contrast to those aspects of
teaing that command their deliberate aention and continue to exercise
them.
is body of work analyses teaers’ pedagogical knowledge and
reasoning in terms of constructs of “script,” “agenda,” and “explanation.” A
teaer’s script for a particular curricular topic is viewed as a loosely

ordered repertoire of goals, tasks, and actions, continually developed and
reﬁned over time; it incorporates sequences of action and argumentation,
relevant representations and explanations, and markers for anticipated
student diﬃculties. e most important feature of a script is the way in
whi it acts as an organizing structure, coordinating knowledge of subject
and pedagogy with reasoning about actions and goals, hence underpinning
the eﬃcient and cohesive planning and development of lessons. Su a
script provides a matrix of knowledge supporting the seing of a lesson
“agenda”: a mental plan including lesson goals, actions through whi these
goals can be achieved, expectations about the sequencing of actions through
the lesson, and important decision points within the lesson. e agendas of
the expert teaers studied by Leinhardt showed more developed
instructional logic and smoother ﬂow, and they took more account of
students’ actions and reasoning, and sought more evidence of these. A
crucial element of any script is its “explanation” of ea new idea. Several
elements contribute to the eﬀectiveness of the explanations of expert
teaers: anticipation of prerequisite ideas and skills; motivation of the new
idea; speciﬁcation of its conditions of use; principled legitimation of the new
idea; integration of diﬀerent elements of the explanation; and completion of
the explanation.
An unexpected ﬁnding concerned the way in whi expert teaers
attended to the thinking of students:
[Teaers] did build models, but in diﬀerent ways than we had anticipated. Teaers seem to
construct flags for themselves that signal material that will cause difficulty as it is being learned,
and then they adjust their teaing of the topic in response to those ﬂags or to past successes.
ey seem to diagnose their teaing and its cycle rather than diagnosing the mental
representation of a particular student. A major goal of teaing seems to be to move through a
script, making only modest adjustments on line in response to unique student needs.
(Leinhardt, 1988a, pp. 51–52)
Indeed, this was one consideration that led to the value of the teaing

practice of whi these studies built a model being questioned by some
mathematics educators: “[O]n at least two points is this model laing: the
mathematics that students are being asked to learn and the la of aention
to individuals” (Fennema & Franke, 1992, p. 159). ese two points were
related: “Although teaers may be able to aieve short-term
computational goals without aending to students’ knowledge, they may
need to understand students’ thinking to facilitate students’ growth in
understanding and problem solving” (Carpenter, Fennema, Peterson,
Chiang, & Loef, 1989, p. 502).
Leinhardt did acknowledge the need to study other forms of teaching:
Although our experts have been shown to be responsive and supportive of student eﬀorts to learn
key concepts and procedures, the content, method, and direction of their lessons are situated
primarily with the teaer. Cognitively based learning theories, however, suggest that it is
pedagogically sound and cognitively necessary for students to have a role in determining the
method and direction of their own learning … A key feature of [future] studies will be the
distinction between the explanations that are essentially designed by teaers in advance, and
those which students play an active role in constructing during classroom dialogue.
(Leinhardt et al., 1991, p. 111)
However, conducting su studies is problematic if teaers have not
developed pedagogical models compatible with su cognitively based
learning theories. A major limitation inherent in simply studying expert
teaers within an established pedagogical system is conﬁnement to that
system. e development of new forms of pedagogy calls for some form of
intervention.
Contextualizing and Activating Scholarly
Knowledge: The Example of Cognitively Guided
Instruction

A program of resear into Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI)
(Carpenter et al., 1989; Peterson Fennema, & Carpenter, 1991; Fennema,
Carpenter, Franke, Levi, Jacobs, & Empson, 1996) addressed this issue of
how new forms of pedagogy might be developed through contextualizing
and activating scholarly knowledge. Its central hypothesis was that:
Resear provides detailed knowledge about ildren’s thinking and problem solving that, if
available to teaers, might aﬀect their knowledge of their own students and their planning of
instruction.
(Carpenter et al., 1989, p. 502)
is quotation signals that it is important to distinguish multiple senses of
“knowledge” about “ildren’s thinking” in considering this body of work.
First, there is an important distinction between some overaring model of
ildren’s thinking, as against information about the thinking of particular
ildren. ere is then a further distinction between su models in general,
as against the particular one adopted by the researers. e solarly
knowledge primarily in play in this project was a cognitive model
(developed by Carpenter and his colleagues in earlier resear) that
classiﬁed arithmetic word problems and the solution strategies adopted by
students, and described progression in students’ thinking in terms of their
anging use of particular types of solution strategy in response to
particular types of problem.
Another study examined what knowledge experienced teaers already
had available to analyze su issues (Carpenter, Fennema, Peterson, &
Carey, 1988). Teaers were presented with tasks related to teaing, su
as creating a word problem corresponding to a given number equation,
assessing the relative diﬃculty of word problems, and—aer viewing
particular students solving problems—predicting how students would solve
others. Most teaers proved relatively successful on su tasks, particularly
those involving the types of problem commonly encountered at the grade

level at whi they taught. Although many teaers found it diﬃcult to
articulate the basis on whi they made su judgments, they clearly had
developed relevant knowledge. Moreover, the form that this cra
knowledge took seems to have reﬂected the circumstances of their
teaing. Teaers appear to have been oriented towards helping students
to infer the computation expected through identifying cue words within a
problem statement or visualizing the action involved.
By contrast, the CGI program was based on the conjecture that
organizing classroom activity around less-structured problem solving, and
developing pedagogical strategies to focus aention on the solution
strategies devised by students themselves, would prove beneﬁcial to
student learning. Consequently, the professional development program
associated with CGI aimed to familiarize teaers with the particular
resear-based model developed by Carpenter and colleagues, as a more
powerful means of conceptualizing problem and strategy types, and of
relating these to problem diﬃculty and student progression. Carefully
osen videotaped recordings of individual ildren solving problems were
used as the stimulus for discussions aimed at highlighting key distinctions
within the model, and at clarifying its use to aracterize the mathematical
thinking of particular ildren. Teaers were also encouraged to test out
the model by presenting agreed problems to ildren in their own class and
recording their solutions for further discussion in workshops.
In addition, teaers were invited to reﬂect on how the model could be
exploited in teaing. While the program emphasized that it was teaers
themselves who were best placed to make informed decisions about how
the model should and could be used in their classrooms, the researers
acknowledge their influence on teachers’ thinking about such matters:
We do not believe that we did not inﬂuence directly what teaers did in classrooms. e
mathematical content we showed and discussed with them was based almost exclusively on
word problems. e videotapes were of individual interviewers asking a ild to solve word

problems, waiting while the ild solved the problem, and asking questions su as “How did
you get that answer?” or “Could you show me what you did?” Teaers were encouraged to ask
ildren to solve word problems and ascertain how the problems were solved. We did not,
however, directly prescribe either pedagogy or curriculum for teachers.
(Fennema et al., 1996, pp. 408–409)
e double negative in the opening sentence of this quotation, the
distinction between “inﬂuence” at the start and “prescribe” at the close,
signals the complexities and ambiguities of the line that the researers
were treading in their relationships with teaers. What this approa
recognized was that the types of questioning shown in the resear
interviews with single students would need adaptation in order to become
functional components of classroom teaing aimed at the longer-term
traversal of a curriculum by a whole class of students. Equally, teaers
would have to integrate use of the cognitive model into facets of their
practice su as lesson planning, classroom organization, and interactive
questioning, by adapting established aspects of their cra knowledge and
possibly developing them to create new approaes to planning,
organization, and questioning.
Indeed, it transpired that this process of knowledge conversion through
whi teaers appropriated the cognitive model and adapted their cra
knowledge accordingly could lead teaers to use the model in ways not
anticipated by the researers. A further study reported on an exceptional
teaer who had already established a powerful social environment for
learning in her classroom. She had been able to contextualize and activate
the cognitive model for her purposes in managing that environment, to
strengthen the allenges she set for her students and to sharpen her
understanding of their responses. However, the researers were surprised
by some features of her approach:
Ms J did not use knowledge of ildren’s thinking in the way we had anticipated … Because
these problems were organized into a hierary of diﬃculty determined by the reasonably well-

deﬁned levels that ildren move through as they learn to solve the problems, we expected that
teaers would … use the knowledge more or less as a template to assess what … students knew
and then to systematically select more diﬃcult problems for the ildren to solve … e
hierary of problem types and solution strategies would be used systematically to make both
daily and long-term instructional decisions. Ms J did not do what we had anticipated. Although
at times she made use of the speciﬁcs of the hierary … we were unable to identify any
systematic way in which she selected problems … Instead, she used the knowledge about problem
types to dramatically broaden the scope of her curriculum and her expectations of ildren. She
used all problem types from almost the ﬁrst week of sool, and ildren in her class had many
opportunities to solve all types of problems using whatever solution strategy they chose.
(Fennema et al., 1993, p. 578)
CGI, thus, provides a particularly fully researed example of a program
that has enabled teaers to contextualize and activate solarly knowledge
in their professional work, provoking a corresponding adaptation and
development of their craft knowledge.

A Dialogic Cycle of Knowledge Creation and
Conversion
Establishing a Dialogic Cycle: Coupling the
Construction and Conversion of Scholarly and
Craft Knowledge
ese examples point to a dialogic cycle of knowledge creation (Ruthven,
2002). In one phase of this cycle (exempliﬁed by the CGI program),
solarly knowledge is (re)contextualized and activated within teaing,
stimulating (re)construction of cra knowledge. In the complementary
phase (exempliﬁed by the Leinhardt program), cra knowledge is elicited
and codiﬁed through researing, stimulating (re)construction of solarly
knowledge. In both phases, conversion involves the ﬁltering and
reformulating of knowledge: only certain derivatives of solarly
knowledge will prove capable of being productively incorporated within
cra knowledge; equally, only some derivatives of cra knowledge will
prove able to be fruitfully appropriated as scholarly knowledge.
Huberman (1993) has pointed to the beneﬁts of “sustained interaction”
between researers (or researing) and teaers (or teaing), and to how
the disruptions of taken-for-granted views that arise in the course of su
collaboration stimulate rethinking:
[O]nce they get beyond the initial discomfort of deﬁning common meanings and of working out
the social dynamics of their encounters, ea party is bound to be surprised or annoyed or even
shaken by some of the information and the reasoning put forth by the other party. Both bodies
of knowledge are “valid,” albeit on diﬀerent grounds, and both are contending for salience and
prominence. Were the researers and [teaers] to remain among themselves, there would
probably be far fewer instances of cognitive shifts.
(Huberman, 1993, p. 50)

Figure 22.1 Establishing a dialogic cycle of knowledge creation (Ruthven, 2002).
Clearly, then, su sustained interaction can make an important
contribution to the professional development of teaers. is has
encouraged approaes to professional development in whi solarly
knowledge from resear is tested by teaers in their own classrooms in
terms of the insight it provides into teaing and learning processes, and of
the support it oﬀers in improving the quality of these processes. However,
because teaing calls for “a highly eﬃcient collection of heuristics … for
the solution of very speciﬁc problems” (Leinhardt, 1988b, p. 146), an
essential component of the dialogic knowledge-creation cycle outlined
earlier is development of appropriate cra knowledge by teaers

participating in the resear. Eliciting and codifying this cra knowledge
has the potential to improve the eﬀectiveness with whi coaing of other
teaers can be undertaken, by providing more explicit frameworks for
analyzing teaing processes, for articulating meanisms and functions,
and for understanding adaptation to different conditions.
e resources and strategies available to teaers shape not only their
approaes to teaing but also their thinking about it. Initiating and
sustaining the dialogic cycle of knowledge creation and conversion can be
assisted by seeking to develop some kind of didactical apparatus, and the
modes of activity and forms of discourse that mediate use of that apparatus.
In the earlier illustration of CGI, for example, key artifacts were the map of
problem types and solution strategies, and the repertoire of interaction
paerns and questioning forms employed to probe students’ reasoning.
Likewise, in the earlier illustration of expert direct instruction, resear
analysis provided explicit models of didactical systems and their component
parts in terms of prototypical “scripts,” “agendas,” and “explanations” for
particular topics. Structuring apparatus of these types can provide
important underpinning for the wider diﬀusion and adaptation of new
knowledge (Ruthven, 2005). First, su apparatus has a symbolic function,
signifying the associated didactical system. Second, of course, it has a
pragmatic function, providing a means of structuring and regulating activity
in accordance with the didactical system. ird, this apparatus and its
associated discourse have an epistemic function, crystallizing the key ideas
of the didactical system. Finally, inasmu as su apparatus and its
associated discourse incorporate explicit ﬂexibility (and are seen as doing
so), they serve a heuristic function, assisting thoughtful interpretation and
local reformulation of the didactical system.
Since initial presentation of the dialogic cycle model (Ruthven, 2002), two
particular proposals have been made on how to realize and develop it
further around particular forms of structuring apparatus. e next two

sections of the chapter explore these.
Developing the Dialogic Cycle: Design and
Analysis of Substantial Learning Environments
Wimann has pointed to the signiﬁcance of a type of structuring apparatus,
the substantial learning environment, whi he deﬁnes in the following
terms:
A teaching/learning unit with the following properties:
(1)  It represents central objectives, contents and principles of teaing
mathematics at a certain level.
(2)  It is related to signiﬁcant mathematical contents, processes and
procedures beyond this level, and is a ri source of mathematical
activities.
(3) It is flexible and can be adapted to the special conditions of a classroom.
(4)  It integrates mathematical, psyological, and pedagogical aspects of
teaching mathematics, and so it forms a rich field for empirical research.
(Wittmann, 2001, p. 2)
Wimann’s adaptation of the dialogic cycle model (Figure 22.2), places su
environments at the center of the processes of knowledge creation, use, and
conversion. He argues that su environments can play an important role
for both researers and teaers, “as common points of reference, as knots
in the collective memory, and as stimuli for action” (2001, p. 4).
In eﬀect, Wimann proposes to recast mathematics education as a
“design science” in whi the teaing/learning units that he refers to as
substantial learning environments serve as boundary-spanning artifacts
between the practices of researing and teaing. is, in turn, raises the

question of the role of cra knowledge within design resear. A recent
review examined researer–teaer interaction within design-resear
projects (Ormel, Pareja-Roblin, McKenney, Voogt, & Pieters, 2012). e
review distinguishes between “collaborative” approaes in whi teaers
and researers work closely together on design, and “cooperative”
approaes in whi a more traditional diﬀerentiation of researer and
teaer roles persists. However, perhaps the most important ﬁnding is that
such interaction is little examined in reports on design research:
Especially in the small-scale projects, the interaction between [teaers and researers] is more
collaborative than cooperative: when designing together, both contributing from their own
expertise and sharing responsibility for the results. In contrast, the studies on larger projects
suggest that interaction is more cooperative (researers are accountable for resear tasks,
teaers are accountable for teaing tasks) and with less collaborative or shared responsibilities.
It must be noted, however, that often very few details are provided about the interaction.
(Ormel et al., 2012, pp. 975–976)
Similarly, analyzing the sources of knowledge referred to in these design-
resear reports, perhaps the most important ﬁnding is the degree to whi
teaching craft knowledge is overlooked or unacknowledged:
Most design resear projects found in this review use literature and/or project data to inform
the design of instructional solutions. Less than half of the reports discuss practical knowledge
informing the design of instructional solutions. While this suggests that practical knowledge
does not necessarily play an important role in these projects, it is also possible that discussion of
practical knowledge was strategically omied, perhaps in an aempt to render articles more
attractive to publication in journals that do not value this orientation.
(Ormel et al., 2012, p. 981)

Figure 22.2  Substantial learning environments at the heart of the dialogic cycle (Wittmann, 2001).
Pursuing Wimann’s proposal, then, to organize the dialogic cycle around
substantial learning environments calls for approaes to design resear
that give more aention to the development and elicitation of cra
knowledge underpinning their use.
Developing the Dialogic Cycle: Collaborative
Video Analysis of Lesson Sequences
Another development of the dialogic cycle model can be found in Hennessy
and Deaney’s (2009) approa to collaborative video analysis in developing
multimedia representations of teaing practice. is analysis worked
towards framing these representations of teaing practice in terms of an

“intermediate” theory developed through dialogic interplay between
teaers’ “practical theories” (the articulate component of cra knowledge)
and sociocultural theory (a particular body of scholarly knowledge):
e study focused on developing understanding and articulating strategies and meanisms
(with the goal of dissemination)… We were also concerned with theory building, speciﬁcally
focusing on teaer mediation. [is involved] exposure of teaers to key constructs from
sociocultural theory, allowing them to select, appropriate, and apply relevant notions using their
own language where desired; supporting initial alignment of all participants in terms of key
ideas and subsequent negotiation of a shared analytic account.
(Hennessy & Deaney, 2009, p. 1769)
Video recordings of lesson sequences taught by participating teaers (and
materials associated with them) were subjected to a carefully phased
process of analysis and synthesis. A time-coded descriptive summary of the
videotaped lesson activities and interactions (with signiﬁcant uerances
transcribed verbatim) was produced to accompany the recording of ea
lesson sequence. All participating teaers and researers then used these
records to familiarize themselves with the lesson sequence and to reﬂect on
it, recording their impressions in a wrien commentary, a preliminary
selection of critical episodes, and questions for further discussion with the
teacher during the subsequent video review meeting.
Prepared in this way, the participants then met together to review ea
lesson sequence:
e video review meetings were employed as, and proved to be, a powerful catalyst for teaer
introspection. e extensive seduled discussions of both lesson plans and the various forms of
data… were intended to create the critical space whereby “cra knowledge can legitimately
come under respectful forms of examination comparable to those applied to solarly
knowledge.” (Ruthven, 2002. p. 589)
(Hennessy & Deaney, 2009, p. 1766)
e mathematics case in particular illustrated the strength of this
methodology:

e two teaers encountered various diﬃculties… precluding them from spending mu time
on wrien commentary. By contrast, the video review process ﬂagged up numerous points for
discussion and questioning during meetings, whi helped to ﬁll in the gaps in our
understanding and to explicate the underlying rationale for a number of teaer actions and
interventions.
(Hennessy & Deaney, 2009, p. 1777)
In addition, a tentative coding seme was initiated by the researers,
informed by pedagogical ideas from sociocultural theory. is seme was
reﬁned in the course of analyzing the lesson sequences through fostering
dialogue between these sociocultural concepts, as introduced by the
researers, and the ideas used spontaneously by the teaer of the lesson
and the other teaer video observers. Once ea lesson sequence had been
reviewed in its own right, aention turned to reﬁning the coding seme to
anowledge paerns across the teaing practices recorded in the
sequences. is ﬁnal coding seme informed decisions about the content
and structure of the multimedia representation of the lesson sequences,
including the thematic framework developed for ea (individual) case and
for the associated (multiple) case study across lesson sequences.1
e use of video recordings has become increasingly viable and popular
as a means of representing teaing practice. Hennessy and Deaney’s
approa places these (alongside other associated records of teaing
practice) at the heart of the dialogic cycle. Signiﬁcantly, the way in whi
these records were used goes beyond simply prompting reﬂection on that
practice. is approa seeks both to elicit the cra knowledge
underpinning practice in a systematic way and to bring a body of solarly
knowledge to bear on analyzing this practice. It ultimately seeks to develop
a new conceptual framework, drawing on, and bridging between, these two
resources.

Learning Study and Communities of Inquiry
Learning Study and Communities of Inquiry:
Knowledge Growth through Collective Design
In all the examples of dialogue between researching and teaching examined
so far, a conventional role diﬀerentiation between teaer and researer
has been maintained. We turn now to examine alternatives that allenge
these role deﬁnitions and diﬀerentiation, and examine their relation to the
dialogic cycle.
Lesson study is a mode of professional development, designed to
facilitate the sharing and development of cra knowledge, that has existed
for many decades in Japan (Fernandez, 2002; Lewis, Perry, & Murata, 2006;
Stigler & Hiebert, 1999; Watanabe, 2002). Stigler and Hiebert credit lesson
study with the development of teaing mathematics in Japan, “the linpin
of the improvement process” (1999, p. 111); they claim that it has made a
signiﬁcant contribution to that country’s students’ superior performance in
international studies of performance in mathematics.
Lesson study typically involves a group of teaers coming together to
design a lesson, following whi one of the teaers implements the lesson
plan while the others in the group observe and take notes. Aer the lesson
the teachers meet to discuss what happened and make changes to the lesson
plan, whi is usually then implemented by another teaer from the
group. In the original Japanese model there does not appear to be any
formal meanism linking the deliberations, experiences, and learning of
the group of teaers to a wider body of solarly knowledge. However,
routinely, the group of teaers do produce a report from their activities
that might be made more widely available. In this model of professional
development, the possibility of learning from and extending the body of
teaers’ cra knowledge is evident. Implementations of lesson study

outside Japan oen include a researer or teaer educator as facilitator; in
su instances, successful bridging between cra and solarly knowledge
may occur (Murata, Bofferding, Pother, Taylor, & Wischnia, 2012).
Aempts to develop the lesson study model include a systematic
meanism to connect teaers’ cra knowledge with solarly knowledge
and aim to develop both forms of knowledge and teaing practice. We
contrast two models of su aempts: “learning study” that takes learning
of particular subject content as the point of departure, in particular the
relation between the learner and subject; and the development of
“communities of inquiry” that focus more explicitly on teaing and
learning as forms of participation in cultural practices. Here we focus on
two larger developmental resear projects, one for ea approa, whi
have comprised teams of researers and many teaers extended over
several years. One is a project based on learning study in Hong Kong, 2000–
2003 (Lo, Pong, & Chik, 2005), and the other a project in Norway that set
out to develop communities of inquiry, 2004–2007 (Jaworski, Fuglestad,
Bjuland, Breiteig, Goodild, & Grevholm, 2007). We note also reports
arising from small-scale studies, including dissertation and award-bearing
courses that focus on these developmental approaes. (e.g. Potari, 2013;
van Bommel, 2012). We outline the underlying principles of ea approa;
we then draw aention to their similarities and diﬀerences; ﬁnally, we
brieﬂy describe some of the outcomes and knowledge gains that have been
reported.
Learning Study
Learning study (LS) sets out to combine lesson study and design
experiments; a speciﬁc departure from lesson study is the introduction of a
theory of learning. e originators of the LS approa teaing and

learning within a theoretical framework referred to as variation theory. In
this framework, it is argued, concepts are known through their “critical
features” that distinguish one concept from another. One learns to
recognize and understand a concept by noting the variation of critical
features between concepts. e teaer’s role is to create a space of
learning in whi the critical features of a concept are either held constant
or varied to enable the learners to apprehend the features and the concept.
[V]ariation is a critical feature in relation to the way in whi the intended learning is brought
about, as well as being a critical feature for students’ learning…. diﬀerences in what the students
learn is to a large extent a function of what they can possibly learn. What they can possibly
learn is a space of learning constituted by that which it is possible to discern.
(Marton, Runesson, & Tsui, 2004, p. 38)
A LS begins by focusing on the “Object of Learning” (OoL): that is, the
new knowledge, capability, or beliefs that it is intended learners will
appropriate (Marton & Lo, 2007). e OoL is analyzed for its “critical
features”: these belong to the set ideas, aracteristics, and identifying
features that uniquely mark the “object.” Students are tested before the
lesson (pretest) to explore their prior knowledge. Teaers (collaboratively)
prepare a lesson that creates a “space of learning” by systematically
presenting and varying the critical features, thus providing students with
experiences of the OoL consistent with their prior knowledge. A posest
follows the lesson, the results of whi are used to inform reﬂection and a
subsequent implementation of the lesson.
Communities of Inquiry
Teaing developmental resear that seeks to establish Communities of
Inquiry (CoI) claims to draw upon approaes and experiences from lesson
study, learning study, action resear, design resear, and practitioner

resear (Goodild, Fuglestad, & Jaworski, 2013; Jaworski, 2004). CoI
approaes set out to ﬁrst establish communities of teaers and
researers/teaer educators who will collaborate in the design of lessons
and activities for students. Teaers’ collaborative action in teaing and
learning facilitates the sharing of ideas, provides support in meeting new
allenges, and opens up opportunities for reﬂection, discussion, and
learning. Inquiry is presented as an approa to learning and practice that
will empower students and teaers to face and overcome the allenges of
learning and teaing. As with LS and other forms of practitioner resear,
a cyclical approa is envisaged, proceeding through phases of design and
planning for teaing, implementation, and observation of lessons,
reflection, reporting, and feeding back into subsequent planning.
Comparing and Contrasting LS and COI
Given their claims to the same antecedents, lesson study and design
resear, it is not surprising that there is common ground shared by LS and
CoI approaes. In both, groups of teaers collaborate with
researers/teaer educators designing for classroom activity. In both, the
researer/teaer educator takes an active part in the design activity, but
the design is essentially developed by the teaers and implemented by the
teaers with their own classes. Both approaes pay aention to learning
or development at three levels: students learning mathematics, teaers
learning about teaing and learning mathematics, and researers testing
theory and learning about the developmental processes. Both are concerned
with the interaction and exange of cra and solarly knowledge.
However, there are also significant differences.
An LS focuses on the OoL, and the relation between OoL and the
learner. The view of learning is based on phenomenography (Marton, 1981),

whi is essentially constructivist with its aention to providing a space of
learning that structures the learner’s experience of the OoL and guides the
learner into making the intended sense. LS and variation theory recognize
diﬀerences between the teaers’ intended OoL, the enacted OoL in the
lessons implemented, and the lived OoL, whi the students experience. A
learning study may last 10 to 12 weeks and comprise a sequence of LS
events (ea including several iterations beginning with analysis of OoL,
then through pretest to expose students prior knowledge, lesson design,
implementation, posttest to expose knowledge appropriated, and reflection-
revised design). Ea small group of teaers and their classes included
within a LS event form a discrete source of data. e three-year project
reported by Lo, Pong, and Chik (2005), for example, comprised 29 separate
LSs in several subject areas: a Chinese language (10), English language (1),
general studies, (4) and mathematics (14). Ea LS event becomes the
subject of a separate case study. More than 30 teaers at just two primary
sools (grades 1 to 6) were involved. Although this project focused at the
primary level, other LSes carried out at secondary levels have reported
positive outcomes from the intervention (Marton & Pang, 2006). A key
distinguishing feature is the intervention by the researer/teaer educator
who explains the theory of learning (variation theory) and guides the
teachers in the application of this theory in their lesson designs.
LSes begin with the explicit development of teaers’ cra knowledge.
They are established on an a priori—and it is assumed unquestioned—theory
of learning that is articulated and explained by researers and presented to
teaers as the basis for lesson design. In the case of LS that regularly
incorporate variation theory, the didactical apparatus that structures the
activity is framed in terms of the OoL and its critical features. ese
provide the symbolic, pragmatic, epistemic, and heuristic functions within
the teaers’ joint planning and implementing activity. Learning study
cycles focus on the development of teaing particular content.

Nevertheless, the focus on students’ prior knowledge in the pretest and
planning phase, and later posest, open up opportunities to explore and
reﬁne solarly knowledge of concept development, although it is not clear
in the published literature reviewed that su reﬁnement has resulted from
learning studies.
By contrast, CoI is framed within socio-cultural theory, in particular
Wenger’s Community of Practice (CoP) theory (Wenger, 1998). Learning is
theorized as identity formation through participation in a CoP.
e activity of teaer and students engaging with mathematics within
an institutional seing can be seen as a practice; teaing itself can be seen
as a practice in whi teaers engage; similarly, didacticians’ engagement
in university practices or in working with teaers can be seen as practice.
According to Wenger (1998, p. 173 ﬀ.), belonging to a CoP, or having
identity within a CoP, involves engagement, imagination, and alignment.
Thus, in practices of mathematics learning and teaching, participants engage
in their practice alongside their peers, use imagination in interpreting their
own roles in the practice, and align themselves with established norms and
values. (Goodchild et al., 2013, p. 395).
Jaworski and colleagues (2007) report from a CoI project, Learning
Communities in Mathematics, that included teams of at least three teaers
from eight sools ranging from primary (grades 1 to 7) through to upper
secondary (grades 11 to 13), together with a team of about 12 university
based researers/teaer educators. e project was established on a
principle of co-learning in whi teaers and university-based participants
were both cast as researers and engaged in professional and practice
development. University participants refer to themselves as didacticians
rather than researers or teaer educators to mark the distinction
between their roles (didacticians were responsible for planning workshops;
teaers responsible for planning for their classes) without using a language
that presumed greater authority or expertise. All teaers and didacticians

within the project came together in workshops, usually three each semester.
Workshops included plenary presentations (of solarly knowledge) by
didacticians and teaers’ reports from their sool-based activity (and cra
knowledge). In small groups, didacticians would provide starting points for
discussion and the design of tasks and lesson plans, whi subsequently
would be reﬁned within sool teams, implemented, and reported ba at a
later workshop. Didacticians would oen participate in the sool-based
team planning and observe and record the implementation of the teaers’
designs with their classes. e project was set up to pass through three
phases, ea corresponding to a year of the project’s activity: community
building, inquiry (in teaing and learning), and goal seing (for
sustainability) (Bjuland & Jaworski, 2009). Teaers exerted a strong
inﬂuence over the activities of the workshops: for example, aer the ﬁrst
year they successfully argued for more workshop time within grade-level
groups preparing inquiry-based lesson activities that focused more directly
on speciﬁc curriculum content, rather than developing inquiry approaes
using tasks and problems that were not closely identiﬁed with rather
narrow statements in the curriculum. Events within the project were
recorded (video or audio) and the accumulated corpus of recordings and
documentary evidence has subsequently been used to construct case studies
(e.g. Goodchild et al., 2013; Jaworski, Goodchild, Eriksen, & Daland, 2011).
Learning Communities in Mathematics (LCM) was framed within a
developmental resear methodology that envisioned and implemented
intersecting cycles of theory and teaing development. An exposition of
developmental resear by Gravemeijer (1994) has been illustrated in the
context of LCM (Figure 22.3). A resear cycle is depicted as an interaction
between global and local theories—in LCM these are Community of
Practice theory (CPT) and inquiry respectively. e resear cycle is
informed by the development cycle, that is, from the observations and
interpretations following the implementation of inquiry-based teaing.

“Inquiry tasks” provide the symbolic, pragmatic, epistemic, and heuristic
functions of the didactical apparatus of LCM. Initial ideas of tasks are
suggested by didacticians and then adapted and refined by teachers for their
classes. Realization of the intersecting cyclical processes is demonstrated in
the development of the notion of “critical alignment” (Bjuland & Jaworski,
2009) by the introduction of a local theory of inquiry to Wenger’s
explanation of alignment in CPT. eory guides the developmental cycle
through task design (Jaworski et al., 2011). Reﬂection on the developmental
activity leads to critical reflection of the theory (Goodchild, 2014).
Figure 22.3  Developmental research cycle (Goodchild, 2014).
LS is explicit in presenting variation theory as a productive approa to
learning and teaing. By contrast, in the example of LCM the didacticians
purposefully do not oﬀer a formula for eﬀective teaing and learning,
whi are perceived as too complex for didactical formulae or structuring
apparatus to be suﬃcient (Jaworski, 2006). Nevertheless, in CoI, there are
principles of inquiry that, like the theory of variation in LS, inform ea
level of activity: undertaking classroom tasks, designing su tasks, and

collaborating in the development of teaching and learning mathematics.
e two approaes also appear to diﬀer in the ﬂow of ideas between
cra and solarship. LS situates the researer as an expert in a theory of
learning, and teaers are led to design lessons that put the theory into
practice. e arrangement appears to favor the ﬂow from solarship to
practice. In a CoI, however, the teaers’ knowledge and expertise, and
their role as researers are emphasized—even to the point that the teaer
educators/researers refer to themselves as didacticians. In discussions
between teaers and didacticians there is the opportunity for an open
exange of ideas, but the CoI emphasizes teaers’ agency and
empowerment to work on their own practice, utilizing their own resources,
with suggestions from didacticians rather than instruction. It thus appears
that the relation favors the ﬂow of knowledge from the teaers’ practice
into solarship. ese diﬀerences also appear to be reﬂected in the results
reported from the two approaches.
Reports from LSes are supported by analyses of results from the pre- and
posests, and they demonstrate remarkable consistency in improved
performance (Lo et al., 2005). Comparative studies contrasting lesson study
and learning study are also reported to favor the laer (Pang & Marton,
2003); however, the design of this comparative resear is questionable in
that it appears there has been lile aempt to mat the groups or carefully
control the treatments. Reports from CoI developmental resear are rather
nuanced. e focus on “practice” draws aention to the many constraints
from without the classroom that hold the teaer in alignment to a regular
practice and thus resist aempts at innovation. e reports from the LCM
project oﬀer no hard evidence regarding improvements in students’
performance. Moreover, lile systematic observation-based evidence of
anges in teaing practices is reported. Reports from CoI tend to be
descriptive and based upon the interpretation of qualitative data, reports
from lessons (Jaworski, et al., 2011), teaers in group discussions

(Goodild et al., 2013), and focus group interviews (Bjuland & Jaworski,
2009). e absence of su evidence emerges directly from the
methodology of developmental resear and the principle of co-learning
framed within communities of inquiry. Assumptions are made about
teaers’ knowledge of their own classes and didacticians’ reluctance to
present themselves as experts. e aim is to create a collaborative inquiry
in whi all participants are cast as researers, but only the teaers are
cast as experts in their classrooms. Furthermore, the socio-cultural and
naturalistic roots of the resear reject any simplistic relationship between
cause and eﬀect that might be made evident through experimental studies.
Consequences of engaging in the project are thus based on teaers’ reports
that their practice has anged (Bjuland & Jaworski, 2009), or that they
have developed greater conﬁdence or a language to explain their practice
(Jørgensen & Goodild, 2009). e interpretation of naturally occurring
data from recordings made of development and teaing events provides
an evidence base for reflecting on teaching and scholarship.

Conclusion
is apter has sought to illustrate how coupling the creation of solarly
knowledge within the practice of researing with the creation of cra
knowledge within the practice of teaing can contribute to building a
more powerful and systematic knowledge base for teaing. In particular,
in one direction, contextualizing and activating solarly knowledge within
teaing and, in the other direction, eliciting and codifying cra knowledge
through researing, support knowledge conversion. is helps to deﬁne a
dialogic cycle through whi knowledge creation within the practices of
researing and teaing can be coordinated, particularly when the design
of boundary-spanning didactical apparatus is placed at the heart of this
endeavor. More radical approaes—through collaborative learning study
and communities of inquiry—seek to allenge the role diﬀerentiation
between teaer and researer that aracterizes more traditional
approaes. However, depending on their particular formulations of the
balance and relations between researing and teaing roles, these
alternative approaes tend to privilege particular aspects of knowledge
creation and conversion within the dialogic cycle.

Note
1. e mathematics case study can be accessed at “Looking at mathematics teaing and learning
with 
projection 
tenology” 
(http://t-media.educ.cam.ac.uk/T-Media-
Mathematics/Maths%20Program%20Files/index.html) e cross-subject case study is available at
“Collaborative case studies of teaing and learning with ‘interactive’ tenologies in the
secondary 
classroom” 
(http://t-media.educ.cam.ac.uk/T-Media-Across-
Subjects/Program%20Files/index.html).

References
Bjuland, R., & Jaworski, B. (2009). Teaers’ perspectives on collaboration with didacticians to create
an inquiry community. Research in Mathematics Education, 11, 21–38.
Bromme, R., & Tillema, H. (1995). Fusing experience and theory: e structure of professional
knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 5, 261–267.
Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., & Carey, D. A. (1988). Teaers’ pedagogical content
knowledge of students’ problem solving in elementary arithmetic. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 19, 385–401.
Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., Chiang, C.-P., & Loef, M. (1989). Using knowledge of
ildren’s mathematics thinking in classroom teaing: An experimental study. American
Educational Research Journal, 26, 499–531.
Cooper, P., & McIntyre, D. (1996). Eﬀective teaing and learning: Teaers’ and students’
perspectives. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Fennema, E., Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., Levi, L., Jacobs, V. R., & Empson, S. B. (1996). A
longitudinal study of learning to use ildren’s thinking in mathematics instruction. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 403–434.
Fennema, E., & Franke, M. L. (1992). Teaers’ knowledge and its impact. In D. Grouws (Ed.),
Handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 147–164). New York, NY:
Macmillan.
Fennema, E., Franke, M. L., Carpenter, T. P., & Carey, D. A. (1993). Using ildren’s mathematical
knowledge in instruction. American Educational Research Journal, 30, 555–583.
Fernandez, C. (2002). Learning from Japanese approaes to professional development: e case of
lesson study. Journal of Teacher Education, 53, 393–405.
Goodild, S. (2014). Mathematics teaing development: Learning from resear projects in
Southern Norway. ZDM: The International Journal of Mathematics Education, 46, 305–316.
Goodild, S., Fuglestad, A. B., & Jaworski, B. (2013). Critical alignment in inquiry-based practice in
developing mathematics teaching. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 84, 393–412.
Gravemeijer, K. (1994). Educational development and developmental resear in mathematics
education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25, 443–471.

Hennessy, S., & Deaney, R. (2009). “Intermediate theory” building: Integrating multiple teaer and
researcher perspectives through in-depth video analysis of pedagogic strategies.
Teachers College Record, 111, 1753–1795.
Huberman, M. (1993). Changing minds: The dissemination of research and its effects on practice and
theory. In C. Day, J. Calderhead, & P. Denicolo (Eds.), Resear on teaer thinking:
Understanding professional development (pp. 34–52). London: Falmer.
Jaworski, B. (2004). Grappling with complexity: Co-learning in inquiry communities in mathematics
teaing development. In M. Johnsen Høines & A. B. Fuglestad (Eds.) Proceedings of the 28th
Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, pp.
17–36). Bergen: Bergen University College.
Jaworski, B. (2006). eory and practice in mathematics teaing development: Critical inquiry as a
mode of learning in teaching. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 9, 187–211.
Jaworski, B., Fuglestad, A. B., Bjuland, R., Breiteig, T., Goodild, S., & Grevholm, B. (Eds.) (2007).
Learning communities in mathematics. Bergen, Norway: Caspar Forlag.
Jaworski, B., Goodild, S., Eriksen, S., & Daland, E. (2011). Mediating mathematics teaing
development and pupils’ mathematical learning: e life cycle of a task. In O. Zaslavsky & P.
Sullivan (Eds.) Constructing knowledge for teaing secondary mathematics: Tasks to enhance
prospective and practicing teacher learning (pp. 143–160). London: Springer.
Jørgensen, K. O., & Goodild, S. (2009). Utvikling av unge elevers relasjonelle forståelse i
matematikk (Developing young pupils’ relational understanding in mathematics). In J.
Fauskanger, & R. Mosvold (Eds.) Å regne i alle fag (To calculate in all subjects) (pp. 100–115).
Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
Leinhardt, G. (1988a). Expertise in instructional lessons: An example from fractions. In D. A Grouws
& T. Cooney (Eds.) Effective mathematics teaching (pp. 47–66). Reston, VA: NCTM/LEA.
Leinhardt, G. (1988b). Situated knowledge and expertise in teaing. In J. Calderhead (Ed.) Teachers’
professional learning (pp. 146–168). London: Falmer.
Leinhardt, G. (1989). Math lessons: A contrast of novice and expert competence. Journal for Resear
in Mathematics Education, 20, 52–75.
Leinhardt, G., Putnam, T., Stein, M. K., & Baxter, J. (1991). Where subject knowledge maers.
Advances in Research in Teaching, 2, 87–113.

Lewis, C., Perry, R., & Murata, A. (2006). How should resear contribute to instructional
improvement? The case of lesson study. Educational Researcher, 35(3) 3–14.
Lo, M. L., Pong, W. Y., & Chik, P.P.M. (Eds.) (2005). For ea and everyone: Catering for individual
differences through learning studies. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Marton, F. (1981). Phenomenography—describing conceptions of the world around us. Instructional
Science, 10, 177–200.
Marton, F., & Lo, M. L. (2007). Learning from “e Learning Study.” Journal of Resear in Teaer
Education, 1, 31–46.
Marton, F., & Pang, M. F. (2006). On some necessary conditions of learning. e Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 15, 193–220.
Marton, F., Runesson, U., & Tsui, A.B.M. (2004). e space of learning. In F. Marton, & A.B.M. Tsui
(Eds.) Classroom discourse and the space of learning (pp. 3–40). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Murata, A., Boﬀerding, L., Pother, B. E., Taylor, M. W., & Wisnia, S. (2012). Making connections
among student learning, content, and teaing: Teaer talk paths in elementary mathematics
lesson study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 43, 616–650.
Ormel, B., Pareja-Roblin, N., McKenney, S., Voogt, J., & Pieters, J. (2012). Resear-practice
interactions as reported in recent design studies: still promising, still hazy. Educational
Technology Research and Development, 60, 967–986.
Pang, M. F., & Marton, F. (2003). Beyond “lesson study”: Comparing two ways of facilitating the
grasp of some economic concepts. Instructional Science, 31, 175–194.
Peterson, P. L., Fennema, E., & Carpenter, T. P. (1991). Teaers’ knowledge of students’
mathematics problem-solving knowledge. Advances in Research on Teaching, 2, 49–86.
Potari, D. (2013). e relationship of theory and practice in mathematics teaer professional
development: an activity theory perspective. ZDM: e International Journal of Mathematics
Education, 45, 507–519.
Ruthven, K. (2002). Linking researing with teaing: towards synergy of solarly and cra
knowledge. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education
(pp. 581–598). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ruthven, K. (2005). Improving the development and warranting of good practice in teaing.

Cambridge Journal of Education, 35, 407–426.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). e teaing gap: Best ideas from the world’s teaers for
improving education in the classroom. New York: The Free Press.
van Bommel, J. (2012). Improving teaing, improving learning, improving as a teaer:
Mathematical knowledge for teaing as an object of learning. Doctoral dissertation, Karlstad
University, Sweden.
Watanabe, T. (2002). Learning from Japanese lesson study. Educational Leadership, 59, 36–39.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wimann, E. C. (2001). Developing mathematics education in a systematic process. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 48, 1–20.

Section V
Influences of Advanced
Technologies

23 Foundations for the Future
The Potential of Multimodal Technologies
for Learning Mathematics
Stephen J. Hegedus
Southern Connecticut State University, United States
David O. Tall
University of Warwick, UK

Overview
We are entering a new stage of the digital era where certain tenologies
are becoming ever more ubiquitous in our lives. Su tenologies oﬀer
immersive experiences for students and ﬂuid forms of interactivity to
enhance engagement. Tenology is also capturing the aﬀordances of
connectivity to enable users to connect with ea other, to share their work
and favorite media, and to preserve access to su items as they freely
roam around a hot-spoed planet through cloud computing. Yet, it is
unclear how su ubiquitous and highly usable forms of tenology can and
will be used in classrooms in mathematically meaningful ways. e
warning of Cuban (2001) about the unfulﬁlled promise of tenology as an
agent of transformation is still relevant today, and recent national reports in
the United States describe the allenging student aievement gaps
between ethnic groups in mathematics classrooms, especially in urban
settings, with technology still not enhancing access for all.
Ten years ago, mu of the tenology we are referring to was not
available in mainstream classroom. Now, however, resear in various
countries describe computers and networks as being widely available in
even the poorest of sools (U.S. Department of Education, 2007)—even
though these established tenologies are seldom used for the purpose of
meaningful work (Bretser, in press). Indeed, some researers have
demonstrated that the main issue now is access to quality professional
development (Sinclair, Arzarello, Trigueros Gaisman, & Lozano, 2009). is
theme also arises in other countries. We situate our work here in recent
resear funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation that explores the
potential beneﬁts of using tenologies that embrace multimodal
interaction and connectivity in various learning contexts. We outline
examples of su tenology and use an analytical framework (Tall, 2013)
to explain how students can reason and learn mathematically in su

environments, and we discuss the potential impact they can have on
mathematics education in the future.

Literature Review and Background
Multimodal tenologies oﬀer alternative input or combined input/output
methods. Common forms of alternative inputs are spee inputs (e.g., voice
recognition), tou (e.g., gesture-based interactions), and bodily motion.
e laer has rapidly evolved in recent years with the development of
multitou tenologies (e.g., tablet PCs, interactive whiteboards, Apple
iPads). Combined input/output devices include haptic devices, whi
integrate visual modes with force-feedba loops, oﬀering the user the
ability to feel objects or the results of their interactions with the
environment.
As a consequence of new modes of interaction, it becomes possible to
integrate new ways of thinking mathematically, taking us beyond
textbooks with static pictures, and keyboard input as in the days when
Logo was ﬁrst introduced, by specifying geometric pictures with typed
commands. ere is now a growing potential based on successful prior
resear and falling costs to use multimodal tenologies in mathematics
classrooms to oﬀer students multiple ways to construct meaning using their
natural modalities and bodily experiences.
Multimodal interaction has evolved in various resear areas and
applications including computer vision/visualization, psyology, and
artiﬁcial intelligence, with increasing use in education—particularly in early
learning and developmental psyology. Jaimes and Sebe (2007) oﬀer a
survey of many of these disciplines, including methods of face recognition,
facial expression analysis, vocal emotion, gesture recognition, human
motion analysis, spee recognition, and eye traing. ey outline how
multimodal interaction can simply be an environment that responds to
inputs in more than one modality or communication annel (e.g., spee,
gesture, writing) through perceptual, aentive, or enactive interfaces.
Dautenhahn (2000) has developed multimodal interactive learning

environments as teaing and learning tools for the rehabilitation of
ildren with autism, whi establishes a potential importance for their use
in special needs education in general.
Multitou environments are also evolving. ompson Avant and Heller
(2011) examined the eﬀectiveness of using TouMath—a multisensory
program that uses key signature points on mathematical objects—with
students with physical learning disabilities. Using a multiprobe, multiple
baseline design, they discovered all students were successful in reaing the
criterion in terms of percentages of correct responses to addition problems.
Recent work in mathematics education explores the mathematical
aﬀordances of multitou tenologies in that it can help develop number
sense in part by virtue of the important role that ﬁngers play in counting,
but also because of the multimodal feedba that it oﬀers ildren (Ladel &
Kortenkamp, 2011; Jackiw, 2013; Sinclair & Sedaghat Jou, 2013).
It is of no surprise to us that a lot of work is focused in Special Education
and with ildren with special needs and physical disabilities. A multimodal
approa engages other senses with whi to investigate and learn. We
believe this approa is relevant to all learners, though, especially if the
tenology can increase access to complex mathematical ideas through
various forms of interaction.
Over 10 years ago Chris Dede (2000) also foresaw the profound potential
of multimodal tenologies but found their cost to be the main impediment
for full integration into mainstream sools. is is less problematic today
as increasingly aﬀordable multimodal devices ﬂood the market and are
being adopted by sools, in particular multitou devices that incorporate
visual and auditory senses with tactile use. A major allenge lies in the
dramatic pace of ange in tenology, whi has been so mu faster than
the anges that can be incorporated into the curriculum in a reasonable
time. In addition, we need eﬀective professional development of teaers to
rethink their pedagogy with respect to the mathematical aﬀordances and

opportunities of such technologies.
In addition to using our senses, utilizing our whole body through motion
is another form of mathematizing the world around us. Speciﬁc studies in
mathematics education have found the use of motion detectors and
interactive tenologies to be important tools as mediators between
students’ 
bodily 
enactments 
and 
more 
complex 
mathematical
representations su as graphs and functions (Brady, 2013; Nemirovsky,
Kelton, & Rhodehamel, 2013; Nemirovsky & Borba, 2003; Radford, Demers,
Guzmán, & Cerulli, 2003; Radford, Edwards, & Arzarello, 2009; Radford,
Miranda, & Guzmán, 2008; Rasmussen, Nemirovsky, Olszewski, Dost, &
Johnson, 2004).
ese studies reveal how enactive embodiments can oﬀer a foundation
for understanding more subtle mathematical ideas, as indicated by Bruner
(1966) in terms of his three successive modes of enactive, iconic, and
symbolic operation. More recent studies (e.g. Tomasello, 1999) have shown
how humans extend the ability of other primates by not only imitating
what others do, but also being able to sense and share the intentions of
others, and to use tools, artifacts, and language to build successively more
sophisticated levels of thinking. An application of Tomasello’s work to
mathematics education (Hegedus & Moreno-Armella, 2011) allows us to
think about the movement to dynamic, interactive tenologies as an
illustration of a representational redescription of mathematics in the 21st
century. Su redescriptions potentially allow more students access to
fundamental ways of mathematical thinking, although we also appreciate
that this may also require new ways of thinking in later contexts that the
learner may encounter.
A major question is how these enactive embodiments relate to the more
subtle mathematical ideas that develop in more sophisticated contexts. Do
they provide an embodied form of meaning that supports later
developments or are there aspects that can impede later learning? is

requires a theoretical framework that studies the detailed development of
mathematical thinking in diﬀerent individuals as they pass through
successive stages of sophistication in mathematics.
Other major and related tenological advances in mathematics
education include the use of dynamic, interactive representations, primarily
in the form of soware and connectivity through exploiting the use of
classroom wireless networks. We oﬀer a brief overview of advances in
these domains.
Dynamic Interactive Mathematics
Dynamic interactive mathematics environments su as e Geometer’s
Sketchpad® and Cabri-Geometre oﬀer tools to construct and interact with
mathematical objects and conﬁgurations. Interaction is via the executable
representations of these mathematical objects. rough this interaction one
can touch the underlying mathematical structure (Hegedus & Moreno-
Armella, 2011). Objects can be selected and dragged by mouse movements
in whi all user-deﬁned mathematical relationships are preserved. In su
environments, students are supported in eﬀorts to formulate conjectures
and generalizations by cliing and dragging hotspots on an object, whi
dynamically redraw and update information on the screen as the user drags
the mouse (Drijvers, Kieran, & Marioi, 2009). In doing so, the user can
explore and eﬃciently test an entire parameter space of equivalent
mathematical constructions.
Su environments aim to develop spatial sense and mathematical
reasoning by allowing conjectures to be tested, oﬀering “intelligent” tools
that constrain users to select, construct, or manipulate objects that obey
mathematical rules (Marioi, 2003) alongside well-developed curriculum
activities. e core features are construction and manipulation, allowing

constructs to be dynamically reconﬁgured. Empirical work states how these
features can lead to improvement in student aievement (Baista, 1997;
Hollebrands, 2002), student engagement through aesthetic motivation
(Sinclair, 2001, 2002a, 2002b), student ability to generalize mathematical
conjectures (Marioi, 2000), and student development of theoretical
arguments (Laborde, 2000, 2001; Noss & Hoyles, 1996). Actions of pointing,
cliing, grabbing, and dragging parts of geometric constructions allows a
form of mediation (Falcade, Laborde, & Marioi, 2007) between the object
and the user who is aempting to make sense of, or discover some
particular aribute of, the ﬁgure or to prove some theorem. is is referred
to as semiotic mediation, whi corresponds to mediation through the use
of sign systems and artifacts whose meanings are generated by social
construction (Hassan, 1992; Vygotsky, 1980).
Su environments have also been applied to a variety of topics to
enable modeling practices (Jaiw & Sinclair, 2007) ranging from
applications in the primary grades (Baista, 1997; Sinclair & Crespo, 2006;
Sinclair & Moss, 2012) to more advanced applications including analysis
(Cuoco & Goldenberg, 1997), trigonometry (Shaﬀer, 1995), calculus (Gorini,
1997), physics (Olive, 1997), complex analysis (Jaiw, 2003), non-Euclidean
geometry (Dwyer & Pﬁefer, 1999; Hegedus & Moreno-Armella 2011), data
analysis (Flowers, 2002), and Linear Algebra (Gol Tabaghi & Sinclair, 2013).
Dynamic, interactive environments oen are representationally ri,
creating multiple perspectives on mathematical ideas. Simulations are used
to explore functional relationships (Falcade et al., 2007; Yerulshalmy &
Naaliev, 2011), complex systems (Stroup, 2005), and rate and variation
(Hegedus & Roselle, 2013), to name just a few topics. e aﬀordances of
su environment establish a representational infrastructure that provides
new ways for students to express, visualize, compute, and interact with
mathematical objects (Kaput, Hegedus, & Lesh, 2007). Indeed, many of
these topics are currently introduced in the secondary or tertiary grades of

mathematics education, but that does not undermine the potential for using
multimodal tenologies to maximize the use of dynamic representations in
the early grades as well. e key idea here is that su tenologies oﬀer a
representational redescription of the core mathematical structures through
executable representations. Su representations can link mathematical
aributes to modalities su as tou or force feedba. For us, it is less
about the curriculum that as stated should be introduced at various levels
but rather the modiﬁcation of the representational system that su
tenologies can potentially establish. A graph of a function can be thought
of as a static ﬁgure and operated on discretely through ordered pairs or
represented in tabular format, or it can be redescribed as a continuous
object that can be smoothly and ﬂuidly examined dynamically and toued.
For example, consider the diﬀerence between feeling a linear and a
quadratic function: How do we sense “linear-ness” or “quadratic-ness”?
More profoundly, a student using his or her ﬁngers to manipulate a graph
on a tablet can zoom in to see how a curved graph (su as a quadratic
curve or a circle) magniﬁes to look “locally straight.” Tracing the anging
slope of the graph oﬀers an embodied meaning linking to the symbolic
processes of diﬀerentiation, integration, diﬀerential equations, the wider
aspects of multidimensional vector calculus, and on to the formal structures
of mathematical analysis. In this apter we posit that multimodal
tenologies have a role in all grades. eir use with young ildren plays
an essential role in the full range of development from elementary to
undergraduate classrooms.
Classroom Connectivity
Classroom connectivity (whi generally means networked classroom
activities and assessment) has roots in more than a decade of classroom

response systems, most notably ClassTalk™ (Abrahamson, 1998, 2000),
whi enabled instructors to collect, aggregate, and display (oen as
histograms) student responses to questions, and in so doing create new
levels of interaction in large classes in various domains (Burnstein &
Lederman, 2001; Crouch & Mazur, 2001; Dufresne, Gerace, Leonard, Mestre,
& Wenk, 1996; Hake, 1998; Piazza, 2002) and levels (Hartline, 1997).
Roselle, Abrahamson, and Penuel (2003) show remarkably consistent
positive impacts across multiple domains and levels. Some of the new
aﬀordances beyond classroom response systems are (1) increased mobility
of multiple representations of mathematical objects su as functions, as
reﬂected in the ability to pass these bidirectionally and ﬂexibly between the
teaer and students and among students, using multiple device-types; (2)
the ability for teaers to arrange, organize, and analyze sets of whole-class
contributions at once, and students to make sense of their work in a social
context, reasoning, and generalizing about their contribution with respect to
their peers’ work. Su aﬀordances transform the communication
infrastructure of the classroom (Roselle, Knudsen, & Hegedus, 2010),
whi extends the normal aﬀordances of social networks by increasing
mathematically meaningful participation (Dalton & Hegedus, 2013),
oﬀering opportunities for generative activity and investigation space
(Stroup, Ares & Hurford, 2005), and establishing comparisons between
private and public work (Vahey, Tatar, & Roselle, 2007). is can all lead
to enhanced engagement and learning due to the collaborative nature of
the classroom. Su resear has primarily been conducted in secondary
grades but we believe there is a lot of potential for su work in the
primary grades, whi oen structure classroom activities around small
group work or learning stations. It is important to note that in ea of these
examples it is not just the tenology that is the primary agent of ange in
these classrooms, but rather the integrated nature of the activity design and
the tenology that structures learning through enhanced discourse. We

will return to this key point later.
In summary, there have been many advances in digital tenology in
mathematics education that are situated, or could be situated, in a wide
variety of sool classrooms. A tenology-enhanced curriculum that
combines interactive mathematics soware, networked classroom
connectivity, and multimodal interaction has the potential to impact
learning and enri mathematical discourse in the future, based on present
work and the growing ubiquity of multimodal tenologies in society. But
we anowledge that su a claim should be modiﬁed by the la of
teaer professional development and preparation that is in Cuban’s
warning regarding the unfulﬁlled role of tenology in sools (Cuban,
2001). We return to this issue in our concluding remarks.
We will now outline some applications of these ingredients combined in
diﬀerent ways (but focusing on multimodal experiences) before providing
an analytical framework for examining how su tenologies can provide
a platform for mathematical learning.

New Mathematical Activities in a Technology-
Enhanced Learning Environment
We have not tried to cover all advances in educational tenology relevant
to mathematics learning, as we prefer to situate our position in aspects of
development that we believe are most promising in taking a mathematical-
activity centered approa vs. a tenology-centered approa. Tenology
should not be just a pedagogical prop or a computational aid in instruction
or learning (Moreno-Armella & Hegedus, 2009) but rather a transformative
device to enhance the discipline of learning between students and teaers.
For example we have osen not to highlight the major relevance of
Computer-Aided Instruction or Online Assessment Tutors as a major
development in educational tenology and computer science in the past 10
years (see Hegedus & Roselle, 2012 for further details): our focus is
primarily on multimodal tenologies that allow students to access the
beauty and complexity of mathematics in simple ways that engage many
aspects of their biological and social self.
Several examples we oﬀer here have been developed at the Kaput
Center with support from the National Science Foundation;1 others are
prototypes based on present tenological aﬀordances. We focus on several
environments that we have explored utilizing various modalities,
representationally ri interactive soware, and classroom networks where
possible. ese include (1) force-feedba in concert with 3D visual shapes
and surfaces and (2) multitou tenology for exploring mathematical
objects and aributes and concepts. e activities serve as exemplars of the
types of learning opportunities possible. We can tap into su tenological
aﬀordances in mathematically meaningful ways that can be generative in
the future.

Force Feedback Technology
Sensable’s 
PHANTOM 
Omni® 
(www.sensable.com/haptic-phantom-
omni.htm)—hereaer referred to as “Omni”—is a desktop haptic device
with six degrees of freedom for input (x, y, z, pit, roll, yaw), and three
degrees of output (x, y, z). e Omni’s most typical operation is via a
stylus-like aament that includes two buons (see Figure 23.1). e
Omni provides up to three forces of feedba for x, y, and z. It is primarily
used in resear, with a signiﬁcant presence in dentistry and medicine but
growing in mathematics education (Hegedus & Moreno-Armella, 2011). In
the environment, models of 2D and 3D objects and haptic simulations (e.g.,
magnetism, friction) are used to create a dynamic, visual-haptic scene
(Figure 23.2). User interactions with the models within a scene are
graphically displayed through the haptic pointer on the computer screen
and physically meditated by the haptic device as the user moves the stylus
or presses the buons on the stylus. For example, one application allows
users to move and rotate a cube. In the application, when a user moves the
haptic pointer onto the frictional surface of the cube and presses a haptic
buon, the position and rotation of the cube is synced to those values of the
haptic stylus until the button is released.

Figure 23.1  A student operates the PHANTOM Omni® haptic device.

Figure 23.2  Students’ view of the multimodal environment.
Multitouch Technology
In collaboration with KCP Tenologies, the Kaput Center developed a set
of activities for use with Sketpad®Explorer for the iPad (hereaer
referred to as “Explorer”), a viewer application of the widely popular e
Geometer’s Sketpad® soware (hereaer referred to as “Sketpad”).
is application is available in the Apple Store. Activities were constructed
in Sketpad and then transferred to the iPad through email or other forms
of ﬁle exange. All activities are preconﬁgured for students and teaers
to use, as no construction tools are presently available in this version for the
iPad. Students directly interact with objects in preconﬁgured activities
including geometric objects (e.g., points), iterative counters through flicking,

or buons that had been conﬁgured to perform a set of operations (e.g.,
reflection of an image).
With multitou/multi-input devices su as the Apple iPad, the learner
can use multiple modes of input and outputs—their natural modes of seeing
and feeling—to make sense of a task. e iPad oﬀers a direct (almost zero-
interface) mode to tou and directly manipulate mathematical objects (see
Figure 23.3). It oﬀers multiple inputs to one mathematical object that are
hitherto impossible on a single-input computer with mouse as pointer and
selector (see Figure 23.4). In Figure 23.3 you can tou both vertices of the
mirror segment at once, whi can ange the way one thinks about a line
of symmetry in a static world. In Figure 23.4, both vertices have to be used
simultaneously either with two ﬁngers or by two people, whi can ange
the mathematical experience.
We now present a framework that will enable us to describe how
students can use and experience su tenologies as a new platform for
mathematical learning through a multimodal approach in the future.

Figure 23.3  Translation as a composition of two reflections.

Figure 23.4  Etchasketch—Moving two points simultaneously to obtain a circle.

Framework: How Students Can Learn mathematics
To formulate a theoretical framework for the development of mathematical
thinking and the use of multimodal tenologies, we need to consider not
only what individuals may or may not learn at a particular stage of
development using various modes of perception and operation, but also to
consider the increasingly sophisticated forms of reason that develops in
ea individual over the longer term. Contrary to the view that
mathematics is a fully coherent system of knowledge, successive
mathematical structures involve new meanings that may be supportive in
some contexts but problematic in others (Tall, 2013).
For example, the initial stages of counting and number involve physical
playing with objects, sorting them, and learning the complex act of
counting. Once the ild realizes that the number does not ange if the
objects are placed in diﬀerent ways, it is possible to focus on the idea that a
set of six objects can be seen as four plus two or two plus four, or even
three lots of two or two lots of three. is perception of the dynamic layout
of the objects can lead to more general ideas, su as the observation that
the order of addition or multiplication does not aﬀect the ﬁnal total. is, in
turn, gives mental connections between physical and mental perceptions
and operations that Tall (2013) refers to as embodied compression from the
operation of counting to the concept of number.
When focusing on counting without such an overall conception, however,
it is not obvious that 7 + 2 (a short count-on of 2 that can be performed on
one hand) is the same as 2 + 7 (a longer count-on of 7 that requires the
ﬁngers of both hands). Tall (2013) refers to the focus on counting
procedures to build the properties of whole number arithmetic as symbolic
compression.
e term embodiment is used with very diﬀerent meanings in the
literature. For example, Dienes (1960) used the term to describe physical

materials su as Dienes’ blos to express the properties of arithmetic of
whole numbers, whereas Lakoﬀ & Nunez (2000) use the term more broadly
to claim that all human thinking is based on sensori-motor operations that
may be expressed metaphorically using language. Here we are interested in
the way in whi mathematical ideas may be represented and interpreted
physically or mentally using multimodal technology.
Embodiments can be supportive and simple in some aspects yet be
complicated and even problematic in others. For example, Dienes’ blos
are simple embodiments for place value in addition. A unit is a small cube;
in base 10, a “long” is ten cubes glued together to represent “10” as a single
entity. Adding two collections such as 17 plus 6 is one long with seven units,
plus six units. Combining ten of the units to give a new long results in two
longs and three units, symbolized as 23. However, when the same
embodiment is used for multiplication, additional features arise in whi
multiplication by 10 replaces ten units with a “long” and ten “longs” with a
ten-by-ten “ﬂat” that represents one hundred. So Dienes’ blos are less
appropriate for multiplication.
In this case, a new embodiment may oﬀer a more appropriate context
for meaning. For instance, in the multiplication of whole numbers,
multiplication of decimal numbers by 10 can be embodied by physical
operations on the symbols themselves. A simple method is to write three 0s
on a piece of paper and cover them with strips of paper with a single digit
on the end of the strip (see Figure 23.5). e number 27 is represented by
placing a 7 in the units place and a 2 over the ﬁrst strip in the tens place to
represent 27 as two tens and seven units (or 27 units). Multiplying by 10 is
embodied by shiing the number one place to the le to get two 100s and
seven 10s, or 27 tens, or 270 units. (Tall, 2013, pp. 135–137).
is involves a new physical operation (moving the symbols themselves)
that can then be imagined in the mind to “see” digits moving mentally in a
more sophisticated way—so the meaning of the symbolic operation can be

supported by more sophisticated embodiment. It also oﬀers a mu more
ﬂexible meaning for symbolism as a basis for multidigit multiplication, in
whi blos of digits are moved one place to the le to multiply by 10 or
one place to the right to divide by 10, including moving the blo of
numbers over the decimal point to see that 27 divided by 10 is 2.7, whi is
2 units and 7 tenths. (Tall, 2013, pp.135–138).
e development of successive levels of sophistication follows the same
broad paern as new contexts are encountered. New embodiments can
support certain aspects of the new situation yet be problematic in others.
is occurs at successive stages of the curriculum where previous
experience can impede new learning, in the shi from whole numbers to
fractions, from unsigned numbers to signed numbers, from fractions to
inﬁnite decimals, from arithmetic to algebra. At ea stage, properties that
were supportive in one context (e.g. multiplication gives a bigger result,
subtraction produces a smaller result, and so on) become problematic later
on.
e development of new multimedia tenology anges the paradigm.
e multimodal environment oﬀers the learner a way to operate on objects
that behave in a predictable way. is provides the opportunity for the
learner to gain insight in an intuitive, embodied way prior to developing
algorithms for more sophisticated use. However, the particular embodiment
may be supportive at one stage but become problematic in a new context,
so there remains the longer term task of how learning at one stage can
impact on later learning. is involves not only the development of the
individual ild making sense of the fundamental mathematical ideas, but
also the social interaction with the tenology as a critical factor in their
collective sense making.

Figure 23.5  Shifting digits physically to the left to multiply by ten.

Application to How Children Use Multimodal
Technologies
Exemplary Activity 1: Force Feedback
In this activity, we oﬀered students two objects to manipulate: a plane and
a 3D shape (e.g. a cone, cube, or pyramid). First the student can use the
Omni as a selection device for cliing-and-dragging the objects around the
screen and reorienting them through twisting the device handle (see Figure
23.6). Once the plane has been moved to intersect with the 3D shape the
device handle becomes a navigation tool for moving the red bug (see
Figure 23.6) around the surfaces and intersections, providing feedba
through continuous forces. rough iterative design we have found that
using magnetism is a useful design principle to enable the user to focus on
what part of the shapes the bug is located. is experience los the bug
onto the surface: the device begins to provide continuous force and abrupt
anges as you move over a speciﬁc discontinuity (e.g. a vertex or edge). In
particular, the user also feels “loed-on” or “sued into” the intersection
joints. Navigation is also driven by 3D motions of the device so that as the
user moves the Omni handle in real space, it simulates the experience of
feeling the pseudo-3D visual shapes on the screen. is design principle and
the use of a bug was discovered to be important for ildren to coordinate
their physical motion with the ﬂat-visual space on the screen. It was a way
of calibrating the two modalities so that ildren might begin to talk about
both experiences. is had been problematic in previous editions. As we
show in the next section, the use of a red bug was not only fun and
engaging for the ildren but became a useful reference point for the
ildren to talk about the experiences. As we will describe, though,
ildren’s discourse moved from talking about the bug explicitly (i.e. the
results of the bug’s actions) to focusing on the speciﬁc mathematical

aributes of the shapes. e bug had a short life in their exploration. Once
the ild sensed the relationship between the two situations, it became
possible to move on from the speciﬁcs of the particular embodiment to
reasoning about the underlying mathematical relationships.
Figure 23.6  Planar intersection with a square-based pyramid.
One variation of this activity was to use a square-based pyramid with the
plane. We draw on a case of four 10-year-olds exploring this setup to
explain how students make sense of su mathematical conﬁgurations
through our analytical framework. Our primary goal was to examine the
types of discourse that students use to make sense of the configurations.
e ildren were engaged in the exploration within minutes of
introducing them to the environment. Initially, the ildren were focused
on perception, with statements that were a mixture of mathematical

observations, metaphors, and behaviors of the elements of the
configuration. These are initial observations:
John:
It might be triangle.
Sarah:
Could be.
John:
Could also be a square.
Sarah:
See if it’s like a wall.
Peter:
It feels heavy.
Sarah:
Heavy? …
Sarah:
The bug is like sucking on it or something.
As the ildren continued to explore the interplay between visual and
haptic modalities it became more evident where their initial visual forms of
perceptions were allenged by physical information ba from the Omni
device:
Sarah:
A triangle it looks like.
Peter:
[Continues to trace intersection and repeatedly move bug oﬀ
and back onto intersection.] When you go up here it’s a triangle,
[referring to the shape made between the front facing edge and
one part of the intersection] because that’s how it is. But when
you go around here [moves bug beneath blue shape] it kind of
feels like a square.
Several of the ildren began to focus more on the objects and their
properties (Operation) as well as aempting to interpret the eﬀect of their
interactions (Reason) and how the plane is perceived of in terms of how it
cuts particular parts of the pyramid apart:
Megan:
I think the square is cuing it oﬀ [gestures] where it’s making,
because the square it goes like that and it goes like that
[gestures a square with her two hands]. I think it cuts it oﬀ

where it goes like that [gestures one corner of a square with
two hands].
Because it’s cuing —[points to screen] it’s just leaving the
boom not the top. [screen turns bla] What happened?
[comes ba] Oh. It’s just —it’s not cuing the side of it
[gestures] where it makes a triangle. It’s cuing in the middle,
[gestures] so it makes a square on the boom just like the
square base pyramid.
e ildren resolve this conﬂict by counting sides that they feel and
turns that they make. ey felt the sharp feedba of moving around a
vertex or angle whilst being continually “stu to” the intersection. e
ildren continue to explore though based on an emerging sense of how
this conﬁguration can be extended and a potential understanding of the
ﬂexibility of this dynamic intersection. is was not prompted by the
interviewer:
Sarah:
I think we can get a five-sided shape.
Interviewer:
Sorry, what? I missed that?
Sarah:
When we felt the triangle if we went on the other side of
the square [the base of the pyramid [we could get a
pentagon.
Peter:
Yeah we could.
Interviewer:
Show me how you can do that using this plane? [Students
pass device down to Sarah]
Sarah:
[Sarah adjusts plane to intersect with the base] [Peter is
drawing] It’s like that.
Interviewer:
Okay.
Sarah:
[Traces with bug her intersection, counting sides] en
you have this side and then it has to go like that. And then
you have that side and then you have that. And then that.
Interviewer:
So for a pentagon, how many sides do you want to feel?

Sarah:
Five.
is is an example of embodied compression that could potentially lead
to forms of symbolic compression with similar explorations of other
polyhedra. Children are focusing on the objects involved in this
conﬁguration and can ﬂexibly manipulate the intersection through
dynamically (visually) editing the slope of the tangent plane. ere is
evidence that the faces of the shape are important for the ildren in trying
to reason the classiﬁcation of the intersection (i.e. by moving the plane into
the base of the pyramid) but the faces are not being enumerated at this
stage.
At this stage, the young students do not express the idea that the planar
intersection of a polyhedron of n faces would be at most an n-gon.
However, our work with high sool and undergraduate students with a
similar activity led to su discoveries being made along with similar forms
of reasoning. is suggests that the design and use of multimodal
tenologies in the future can potentially establish learning environments
for students at various age levels and needs. is example and subsequent
ones outlines an opportunity space for open-ended and semistructured
activities.
Exemplary Activity 2: Multiple Inputs Correspond
to Mathematical Variables
In this activity, one student controls the lateral-moving Point 1 and another
student controls the vertical-moving Point 2, or one student controls both
simultaneously (see Figure 23.7). e goal is for the students to trace a
colored blob around the ﬁxed circle. A third student (or third ﬁnger input)
can adjust the color of the trace, in order to make a rainbow of color

around the circle (point on the spectrum), or the size of the blob (point H).
Figure 23.7  Creating a circle from two inputs.
is activity exempliﬁes how the tenological aﬀordances of multitou
can be adapted in mathematically meaningful ways, hence they could be
described as mathematical aﬀordances of the tenology. Let us oﬀer a
simple example to explain what this means. Consider using an iPad to
wat a movie. A pin gesture can be used to make the movie smaller (or
larger if the pin is reversed outwards). is is a mode of interaction, and
an aﬀordance of the operating system and hardware. It allows the user to
operate in a particular way. Consider now a geometric shape where the
user performs a similar gesture either as a pin or with two ﬁngers (since

the operating system allows su interactions) and the shape is dilated.
Here the tenological aﬀordances can be made mathematical actions. In a
sense, the biological actions are mathematized, puing mathematics at the
very tips of students’ ﬁngers. Unlike on a desktop computer, here the user
can provide two inputs simultaneously to manipulate the sliders (on Points
1 and 2). Point 1 is constrained in order to be moved along an invisible
horizontal line segment and Point 2 on a vertical line segment orthogonal to
the horizontal one. In this construction we have parameterized two input
functions using traditional interactive tools. The two sliders are combined to
create one output, hence the input covariates create a single visual output
(i.e. the blob), whi they need to trace around a ﬁxed circle. Su an input
methodology can be conducted by one person with two ﬁngers or by two
people with single ﬁnger-input strokes. We have found the laer to lead to
collaborative problem-solving teniques where ea person directs the
other to create the desired output. e coordination of su discourse
moves can establish mathematical arguments regarding the relationship
between 
the 
input 
routines 
(social/individual) 
and 
output
(computational/visual).
In our studies, elementary sool and undergraduate students rapidly
move towards moving the point-sliders separately. is has been
completed using single-discrete ﬁnger movements of Point 1 followed by
Point 2, followed by Point 1 and the Point 2 to create four discrete line
segments as the initial trace (i.e. a square). Many groups in our studies have
done this both individually and collaboratively. Su initial investigations
illustrate perception based on information from actions on base-objects in
the learning environment. Following the visual feedba, students realize
that they are not meeting the challenge of tracing of a circle and focus more
on the eﬀects of their inputs and the properties of these interactive
elements controlled by their touch. In one example, two students expressed:

Rob:
We need to move point one left and right …
Sally:
And point two up and down but with a different speed I think.
Given this initial form of reasoning of the essential elements and their
potential role in creating a new mathematical object (the blob output
point), we highlight this as a form of embodied compression where students
focus on the eﬀect of their input operations, in particular the speed of their
input as a model for the mathematical variation formerly embedded in this
activity. For example, one student in this group said:
Jared:
I think we need to move it faster and slower at some points.
Finally, two students in the group move to a form of reasoning that
involves the coordination of both inputs:
Rob:
Point one is kind of a y-axis… And point two is kind of a x-axis.
Sally:
Like… One person can control … like going up-and-down … like
going on the sides of the circle … and the other person can
control the … top and bottom of the circle.
e combination of su reactions and establishment of properties of the
moving inputs and outputs lead to iteratively successful circles. Symbolic
compression is at an elementary stage here where the structure of the
inputs with respect to the output are informally formulated but the essential
properties of su coordination are established: (1) two inputs create one
output; (2) the two inputs need to co-vary, i.e. move together in some
fashion; (3) the two input-tou motions need to vary in terms of motion to
map the circle. is still las the formal symbolic clarity of deﬁning how
su motions can be described in terms of a phased combination of
sinusoidal motions (functions), i.e., x2 × y2 = (sin t)2 = (cos t)2 = 1.
With recent prototypes we have explored a new design space that allows

students to share their construction and parameterize their contributions in
ways that can lead to mathematically ri discussion in terms of
comparison, reasoning, and deduction. rough the aﬀordances of wireless
connectivity, students can share their investigations electronically with the
teaer, who can display through their device connected to a projector thus
providing a public space for discussion. In addition, the activity can be
reconﬁgured at an individual or group level for comparison in this display
space, for example, varying the circle diameter or shape, whi can lead to
a contrast of actions and formulated procedures in a whole-class discussion.

Discussion and Future Perspectives
We have looked closely at learners’ discourse in terms of their uerances
and actions both individually and socially, since they have worked in
groups. In particular the role of non-solastic language in making sense of
the properties of mathematical objects or concepts—e.g. the planar
intersections of solids, categorizing shapes and surfaces, making sense of
geometric transformations or composition of transformations through
multitou, to name a few. We have observed in other work (Güçler,
Hegedus, Robidoux, & Jaiw, 2013) that some forms of non-solastic
statements are mathematically meaningful in scaﬀolding meaning for the
group, and some solastic language can be used in mathematically
inaccurate ways (e.g. drawing on prior knowledge of shapes in incorrect
ways). Students sometimes experienced cross-modality where one modality
(what they see) conflicts with another modality (what they feel).
Using embodied compression, ildren are focusing on objects and the
consequences of their ﬂuid interaction with the environment. ey are also
engaged in co-action (Moreno-Armella, & Hegedus, 2009) where they are
guiding and being guided by their actions within this dynamic, responsive
environment, whi potentially allows them to “see through” to the
underlying mathematical structures inherent in the ﬁgures on the screen
and the “invisible” forces of the haptic device (Hegedus & Moreno-Armella,
2011). We see the beginning of this in Example 1 where the students realize
and rationalize the intersection being a pentagon through visual-haptic
arguments and in Example 2 in Jared’s comments about the dynamics of his
movement (ﬁnger actions) in that they need to ange speed at some points
that give rise to the circularity of the output blob. “Seeing through” can be
thought of as potential insights, perceptions into, or metaphors regarding
the underlying structure. An underlying structure here might be the formal
parametric definition of the circle.

We have observed that it is very diﬃcult to parse out the visual from the
haptic experience, but what the ild or ildren perceive is of particular
relevance. e real allenge is developing learning environments with
sequences of curriculum activities that enable students to transition to forms
of symbolic compression. Without a focus, su students might only focus
on the embodiment, which could be an impediment to future learning.
These are perennial points for many popular technologies in mathematics
education including Logo, Dynamic Geometry, and Spreadsheets. It might
be that any aim of moving towards symbolic compression and
comprehension (and even application) through the use of su tenologies
is at odds with providing access to more students: you cannot aieve both.
But then, the practice of mathematical thinking is potentially anging
because of the transformative role su multimodal tenologies have on
the distributed cognitive and communicative activities of the classrooms
su that the nature of mathematical discourse evolves. Su tenologies
can be thought of as cognitive extensions of the biological self (i.e. thinking
through our ﬁngertips), or the drawing closer of our natural biological
senses and the abstraction of mathematical thinking through the mediating
effect of multimodal technologies. As Rotman (2000) has suggested:
[S]u a transformation of mathematical practice would have a revolutionary impact on how
we conceptualize mathematics, on what we imagine a mathematical object to be, on what we
consider ourselves to be doing when we carry out mathematical investigations, and persuade
ourselves of certain assertions, certain properties and features of mathematical objects, are to be
accepted as “true”. Indeed the very rules and protocols that control what is and isn’t
mathematically meaningful, what constitutes a “theorem”, for example, would undergo a sea
change.
(p. 68–69)
e essential point here is that not only do these tenologies allow a
shi in the mathematical representational infrastructure but they can also
enhance the communication infrastructure of the classroom in the types,

and new forms, of mathematical discourse that can arise from su use in
the future.
We have explored the aﬀordance of linking mathematical objects or
functional relationships through haptic environments. For example, a ild
can use the haptic device to provide dynamic anges to inputs that are
mathematical variables and receive physical feedba that is a dependent
variable to the input(s). Here the tenological environment co-acts in
diﬀerent ways mathematically to the navigational scenarios described. In
the activity illustrated in Figure 23.8, a ild can cli and drag points A, B,
and C (vertices of the triangle) or D (a point to control the translational
position of a parallel line whi the triangle is constructed on), but the
Omni device is programmed to provide resistance (force feedba) that is
proportional to the area of the triangle ABC. Moving certain vertices will
result in invariant resistance (e.g. C) whereas others will create anging
resistance due to the base or height of the triangle being modified.
In our preliminary work, ildren can aribute the inputs to
mathematical variables that result in the output “feeling” and mathematical
representation. Whilst ildren in our studies have not explained this
relationship as Area = ½ × base × height, they have described the Area to
be related to anges in the base and height, a form of embodied
compression. is is also the beginning of symbolic compression. However,
more work needs to be done to understand and realize how su
experiences can establish such forms of symbolizing.
Multitou environments su as Explorer allow young learners to
interact with simple conﬁgurations that involve mathematically meaningful
input and outputs. Su modalities allow ildren to use various modalities
to explore conﬁgurations and focus on their actions (to develop their
perception) and their operations on objects and their iterative responses
based on core interactivity design principles. Su forms of co-actions
(between multimodal iterations and their output, whi further guide

actions) can generate learning environments that enable students to focus
on the operations that enable an understanding of the mathematical
properties and structures being investigated. Tall (2013) aspires towards the
“long-term simpliﬁcation of mathematical ideas”; su infrastructures can
oﬀer su opportunities. is notion of simplification is both mathematical
(where mathematicians and teaers make sense of the mathematical
structures by formulating new concepts that can be manipulated as mental
entities) and also personal (where learners make sense of the compressed
entities in ﬂexible ways). Su ﬂexible thinking can be encouraged at all
levels. For example, by building on the prototypical examples described in
this apter students could engage in a multitou/input approa to
collaboratively create an isosceles triangle or some other classiﬁcation of
2D triangles through group strategizing. Su actions on the base vertices A
or B could establish methods to focus on the steps necessary to create an
equiangular shape or similar magnitudes of sides and develop symbolic
compression. In addition, with well-conﬁgured sketes, many “parent-
ild” relationships, whi preserve mathematical aributes, could be
discovered through a multitou approa. A free triangle with no
constraints on the vertices would lead to a collaborative strategy (or an
individual one) that focuses on the eﬀect of moving one vertex with respect
to the other one; or the eﬀects of moving two vertices with respect to the
corresponding sides; or the invariance of su actions on some of the
properties of the triangle.

Figure 23.8  Dynamic triangles.
In addition, the potential of su devices in a connected environment can
help develop the process of symbolic compression as students individually,
collaboratively, and in comparison, externalize the steps that are necessary
in coordinating a workspace of procedures and sense-making of
mathematical concepts and aributes. e public workspace could be a
collaborative arrangement where ea student is developing a variation of
a set of conﬁgurations—e.g. a family of similar triangles—or an aggregative
enterprise where ildren build particular linked pieces of a constructions,
knowing how their piece interacts with someone else’s product or the
whole group construction.
We have aempted to introduce how recent multimodal tenologies
can create learning environments for students to access the basis for the
mathematical properties of shapes, conﬁgurations and functional
relationships focused on variation and covariation. is can be aieved,
and in the future reﬁned, through the combination of various modalities, in
particular tou and visual. e primary purpose is to enable access to the
embedded mathematical structure in order that a “focus on real-world
embodiment can make sense for early learners, giving embodied meaning
to symbolic operations.” (Tall, 2013, p.173.)

We propose that the long-term development of mathematical thinking
can be sustained through the careful use of multimodal tenologies and
meaningful implementation—careful because of the potential for causing
confusion for students in conﬂicting modal experiences highlighted earlier,
and also because of the possibility that formal symbolic compression might
not be aieved through su implementation. e opportunity space that
we outline here needs to be explored in ways that can create coherent
mathematical experiences that not only allow access to mathematical ideas
and concepts but also develop into more general symbolic thinking. is
might not be possible for the whole spectrum of learners; future work
needs to address this critically as more curriculum is developed that
integrates su tenological aﬀordances in meaningful ways. We have
tried to demonstrate here ways of doing this where the physical experience
has been preprogrammed to correspond to mathematical aributes or
multiple toues (input) correspond to mathematical operations (e.g.
transformations). Both of these approaes are time consuming and should
be built and tested in a resear environment. e alternative is a form of
edutainment where the feedba is superﬂuous to the mathematics of the
activity.
Future work also needs to address whi populations of students are
being addressed and what the signiﬁcance of the resear actually is. In the
studies reported here we have worked with traditional populations, but we
also see the need to work with multimodal tenologies for speciﬁc
categories of learners, su as those with special educational needs (as
outlined at the start of this apter). Future work needs to focus on
pedagogical strategies and the preparation of teaers to implement su
strategies.
One of the long-term critical issues for eﬀective implementation of
tenologies in sools is the professional development of teaers not only
to understand how to use the new tools but also the pedagogical

implications. Depending on the stage of their careers, teaers might be
faced with rethinking how su tenologies can enhance the learning
environment or even transform the very nature of the classroom in terms
of how mathematics is redescribed. If teaers are later in their career this
might involve a shi in mindset to how content is conceived of and how it
might be eﬀectively introduced through su new tenologies. Hennessy,
Ruthven, and Brindley (2005) build on Cuban’s message by reporting on use
of Information and Communications Tenology (ICT) in England. ey
report that teaers in their study might aﬃrm that their practices are
anging, but they are not participating actively in tenology-based
curriculum design and implementation in their sools. Hennessey and
colleagues propose ﬁve speciﬁc aims for successful integration of ICT at the
level of departmental policy and planning: (a) providing teaers with
“opportunities for long-term collegial interaction involving critical
reﬂection, sharing ideas, and resear concerning the use of ICT” (p. 187);
(b) integrating ICTs into a structure of work in alignment with the national
prescribed curriculum and help in meeting learning objectives with critical
and appropriate use; (c) taking into account and enhancing students and
teaers’ levels of tenological expertise; (d) systematically evaluating the
aﬀordances of ICT for aainment of speciﬁc learning goals; and (e) oﬀering
a balance of complementary ICT-based and other learning activities. ey
claim organizational ange processes are important in generating
strategies to successful implementation of tenology-based instruction and
emphasize “shared ownership of plans” (p. 186) at organizational level as a
requisite to implement tenology into the sool instructional practices
with a signiﬁcant impact on student learning. Our work and proposed
claims for future development and implementation need to address su
aims to have any widespread signiﬁcance in mathematics classrooms in the
future.
In conclusion, the central focus here is on the fundamentals of

mathematics and how the latest advances of multimodal tenologies can
promote learning through the development of mathematically meaningful
transformations of tenological aﬀordances. is should potentially impact
curriculum design, how we teach, and how our children learn in the future.

Note
1. is work is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
REC-0835395. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the agency.

References
Abrahamson, A. L. (1998). An overview of teaing and learning resear with classroom
communication systems. Paper presented at the Samos International Conference on the Teaing
of Mathematics, Village of Pythagorion. Samos, Greece.
Abrahamson, A. L. (2000). A brief history of ClassTalk. Paper presented at the Teaers Teaing
with Technology International Conference. Dallas, TX.
Baista, M. T. (1997). Shape makers: Developing geometric reasoning with the Geometer’s
Sketchpad. Berkeley, CA: Key Curriculum Press.
Brady, C. E (2013). Perpectives in motion. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Massachusetts, Dartmouth.
Bretser, N. (in press). Exploring the quantitative and qualitative gap between expectations and
implantation: A survey of English mathematics teaers’ use of ICT. In A. Clark-Wilson, O.
Robui, & N. Sinclair (Eds.). e mathematics teaer in the digital age . Dordret, e
Netherlands: Springer.
Bruner, J. S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burnstein, R., & Lederman, L. M. (2001). Using wireless keypads in lecture classes. Physics Teaer,
39(8), 8–11.
Crou, C. H., & Mazur, E. (2001). Peer instruction: Ten years of experience and results. e Physics
Teacher, 69(9), 970–977.
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Cuoco, A., & Goldenberg, P. (1997). Dynamic geometry as a bridge from Euclidean Geometry to
analysis. In J. R. King & D. Sasneider (Eds.), Geometry turned on!: Dynamic soware in
learning, teaing and resear (pp. 69–70). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of
America.
Dalton, S., & Hegedus, S. (2013). Learning and motivation in high sool classrooms. In S. Hegedus
& J. Roselle (Eds.), Democratizing access to important mathematics through dynamic
representations: Contributions and visions from the SimCalc Research Program. Berlin: Springer.
Dautenhahn, K. (2000). Design issues on interactive environments for ildren with autism. In

Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Disability, Virtual Reality and Associated
Technologies, ICDVRAT (pp. 153–161). Alghero, Sardinia, Italy.
Dede, C. (2000). Emerging inﬂuences of information tenology on sool curriculum. Journal of
Curriculum Studies, 32(2), 281–303.
Dienes, Z. P. (1960). Building up mathematics. London: Hutchinson.
Drijvers, P., Kieran, C., & Marioi, M-A. (2009). Integrating tenology into mathematics education:
eoretical perspectives. In C. Hoyles & J-B. Lagrange (Eds.), Mathematics education and
technology—rethinking the terrain (pp. 89–132). New York: Springer.
Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., Leonard, W. J., Mestre, J. P., & Wenk, L. (1996). Classtalk: A classroom
communication system for active learning. Journal for Computing in Higher Education, 7(2), 3–
47.
Dwyer, M. C., & Pfeifer, R. E. (1999). Exploring hyperbolic geometry with The Geometer’s Sketchpad.
Mathematics Teacher, 92(7), 632–637.
Falcade, R., Laborde, C., & Marioi, M. A. (2007). Approaing functions: Cabri tools as instruments
of semiotic mediation. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 66(3), 317–333.
Flowers, L. A. (2002). Developing purposes in college: Diﬀerences between freshman and seniors.
College Student Journal, 36, 478–484.
Gol Tabaghi, S. & Sinclair, N. (2013). Using dynamic geometry soware to explore eigenvectors: e
emergence of dynamic-synthetic-geometric thinking. Tenology, Knowledge and Learning
18(3), 149–164.
Gorini, C. A. (1997). Dynamic visualization in calculus. In J. R. King & D. Sasneider (Eds.),
Geometry turned on!: Dynamic soware in learning, teaing and resear (pp. 89–94).
Washington, DC: The Mathematical Association of America.
Güçler, B., Hegedus, S., Robidoux, R., & Jaiw, N. (2013). Investigating the mathematical discourse
of young learners involved in multi-modal mathematical investigations: e case of haptic
tenologies. In D. Martinovic, V. Freiman, & Z. Karadag (Eds.), Visual mathematics
cyberlearning (pp. 97–118). New York: Springer.
Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs. traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey of
mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 66, 64–74.
Hartline, F. (1997). Analysis of 1st semester of Classtalk use at MacIntosh elementary sool.

Yorktown, VA: Better Education.
Hassan, R. (1992). Spee genre, semiotic mediation and the development of higher mental
functions. Language Sciences, 14(4), 489–528.
Hegedus, S. J., & Roselle, J. (2012). Highly adaptive, interactive instruction: Insights for the
networked classroom. In C. Dede & J. Riards (Eds.), Digital teaing platforms (pp. 103–115).
New York: Teachers College Press.
Hegedus, S. J., & Roselle, J. (2013). (Eds.). Democratizing access to important mathematics through
dynamic representations: Contributions and visions from the SimCalc Resear Program. Berlin:
Springer.
Hegedus, S. J., & Moreno-Armella, L. (2011). e emergence of mathematical structures. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 77(2–3), 369–388.
Hennessy, S., Ruthven, K., & Brindley, S.(2005). Teaer perspectives on integrating ICT into subject
teaing: commitments, constrains, caution, and ange. Journal of Curriculum Studies, 37(2),
155–192.
Hollebrands, K. (2002). e role of a dynamic soware program for geometry in high sool
students’ understandings of geometric transformations. In D. Mewborn, P. Sztajn, D. Y. White,
H. G. Wiegel, R. L. Bryant, & K. Nooney (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th Annual Meeting of the
North American Chapter of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics
Education (Vol. 2, pp. 695–705). Columbus, OH: ERIC Clearinghouse on Science, Mathematics
and Environmental Education.
Jaiw, N. (2003). Visualizing complex functions with the Geometer’s Sketpad. In T. Triandaﬁllidis
& K. Hatzikiriakou (Eds.), Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Tenology in
Mathematics Teaching (pp. 291–299). Volos, Greece: University of Thessaly.
Jaiw, N. (2013). Tou & multitou in dynamic geometry: Sketpad Explorer and “digital”
mathematics. Proceedings of ICTMT12 (pp. 149–155), Bari, Italy.
Jaiw, N., & Sinclair, N. (2007). Dynamic geometry activity design for elementary sool
mathematics. In C. Hoyles, J.-B. Lagrange, L. H. Sun, & N. Sinclair (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Seventeenth ICMI Study Conference “Tenology Revisited”  (pp. 236–245). Paris, France: Hanoi
Institute of Technology and Didirem University.
Jaimes, A., & Sebe, N. (2007). Multimodal human computer interaction: A survey. Computer Vision

and Image Understanding, 108(1–2), 116–134.
Kaput, J., Hegedus, S., & Lesh, R. (2007). Tenology becoming infrastructural in mathematics
education. In R. Lesh, E. Hamilton, & J. Kaput (Eds.), Foundations for the future in mathematics
and science (pp. 172–192). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Laborde, C. (2000). Dynamic geometry environments as a source of ri learning contexts for the
complex activity of proving. Educational Studies in Mathematics (Special edition on proof in
dynamic geometry environments), 44(1–3), 151–161.
Laborde, C. (2001). Integration of tenology in the design of geometry tasks with Cabri-Geometre.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 6, 283–317.
Ladel, S., & Kortenkamp, U. (2011). Implementation of a multitou-environment supporting ﬁnger
symbol sets. In M. Pytlak, T. Rowland, & E. Swoboda (Eds.), Proceedings of the seventh Congress
of the European Society for Research in Maths Education (pp. 1792–1801). University of Rzeszów,
Poland.
Lakoﬀ, G., & Nuñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Marioi, M. A. (2000). Introduction to proof: e mediation of a dynamic soware environment.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 44(1–2), 25–53.
Marioi, M. A. (2003). e inﬂuence of tenological advances on students’ mathematics learning.
In L. D. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (pp. 695–
723). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Moreno-Armella, L., & Hegedus, S. (2009). Co-action with digital tenologies. ZDM: e
International Journal on Mathematics Education, Special Issue: Transforming Mathematics
Education through the Use of Dynamic Mathematics Technologies, 41(4), 505–519.
Nemirovsky, R., & Borba, M. (2003). Perceptuo-motor activity and imagination in mathematics
learning. In N. Pateman, B. Dougherty, & J. Zilliox (Eds.), Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference for the Psyology of Mathematics (Vol. 1, pp. 105–136). Honolulu, Hawai’i:
Program Committee.
Nemirovsky, R., Kelton, M. L., & Rhodehamel, B. (2013). Playing mathematical instruments:
Emerging perceptuomotor integration with an interactive mathematics exhibit. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 44(2), 372–415.

Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (1996). Windows on mathematical meanings: Learning cultures and
computers. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Olive, J. (1997). Creating airfoils from circles: e Jouowski transformation. In J. R. King & D.
Sasneider (Eds.), Geometry turned on!: Dynamic soware in learning, teaing and
research (pp. 169–177). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Piazza, S. (2002). Peer instruction using an electronic response system in large lecture classes.
Presented at the Pennsylvania State University, Center for Educational Tenology Services
“Teaing with Tenology” Series: Departments of Kinesiology, Meanical Engineering, and
Orthopedics and Rehabilitation.
Radford, L., Demers, S., Guzmán, J., & Cerulli, M. (2003). Calculators, graphs, gestures and the
production of meaning. In N. A. Pateman, B. J. Dougherty, & J. T. Zilliox (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 27th conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education
(Vol. 4, pp. 55–62). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii.
Radford, L., Edwards, L., & Arzarello, F. (2009). Introduction: Beyond words. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 70(2), 91–95.
Radford, L., Miranda, I., & Guzmán, J. (2008). Relative motion, graphs and the heteroglossic
transformation of meanings: A semiotic analysis. Paper presented at the proceedings of the 32nd
conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education, Morelia,
México.
Rasmussen, C., Nemirovsky, R., Olszewski, J., Dost, K., & Johnson, J. L. (2004). On forms of knowing:
e role of bodily activity and tools in mathematical learning. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 57(3), 313–316.
Roselle, J., Abrahamson, A. L., & Penuel, W. (2003). Catalyst: Toward scientiﬁc studies of the
pedagogical integration of learning theory and classroom networks. Menlo Park, CA: SRI
International.
Roselle, J., Knudsen, J., & Hegedus, S. (2010). From new tenological infrastructures to curricular
activity systems: Advanced designs for teaing and learning. In M. J. Jacobsen & P. Reimann
(Eds.), Designs for learning environments of the future (pp. 233–262). New York: Springer.
Rotman, B. (2000). Mathematics as sign. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Shaﬀer, D. W. (1995). Exploring trigonometry with the Geometer’s Sketpad. Berkeley, CA: Key

Curriculum Press.
Sinclair, N. (2001). The aesthetic is relevant. For the Learning of Mathematics, 21(1), 25–33.
Sinclair, N. (2002a). Re-constructing a painting with geometric eyes. For the Learning of
Mathematics, 22(3), 19–23.
Sinclair, N. (2002b). e kissing triangles: e aesthetics of mathematical discovery. International
Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7(1), 45–63.
Sinclair, N., Arzarello, F., Trigueros Gaisman, M., & Lozano, M. D. (2009). Implementing digital
tenologies at a national scale. In C. Hoyles & J. Lagrange (Eds.), Digital tenologies and
mathematics teaching and learning: Rethinking the terrain. Berlin: Springer.
Sinclair, N., & Crespo, S. (2006). Learning mathematics with dynamic computer environments.
Teaching Children Mathematics, 12(9), 436–444.
Sinclair, N., & Moss, J. (2012). e more it anges, the more it becomes the same: e development
of the routine of shape identiﬁcation in dynamic geometry environments. International Journal
of Education Research, 51&52, 28–44.
Sinclair, N., & Sedaghat Jou, M. (2013). Finger counting and adding with TouchCounts. Presented at
CERME 8. Early Mathematics Working Group. Antalya, Turkey.
Stroup, W. (2005). Learning the basics with calculus. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and
Science Teaching, 24(2), 179–196.
Stroup, W. M., Ares, N. M., & Hurford, A. (2005). A dialectic analysis of generativity: Issues of
network supported design in mathematics and science. Journal of Mathematical inking and
Learning, 7(3), 181–206.
Tall, D. O. (2013). How humans learn to think mathematically: Exploring the three worlds of
mathematics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
ompson Avant, M. J., & Heller, K. W. (2011). Examining the eﬀectiveness of TouMath with
students with physical disabilities. Remedial and Special Education, 32(4), 309–321.
Tomasello, M. (1999). e Cultural Evolution of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
U.S. Department of Education. (2007). e nation’s report card mathematics 2007: National
assessment of educational progress at grades 4 and 8. Washington, DC.
Vahey, P., Tatar, D., & Roselle, J. (2007). Using handhelds to link private cognition and public

interaction. Educational Technology, 47(3), 13–16.
Vygotsky, L. (1980). Mind in society: e development of the higher psyological processes .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Yerushalmy, M., & Naaliev, E. (2011). Design of interactive diagrams structured upon generic
animations. Technology, Knowledge and Learning, 16(3), 221–246.

24 Statistical Software and Mathematics
Education
Affordances for Learning
Jane Watson and Noleine Fitzallen
University of Tasmania
Soware applications designed for education have become more
sophisticated and have the potential to be more than tools employed in the
classroom just to make it easier or quier to perform tasks otherwise
completed by hand. By virtue of advances in tenology and the
complexity of the functionality that is embedded within soware
applications, the potential of learning from computers has shied to
learning with computers. is distinction was recognized by Goldenberg
(1991) in providing examples of students learning the aracteristics of
algebraic functions through interacting with a graphing soware paage
by inpuing test equations and observing the ﬁt with the correct one. e
increase of the use of immersive interactive interfaces has also resulted in
many applications that are student-centered; that is, students are able to
participate in the learning process by using design features embedded
within applications to construct understanding of ideas and concepts within
meaningful contexts (Jonassen & Land, 2000; Murray, Blessing, &
Ainsworth, 2003). is occurs when students are active participants in the
learning process, but it does not occur without support (Land, Hannaﬁn, &
Oliver, 2012). e support necessary, in some cases, is oﬀered by the
soware application itself. Its inherent features, capabilities, and ﬂexibility
determine to what extent and the way in whi that support is delivered.

ese aracteristics of soware applications are aﬀordances, whi
scaﬀold and support student learning, and it is the aﬀordances for learning
that are the focus of this apter. What do students learn from using
soware that they might not learn, or learn as easily, without it? e aim of
the apter is to go beyond what a soware application promises to do to
consider its aﬀordances for learning. Further, what are the aﬀordances for
teachers in their planning for and assessment of student learning?

Affordances
Gibson (1977) is credited with developing the eory of Aﬀordances, whi
has been extended and applied in many ﬁelds (e.g., Jones, 2003; Webb,
2005). For Gibson, affordance referred to the perceived usefulness of an
object by a potential user. In the context of this apter, the potential user
may be a learner or a teaer, and the object is some facet of soware with
perceived usefulness by either user. For Gibson, aﬀordances, from the
perspective of ecological psyology, were directly related to ﬁing the
organism (in this case the user of the soware) to the environment (in this
case the soware itself). is could be taken to mean that aﬀordances are
what the soware can do for the user. Anowledging that users must
know what the soware can do before learning can occur, this apter
transfers the focus to the learning aﬀordances. Two literatures hence
provide a foundation for the apter. One is based on the aﬀordances of
tenology (e.g., Bower, 2008). Based on Gibson’s deﬁnition, Bower is
interested in educational aﬀordances, “aracteristics of an educational
[tenology] resource that indicate if and how a particular learning
behavior could possibly be enacted within the context,” and social
aﬀordances, “aspects of the online learning environment that provide
social-contextual facilitation relevant to the learner’s social interaction” (p.
6). Although social aﬀordances receive some aention in this apter, the
main focus is on educational aﬀordances. With respect to tenology
generally, Bower goes on to delineate 11 categories of e-learning
tenology aﬀordances, 10 of whi are applicable to the type of soware
that is the focus of this apter. ese can be interpreted in terms of the
aracteristics of the soware that can be perceived by the user as
contributing to its usefulness. ey include input/output formats,
resizability, accessibility, ability to browse baward and forward, capacity
to highlight particular features, ability to combine tools, intuitiveness of

features, appearance of the interface, capacity to be used on various
platforms, and reliability. e access control aﬀordances related to
synronous and asynronous collaboration and publication apply to
online applications and do not apply to stand-alone software applications.
e second literature is related more speciﬁcally to the mathematics that
is taught in the classroom and what tasks, problems, demonstrations, and
tools are used by the teaer to engage students with the mathematics for
learning. Chi (2007) also uses Gibson’s (1977) deﬁnition of aﬀordances
and links it to teaers’ pedagogical content knowledge in order to consider
potential aﬀordances, recognizing the opportunities that are inherent in the
“objects” as tasks or tools employed in the classroom. In expanding her
exposition, Chick introduces the word example to cover the objects that she
uses to exemplify the types and range of aﬀordances she analyses. For her,
the importance of examples and their potential aﬀordances lies in the
learning that takes place. Chick’s examples are not embedded in technology
use but it is possible to imagine that some of the tasks, demonstrations, and
exercises could be so embedded, as similar examples are in the soware
examples provided in this chapter.
Combining the foundations provided by Chi’s (2007) speciﬁc concerns
about aﬀordances (potential and actual) for mathematics learning and
Bower’s (2008) focus on the aﬀordances of tenology to facilitate learning
behavior more generally, this apter looks at learning and learning
behavior based mainly in the statistics part of mathematics curricula using
the TinkerPlots soware (Konold & Miller, 2011). e combining of these
two perspectives is illustrated by Brown, Stillman, and Herbert (2004) as
they aempt to devise an operational deﬁnition of aﬀordances that could
be used for designing a tenology-ri mathematics curriculum. ey
found it necessary to anowledge the further contribution of Kennewell
(2001) in suggesting that there are also “constraints” to consider, as well as
aﬀordances, when judging the usefulness of an object. Kennewell (2001)

deﬁnes constraints as “the conditions and relationships amongst aributes
whi provide structure and guidance for the course of actions” (p. 106). He
claims that constraints are not the opposite of aﬀordances but
complementary to them “and equally necessary for activity to take place”
(p. 106) when considering what tenology has to oﬀer for particular
learning experiences. Brown and her colleagues ask speciﬁcally if
aﬀordances are positive and constraints negative or are constraints a way of
articulating more speciﬁcally the aﬀordances that exist in a given situation
and if an object aﬀords users to do things in particular ways by constraining
them to think or act in a speciﬁc way. is apter furthers the
consideration of constraints and their potential as affordances.

Background
e context within whi the aﬀordances of soware for learning are
considered is statistics. Content associated with statistics has had a high
proﬁle in the mathematics curricula of developed countries since the last
decade of the 20th century (e.g., Australian Education Council, 1991;
Ministry of Education, 1992; National Council of Teaers of Mathematics,
1989). e objectives of these curricula are intended to meet two needs.
One is to prepare students for engaging in serious statistical investigations
either in relation to other subjects at sool or at higher education levels by
completing further study. e second need is for statistically literate citizens
who, although not engaging personally in statistical investigations, have the
ability to analyze reports and claims made in wider society critically, claims
perhaps made by interest groups or the media. Both of these objectives are
based on thinking and reasoning statistically. e reasoning skills for both
are built around experiencing the stages of a statistical investigation during
the sool years (Watson, 2006; Watson & Fitzallen, 2010). Over time
students ask data-driven questions, collect data to answer the questions,
represent the data in some visual form, reduce the data to a summary form,
and make a decision related to the question based on the conﬁdence they
have in the evidence collected. ey also learn about the important
relationship between samples and populations in drawing inferences about
the laer from the former (Manor, Ben-Zvi, & Aridor, 2014; Saldanha &
McAllister, 2014; Watson & Chance, 2012). A allenge for students is to
make these decisions anowledging uncertainty and to develop intuitions
in judging levels of certainty (Ainley & Pra, 2014). Experiencing the
process involved in statistical investigations over the sool years provides
the baground for the type of reasoning required for statistical literacy. In
social seings where citizens encounter statistical claims, they need to be
able to recognize and understand statistical terminology being used, further

understand its meaning within the context where it is being applied, and
then be able to question claims that are made without proper justiﬁcation
or confirm those that are properly made (Watson, 2006).
e realization two decades ago that visualization through computer
graphics could assist learners in learning about algebraic functions
(Goldenberg, 1991) was shared in the realm of random phenomena by
Weissglass and Cummings (1991). Based on a paage called Hands-On
Statistics (Weissglass, eis, & Finzer, 1986), they gave examples of a series
of programs to complete speciﬁc tasks, including ﬂipping coins, loery
draws, sampling means, and comparing means. At that time these could be
used by groups of students in computer labs to supplement classroom
lectures. ese authors recognized early the constructivist perspective in
claiming that the advantages (aﬀordances) to students were having control
over the oice of parameters when performing experiments, experiencing
visual representations of concepts, repeating experiments at will, visualizing
results for diﬀerent sample sizes, and experiencing immediate feedba
from experiments. ese are supplemented by Goldenberg in relation to
graphing more generally with the ability to modify representations, to
highlight certain regions, to focus on scale, and to appreciate the
importance of using appropriate language to describe the learning
experience. ese initiatives anticipated the later development of the
DataScope paage (Konold & Miller, 1994), whi allowed many of the
same affordances for students in terms of learning.
e soware that is the focus of this discussion of aﬀordances for
learning statistics is TinkerPlots: Dynamic Data Exploration (Konold &
Miller, 2011). Originally created for the middle years of sooling, it is now
used mu more widely, including at the tertiary level (e.g., Day, 2013;
delMas, Garﬁeld, & Zieﬄer, 2014; Frisemeier; 2014) and in industry (e.g.,
Hoyles, Bakker, Kent, & Noss, 2007). An earlier version of the soware was
also the focus of a apter on soware in a previous edition of this

Handbook (Konold & Lehrer, 2008). Although described in some detail in
Konold and Lehrer, a summary of the development of TinkerPlots is
necessary here to set the scene for moving from the “doing” aﬀordances of
the soware to its “learning” aﬀordances for students and their teaers. In
describing the rationale for developing the initial version of TinkerPlots
(Konold & Miller, 2005) from the earlier paage, DataScope (Konold &
Miller, 1994), Konold (2007) noted two features that contribute directly to
the aﬀordances exhibited in the current apter. One was the conscious
eﬀort to avoid producing a watered-down version of tertiary graphing
soware that makes assumptions about students’ prior knowledge of
statistics. e need to know what kind of graph is needed for a particular
data set before opening the graphing paage means that the soware is
strictly a tool for “doing” on command, not a tool for “learning” as the
student tries various representations. e other feature was positioning
TinkerPlots as constructivist soware, whi ﬁts with the developmental
view of the curriculum in today’s environment. It is not about telling
students deﬁnitions and procedures but about guiding them to discover the
appropriate ways to display, summarize, compare, and judge data sets to
tell the stories behind them. Reﬂecting a constructivist viewpoint means
that students can produce a meaningless representation, realize the story is
not seen, delete the plot, and create another from the possibilities available,
some of whi they may have never seen before (Harradine & Konold,
2006). Students rapidly get used to exploring multiple representations that
would take a long time to produce by hand (e.g., Ireland & Watson, 2009).

What TinkerPlots Offers
To consider the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots for learning it is necessary to
explain brieﬂy the structure of the program when one interacts with it. e
structure is based on ﬁve “objects” that appear in the upper le corner of
the window when the program is opened (Figure 24.1). e ﬁrst two
objects, Cards and Table, contain the data that are used in the statistical
investigation. e next two objects, Plot and Sampler, provide the major
environments within whi the activity of the investigation takes place. e
ﬁnal object, Text, provides a box within whi text can be entered to report
the results of the investigation. TinkerPlots has many other tools and
features, whi are illustrated in Biehler, Ben-Zvi, Bakker, and Makar
(2013) and in Konold and Lehrer (2008).
e Plot is the cornerstone of TinkerPlots. It is used to build graphical
representations, whi are employed to organize data, making it possible to
sear 
for 
interesting 
paerns 
or 
group 
diﬀerences. 
Graphical
representations are created and manipulated within the Plot using an icon-
based cli-drag-and-drop function. Changes are qui and ﬂuid, and are
viewed as animations. The opportunity to create a large variety of graphical
representations arises either by anging the data icon using the drop-down
menu at the boom of the Plot, or by selecting tools from the menu that is
added to the TinkerPlots interface at the top of the screen when the Plot
window is active (Figure 24.2). Although a stand-alone object, the Plot can
be utilized in conjunction with output from the Sampler.

Figure 24.1 The five basic objects in TinkerPlots.
Figure 24.2  Typical Plot with tool bars and associated Cards.
e Sampler is a simulator that can be used to model probabilistic
processes and to generate data. It also makes possible the random selection
of samples from large ﬁnite populations when they are placed in the
Sampler. Output from the Sampler can be represented in a Table or a Plot.
A Sampler, for example, can be used to simulate tossing two coins, collect
data in a Table, and analyze the Table data in a Plot in order to explore
questions about the probability of geing two heads. e various devices to
use within the Sampler are osen from a tool bar across the boom of the
object or from drop-down menus within the object. e devices include a
Mixer and a Spinner (Figure 24.3). e Mixer shows balls bouncing before
one emerges at the top, to be replaced before the next Draw. For the
Spinner a pointer is seen to rotate before coming to rest in one section. e
Sampler can utilize a combination of individual devices or multiples of
devices selected.
ese and some of the other features of TinkerPlots are exempliﬁed in
the later section on Examples of Aﬀordances of the soware. It is also
possible to wat the basic demonstration movie for TinkerPlots, as well as
other movies, on the Web (www.srri.umass.edu/tinkerplots/overview).

Potential Affordances of TinkerPlots
In order to describe the potential aﬀordances of TinkerPlots it is useful to
consider the aﬀordances deﬁned by Bower (2008) within the soware
context. To do this it is necessary to move from the broad deﬁnition of
aﬀordances oﬀered by Bower to anowledging how the relevant
aﬀordances are aracterized in TinkerPlots. In 2007, Fitzallen conducted an
evaluation of TinkerPlots where she outlined the nature of TinkerPlots
using a set of organizers called Enabling Aspects of Soware (Fitzallen &
Brown, 2006). e set of six Enabling Aspects were developed by
combining three frameworks sourced from the literature: the Principles for
Analysing Visual Representations (Kidman & Nason, 2000), Guidelines for
Evaluating Software (Goyne, McDonough, & Padge, 2000), and the Model
of Learning in EDA Graphing Environments (Fitzallen, 2006). Although not
developed with the notion of aﬀordances in mind, Fitzallen and Brown’s
Enabling Aspects of Soware align with Bower’s aﬀordances of
tenology, while focusing directly on TinkerPlots. Fitzallen’s (2007)
evaluation of TinkerPlots, highlighting the potential aﬀordances of the
soware, was based on the original version of TinkerPlots, whi featured
representing data in graphs. The current version extends the functionality of
the soware by including the Sampler. Because of its breadth of
application, Fitzallen and Brown’s framework remains relevant for
describing the potential affordances of the current version of TinkerPlots.

Figure 24.3 Typical Samplers using the Mixer (left) and Spinner (right).
e TinkerPlots interface is accessible and the features are easy to use
(Enabling Aspect 1, Fitzallen, 2007). e menus are icon-based and
incorporate drop-down menus for accessing additional features. A drop-
and-drag functionality is utilized to add Cards, Table, Plot, and Sampler
objects to the soware interface. is has the potential for students to
introduce the diﬀerent visual representations onto the screen in stages. is
is particularly useful when building a Sampler. By adding diﬀerent
elements of the Sampler to the screen in stages, students experience the
growing capability of the Sampler as it is constructed.
Data can be displayed in TinkerPlots in multiple forms simultaneously
(Enabling Aspect 2). As well as being able to store and record data in sets of
data cards and in tables, graphical representations can be used to display the
data. Data can also be generated using the Sampler. e way in whi the
graphical representations are constructed from the data allows learners to
transition ba and forth and among those various representations easily.
is has the potential for students to maintain the connection among the
data, the graphical representations constructed, and the data summary tools
used to analyze the data, su as the Mean, Mode, Median, and Hat plot. As

well as the ability to display data in multiple ways, other information su
as text and digital images can be added to the TinkerPlots interface. is
has the potential to facilitate the process of translating between
mathematical expression and natural language (Enabling Aspect 3) as
students add a commentary to a Text box in everyday language to describe
and analyze the graphical representations they construct.
TinkerPlots is very ﬂexible. It allows students to build representations
that are meaningful to them. ey are not conﬁned to using prearranged
graph types and they are able to build multiple graphical representations
from the one data set. is has the potential for students to draw on the
extended memory TinkerPlots oﬀers when organizing and reorganizing
data (Enabling Aspect 4). In addition, the Sampler provides an interactive
environment that allows multiple entry points for abstraction of concepts
(Enabling Aspect 5). e ability to build a Sampler progressively enables
students to add complexity and increasing functionality to the object. e
capacity then to represent the data generated in graphical representations in
the Plot object and use data analysis tools, su as the Ruler, whi
measures distances between points on a continuous scale, have the potential
to allow students to enter the statistical inquiry process from multiple entry
points. e visual representations created using the Plot and Sampler
objects have the potential to be used for both interpretative and expressive
learning activities (Enabling Aspect 6). Fitzallen and Brown’s (2006) six
Enabling Aspects are evidenced in the studies described in the section,
Examples of Affordances.
Affordances of TinkerPlots
e aﬀordances of a graphing soware paage can be described in terms
of its ability to foster students’ mathematical learning (Chi, 2007). e

capacity to do this is dependent on the aracteristics of the soware
paage and the way in whi students interact with and access those
aracteristics. Facilitating this interaction is the way in whi teaers
incorporate the soware paage into learning experiences and orestrate
the development of key concepts and ideas. It is important to recognize that
soware paages alone are not likely to encourage students to build up
their capacity to think and reason in particular ways. Learning is facilitated
when the teaer artfully combines allenges and scaﬀolds learning with
the resource, in accompaniment with suitable contexts and investigation
processes within a larger learning program.
A graphing soware paage, in this case TinkerPlots, hence has
potential aﬀordances when employed by a teaer in a way that gives the
opportunity for learning, in this case learning about statistics (and
probability). Learning about how to use the soware may be a starting
point, or happen periodically along the way, but it is not the end game. It
may be exciting to see a colorful plot or wat a probability simulation run
but the objective is to glean from these an understanding of a context, a
question, and the potential answer to the question that one did not have
before. In showcasing the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots it is hence necessary to
set diﬀerent scenes, explain the questions, demonstrate the contribution by
TinkerPlots, and describe the learning that is facilitated. e following four
sections present examples in relation to aﬀordances of TinkerPlots for
students’ learning statistics, for enhancing teaers’ pedagogical content
knowledge for teaing statistics, for assessing students’ understanding, and
for supporting other areas of the mathematics curriculum (as a by-product).
In light of the observations of Kennewell (2001), a ﬁnal section considers
constraints in relation to TinkerPlots and makes suggestions for further
enhancement of the affordances.

Examples of Affordances
e aﬀordances of learning that are linked to experiences based in a
practical TinkerPlots environment are varied both in content and in the age
range of students. In presenting examples of aﬀordances (Chi, 2007), it is
understood that they represent speciﬁc instances of statistical learning
osen in this case to illustrate or explore the relationship between
TinkerPlots and the learning taking place. Four environments are
considered in presenting examples of the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots. e
most numerous group of examples reﬂects the main purpose of the
soware, “Students learning statistics.” is generally does not happen
without teaers; the second subsection reports on examples relating to
“Teaers learning to tea statistics.” Associated with teaing is assessing,
and the third group of examples of aﬀordances is “Assessing
understanding.” ere are also sometimes spinoﬀs from using TinkerPlots
that are not directly related to statistics. e next subsection provides
examples of aﬀordances for “Other mathematics learning.” e following
subsection, “Constraints,” considers aﬀordances in the light of constraints
that exist in the structure of TinkerPlots and whether they may have a
positive or negative impact on learning.

Students Learning Statistics
Paparistodemou and Meletiou-Mavrotheris (2008) provide multiple
examples of grade 3 students in Cyprus learning to make arguments based
on data they collect from their sool on nutrition, health, and safety. e
examples are all based on the visualizations that the students create in
TinkerPlots with diﬀerent graphical forms. e aﬀordance of TinkerPlots is
based on the freedom it gives students to create unconventional
representations that both assist in telling the story students initially want to
tell (see also Fitzallen & Watson, 2010), as well as leading them to further
argumentation and (at times) generalization (observed by Ben-Zvi &
Aridor, 2014; Fitzallen & Watson, 2011).
e aﬀordance provided by TinkerPlots in the open-ended creation of
plots is further illustrated when grade 4 students tell the story of their class
members ea measuring the arm span of one member of the class (Watson
& English, 2013a). Some students oose value plots and others oose
frequency plots. e interpretations vary greatly, as shown in Figure 24.4,
with the value Plot on the top and the staed dot Plot on the boom. e
value plot is used to identify the mode (“most people thought … 142 cm”)
by comparing the lengths of the value bars, whereas the staed dot plot
shows the mode as the tallest stack.
Among the aﬀordances arising from the use of TinkerPlots by grade 5
students learning about informal inference (Ben-Zvi, 2006) is the ability to
personalize icons with labels in small samples. is motivates students to
identify errors, interpret plots, and explain irregularities or paerns. For
some this leads to searing for the behavior of aggregates of data points in
larger samples (further noted by Fitzallen & Watson, 2014). Following the
students a year later, Ben-Zvi, Gil, and Apel (2007) report on grade 6
students’ developing reasoning about sampling and surveys, where random
samples are taken from large collections of surveys collected from grade 6

and 7 students. Students use TinkerPlots to plot and separate data for the
two grades and to discuss and defend their hypotheses about diﬀerence or
no diﬀerence in the aributes considered. e visual presentation and the
ability to mark mean values on axes complement the students’
understanding of the context and assist the argumentation skills being
developed through the unit of work.
 

Figure 24.4 Creativity shown in constructing plots in grade 4.
Visualization can also be an aﬀordance when studying properties of the
mean and median, oen thought of mainly as numerical values conceived
of as the result of procedural calculations. Yilmaz (2013) presents a well-
documented case study highlighting the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots in
remediating a grade 6 student’s misunderstanding of the mean and median.
e student constructs her knowledge through initially displaying her
“understanding” of the mean on a Plot with two values and then
experiencing conﬂict when a third or fourth value is added to the Plot and

seeing that the mean does not have the value predicted. is leads to
reﬂection on the part of the student who begins to add values to the Plot to
conﬁrm her new understanding. e same process occurs for the median.
At the end she states several principles involved with the behavior of the
mean and median, for example, “If I add a data point greater than the
existing mean, the mean will get larger.” e aﬀordances of TinkerPlots are
of course dependent on how the teaer uses the soware. In this case the
teaer sets up a Plot that reﬂects the student’s current understanding,
allenges the understanding with new values, and then lets the student
reﬂect and add more values to test and consolidate her understanding. e
presence of the mean and median tools in the soware avoids tedious
calculations so that the visual impact can build the student’s intuitions,
without relying on procedures.
Going further than Yilmaz (2013), Hudson (2012) introduces the Ruler
from TinkerPlots to display visually the diﬀerences between data values
and the mean. In seeing the mean as the balance point for the data, the sum
of the distances from the mean to data values to the le of the mean is the
same as the sum of the distances from the mean to data values to the right
of the mean. is is conﬁrmed as shown in Figure 24.5 in the lower-le
corner of the Plot where “Sum of Diﬀ of 7 cases = 0,” recognizing the
negative and positive diﬀerences on either side of the mean. As well,
Hudson (2012) demonstrates the beneﬁt of using the “Drag Value Tool” to
move a data value and wat what happens to the mean as its value
anges to become larger or smaller. If activities su as these are built into
classroom work, there is the potential to consolidate students’
understanding of the mean from its introduction.
In a study of grade 6 students’ statistical reasoning about center and
variation, Bakker, Derry, and Konold (2006) employ the notion of
diagrammatic reasoning. is notion suggests three components in the
process: making a diagram, experimenting with it, and reﬂecting on the

resulting diagram. Bakker et al. ﬁnd that TinkerPlots plays a signiﬁcant role
in the ﬁrst two components, for example, discussing “clumps,” producing
diagrams, and informally describing center and variation. is leads to
reﬂection in either small or large group classroom discussions. Evidence
provided of the aﬀordance of TinkerPlots is shown through examples of the
discussion taking place among the students and teaer. Words and phrases
su as “bigger clump,” “more spread out,” “higher values,” arise from the
initial plots created with the soware, and as anges are made to the plots,
sophistication grows in the language, for example, “if the mean values are
far apart that’s how much bigger they are.”
Figure 24.5  Using the Ruler in TinkerPlots to show the sum of distances from data values to their
mean is zero.
e exploratory nature of TinkerPlots aﬀordances are illustrated well by
the study of Lehrer, Kim, and Sauble (2007) in having students invent
measures (statistics) for variation. e ﬂexibility of ploing options allows
students to create ways of measuring the aracteristics of distributions of
data values. Alternatives include counting repeated values, so that a larger

count means less variation, or measuring the distances (without sign) to the
mean or median of all values and averaging them, so that a smaller value
means less variation. Although beginning with basic plots, students are also
introduced to other features of TinkerPlots, su as the Hat plot, to focus on
“middles” as a way of describing central variation. In this context,
TinkerPlots is allowing students to reflect, create, check, and revise invented
statistics.
A more sophisticated aﬀordance of TinkerPlots is the ability to test
informal theories that students develop and articulate. Konold, Harradine,
and Kazak (2007) illustrate this aﬀordance using the Sampler as a “factory”
to create data. In the beginning it is a challenge for students to articulate the
aributes that aracterize the objects they want to create. Combining the
Sampler with the Plot and other features of TinkerPlots, a testing ground is
provided to consider the realistic nature of the variation in a “production
line.” Adjustments can be made to the Sampler and further testing of
theories carried out. e instantaneous feedba and possibility for large
sample sizes add to the benefits of the software.
Another aﬀordance of TinkerPlots related to 12–14-year-old students’
developing understanding of variation, based on either repeated
measurements or a repeatable production process, is described by Konold
and Harradine (2014). Based on the collection of data from the repeated
linear measurement of a single object with two diﬀerent tools or from the
weighing of student-manufactured Play-DohTM “sausages,” the focus is on
the identiﬁcation of “signal” (center) and “noise” (variation) in data sets and
the ability to use these to explain diﬀerences between data sets. e
visualization of the signal and noise in the graphical presentations for
concepts that have not been procedurally deﬁned forms an intuitive basis
for later development. Konold and Harradine go further to use a
modiﬁcation of the Sampler as employed by Konold et al. (2007) to allow
students to simulate ance variation (noise) in a distribution with a ﬁxed

center (signal), allowing students to question the absence of systematic
variation, which they may conjecture occurs in an actual setting.
Turning to the learning about statistical sampling, one of the main
beneﬁts of the Sampler in TinkerPlots is its ability to repeat many
probability simulation trials at great speed. Kazak and Konold (2010) use
this facility with middle-sool students as an aﬀordance for learning about
sample size and the approa of the distribution of random trials to a
theoretical model as the sample size increases. In this case the aﬀordance of
TinkerPlots is immersed in a well-planned and executed teaing sequence.
Similarly Ireland and Watson (2009) report on work with a grade 6 class
aimed speciﬁcally at helping students develop an understanding of the
relationship between experimental and theoretical probability through use
of the Sampler to generate larger and larger samples of tosses of coins or
dice. e Sampler is the important link between the two concepts—
experimental and theoretical—as well as consolidating understanding and
application of ideas of fairness and equally likely outcomes through
creating simulations. Transferring from a ance context to a large ﬁnite
population that can be placed in the Sampler, Sta and Watson (2013)
consider taking samples of size 10 or size 30 from a data set based on
Australian convicts. Comparing statistics su as the median for the
samples, students are able to observe the decrease in variation of the
medians for the larger sample size and in this case actually observe the
value for the entire population. In all three contexts it is the Sampler that
aﬀords the opportunity for collection of larger samples or many samples to
support the learning objectives.
At the tertiary level, Garfield, delMas, and Zieffler (2012) have developed
an introductory course to develop statistical modelers and thinkers, using a
simulation-based approa to inference requiring “students to create a
model with respect to a speciﬁc context, repeatedly simulate data from the
model, and then use the resulting distribution of a particular computed

statistic to draw statistical inferences” (p. 883). is course is in contrast to
the traditional statistics course at the tertiary level, whi is based on a
procedural approa to formal statistical tests, su as the t-test and p-
values. As Garﬁeld et al. (2012) report, this traditional approa has been
shown overall to be unsuccessful in aieving the aim of students
understanding the meaning of the process taking place and the signiﬁcance
of results. In their course, Garﬁeld et al. (2012) have students use the
Sampler in TinkerPlots to set up a model for the context of the problem
they are investigating, let the Sampler generate many trials of the model
collecting the numerical summary of results, create a Plot of the distribution
of the results, and evaluate the initial question from the context. Following
the metaphor of Soenfeld (1998) concerning teaing mathematics so that
students can “really cook” with mathematical thinking rather than just
“follow a recipe,” the authors provide evidence of improved understanding
of inference by students in their course compared with students in
traditional statistics courses. As TinkerPlots is the basis of the course,
combined with the focus on modeling with simulations, its aﬀordance is
associated with the documented improved learning outcomes related to
inference. Further evidence of the aﬀordance of TinkerPlots for learning is
provided in delMas et al. (2014) from interviews with students in the course:
An interesting observation that emerged was the possible way that the soware, TinkerPlotsTM,
facilitated students’ thinking and reasoning. When asked to describe how they would answer a
question, students seemed to consider how to build the model in TinkerPlotsTM and to reason
and think through problems using the language of TinkerPlotsTM.
(pp. 417–418)
Ben-Zvi and Aridor (2014) also have found that a modeling activity using
the Sampler and Plot functions in TinkerPlots supports two grade 8
students’ reasoning about uncertainty. e activity involves the students
developing a data-based model that represents the movement of a toy bird

being launed from a catapult. Aer planning and conducting an
experiment with a toy emu, the students model the predicted bird
movements in TinkerPlots. ey use the Sampler to generate data and
subsequently graph the data. e activity promotes several iterations of
data collection and graphing in order to make inferences from the data.
Generating the graphs in TinkerPlots allows one of the students to make
the conjecture that the bird’s ﬂight is not linear when diﬀerent forces are
applied. He also suggests that a mathematical formula derived from
collecting more data would assist in understanding the toy bird’s motion
observed during the initial experiment. Although this study only reported
on a pair of students, it illustrates the aﬀordance of TinkerPlots as an
analytical tool.
e aﬀordance of TinkerPlots as an analytical tool is further evidenced in
two other studies of grade 6 students. One involves the use of the Sampler
in TinkerPlots to model the distribution of random bunny hops, suggesting
that the ability to produce iterations of data when modeling an event
supports students’ reasoning about distributions (Kazak, Fujita, & Wegerif,
2014). is is further evidenced in the other study in whi students use
TinkerPlots to model four games that involves selecting a colored ip from
ea of two bags that contain various combinations of colored ips. By
being able to create the simulations to test and revise their conjectures and
explanations through multiple iterations of data collection, conﬂict is
created with their original intuitive ideas, whi leads to probabilistic
thinking (Kazak, Wegerif, & Fujita, 2014).
Turning to the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots as seen by students themselves
for their learning, Burgess (2014) reports that students in grades 5 to 8 in
New Zealand comment favorably on the time saved when creating graphs
for helping answer their investigative questions. Having been introduced to
data handling activities through physical cards with data entered on them
for relatively small data sets, students quily recognize the aﬀordance of

the soware for larger data sets: “Searing lile cards takes forever. But
when you used TinkerPlots, it just went, went like that!” e features that
students particularly like and that are demonstrated in the students’ analysis
and report of outcomes include staing, ordering, providing counts or
percentages, shiing dividing lines, cliing on dots on a plot to see the
corresponding data, and having a text box next to the plot. Burgess
concludes from this that a major aﬀordance of TinkerPlots is that it gives
students more time to focus on “noticing and analyzing aspects of the
investigations,” which is demonstrated in student outcomes.
Similar results are described by Allmond and Makar (2014) who are
motivated to use TinkerPlots with grade 6 students because of its
aﬀordance as a “sense-making tool in statistical investigations.” Sense-
making involves students making conjectures about a problem, suggesting
solutions, monitoring progress, and making adjustments to an investigation
through an exploratory process (also a ﬁnding of Browning & Smith, 2015).
Allmond and Makar’s goal is to explore how middle-sool students use
Hat plots to compare distributions and write justiﬁed conclusions. Students’
reﬂections of the beneﬁts of using TinkerPlots reveal three common
themes: the removal of computational boundaries allowing for a focus on
analysis, the ability to operate accurately and eﬃciently, and the ﬂexibility
oﬀered. Among the examples given, they report that the Hat plot helps
them identify where data are skewed, the Plot function averts errors usually
made when drawing graphs by hand, and TinkerPlots helps to “make
diﬀerent graphs to support evidence required by anging format turning
dot plots into histograms, hat plots or box plots (Lucy).” e students’
perceived aﬀordances of TinkerPlots support those identiﬁed by researers
in other studies (e.g., Browning & Smith, 2015).

Teachers Learning to Teach Statistics
Turning to aﬀordances of TinkerPlots for teaers’ learning about statistics,
Hall (2008) reports on using TinkerPlots as the vehicle for introducing
Census at Sool, one of Statistics Canada’s education programs for sools,
a program employing Canadian and international data collected from
soolildren. Although restricted to a three-hour workshop, Hall tells of
positive feedba in evaluations, indicating that teaers ﬁnd TinkerPlots a
fun, user-friendly complement to the Census at Sool Web site. About half
of teaers say “TinkerPlots” or “Everything (all resources)” is the most
useful aspect of the workshop. Hall also includes a detailed aﬀordance of
TinkerPlots being that it allows the Categorical Aribute values initially
listed in a Plot in alphabetical order, to be dragged into whatever order
might be more logical for the user. In this context TinkerPlots is a
complementary aﬀordance for facilitating an educational goal. Like Hall
(2008), Monteiro, Asseker, Carvalho and Campos (2010) use TinkerPlots
with adults. ey work with preservice teaers to introduce data handling
concepts necessary for teaing the Brazilian mathematics curriculum. e
aﬀordance of TinkerPlots in this environment is that the preservice teaers
can explore diﬀerent (sometimes unconventional) representations, focusing
in on an appropriate approa to use in determining diﬀerences in two
groups of data.
Similar to Hall (2008), Meletiou-Mavrotheris, Paparistodemou, and
Stylianou (2009) report working with in-service teaers, introducing them
to TinkerPlots in relation to the mathematics curriculum in Cyprus. ey,
however, work with the teaers for 15 hours over three weeks, exploring
the aﬀordances for teaers’ teaing as well as their own understanding of
statistics. In answering questions based on a table of data from 12 European
countries related to means and comparing the other countries with Cyprus,
teaers ﬁrst work without TinkerPlots. In this mode they produce many

correct calculations but none create a visual representation of the data in
the table. When given the same data and questions in TinkerPlots, very
diﬀerent strategies emerge with teaers combining visual and numerical
strategies in considering entire distributions of the data, making conjectures
and observing trends, and using unconventional representations to make
comparisons and draw conclusions. ese outcomes lead to group
discussions of how they would use the soware in the classroom and how
students would be able to carry out the same types of investigations they
have been doing. TinkerPlots is hence an aﬀordance for the teaers’
development of understanding beyond paper-and-pencil activities, as well
as for providing a platform to plan interventions in their classrooms. e
next phase is a potential aﬀordance for their students when they meet
TinkerPlots for analyzing data. Madden (2014) reports similar experiences
in working with preservice secondary teachers.
In introducing teaers to features of TinkerPlots, Rubin and
Hammerman (2006) describe the aﬀordance of “bins” and “dividers” as
allowing the teaers to expose their way of thinking about distributions of
data. On the top of Figure 24.6 is a distribution of data across eight bins,
rather than on a continuous scale as in the boom of the ﬁgure. When
initially providing a dot plot for data with numerical scaled data on an axis,
the program splits the data in two bins using the midpoint of the range.
Bins as shown at the top of Figure 24.6 occur from dragging an icon to the
right. Further dragging produces the continuous distribution. Teaers using
the bins generally discuss particular sections of the data rather than the
overall distribution. Using dividers with the overall distribution (boom of
Figure 24.6) helps them to make judgments in relation to the entire data set.
Using bins, however, is an initial approa that is likely to be used by
students and teaers aware that this is a useful stage that can oen be used
to draw conclusions in some contexts.

 
Figure 24.6 Display of a data set using bins (top) and dividers (bottom).
In a statistics course for elementary preservice teaers, TinkerPlots is
used to develop these students’ understanding of standard deviation
(Browning, Goss, & Smith, 2014). e aim is to allenge the students’
thinking about measures of variability aained through procedural
processes. e students complete a series of tasks that lead to investigation
of the mean absolute deviation and, subsequently, standard deviation. In
response to a quiz question that requires the students to display a data set

using representations of their oosing, seven of the 12 students use either
Hat plots, dividers, and/or lines/squares in their descriptions of determining
the standard deviation. During interviews conducted at the end of the
course, the preservice teaers reﬂect on their responses to the quiz item.
ey justify their answers by describing the way in whi they use the Hat
plot and dividers to think about the spread of the data. One student
suggests that the dividers assisted by showing:
the percentage of points that were within a certain range of the mean, whi helped me justify
that there was a clump. But then it showed me a percentage of points that were outside of that
range which also helped me justify that there was some significant deviation from the mean.
e researers contend that the visual aﬀordances of TinkerPlots support
the preservice teaers to develop conceptual understanding of standard
deviation in ways that the procedural knowledge does not. Further to this,
Madden (2014) notes that preservice teaers ﬁnd it diﬃcult to reconcile
computational and graphical aspects of standard deviation. Her study
suggests that the dynamic nature of TinkerPlots—with the ability to sample,
resample, and model statistical ideas using graphical representations—
supports development of statistical reasoning skills.

Assessing Understanding
Fitzallen (2012, 2013) documents resear with 12 grades 5 and 6 students
over a period of 6 weeks to investigate their development of understanding
of covariation. ey progress through a learning sequence with two main
purposes: to learn about the features of TinkerPlots to equip them with a
repertoire of graph types to draw upon when answering questions about
data, and to develop an understanding of covariation and the way in whi
a graphical representation displays covariation. e learning sequence
moves from creating and interpreting staed dot plots with univariate data
and small data sets (n = 12) to bivariate data, larger data sets, and a variety
of graph types (scaerplots, bar graphs, staed dot plots, and split staed
dot plots). At the end the students are interviewed individually as they
work at the computer with an assessment protocol set up as an activity
sheet in TinkerPlots. e interview activities require the students both to
create and to interpret graphs. One question requires them to create a
graph that shows the relationship between two aributes, determining their
levels of understanding of covariation. All students are able to identify and
describe the relationship evident in a scaerplot that displays bivariate data,
identifying clusters of data in the graphs that are consistent with their
conclusion and other areas of the graphs that do not comply with their
conclusion, including identiﬁcation of outliers. In this resear seing
TinkerPlots aﬀords the students the opportunity to display the learning that
has taken place through actual interaction with the soware, rather than
having to transfer to a paper-and-pencil test.
e aﬀordance of TinkerPlots assessment of understanding is further
demonstrated as part of a resear project exploring students’ ability to
compare two sets of data and decide whi of two groups of ildren have
done beer on a spelling test. In this case, two formats (paper-based or
employing TinkerPlots) are used to interview middle sool students, with

diﬀerent students in ea mode (Watson & Donne, 2009). Of interest here is
not how well the students do in comparison with ea other but what
aﬀordances ea mode oﬀers for the students to display their
understanding. Students are asked to compare four pairs of graphs with test
scores for diﬀerent classes and decide whi class has done beer. e
students using TinkerPlots have been introduced to the soware and
completed some lessons in different contexts than the interview. Figure 24.7
shows the presentation of the ﬁrst (lowest level) comparison to be made in
the Comparing Groups protocol for the two seings. e paper-based
interviewees view the graphs only, whereas the TinkerPlots students are
expected to manipulate the soware in a way that will allow them to
answer the same question. e question is, What are the aﬀordances
oﬀered to students by TinkerPlots in displaying their understanding (i.e.,
learning) of statistics and how do they compare with aﬀordances in the
nonsoftware environments?



Figure 24.7 Protocols for Comparing Groups without and with TinkerPlots.
For the Comparing Groups protocol TinkerPlots allows students freedom
to create various plots to explore the diﬀerences in the test scores of the
two classes. When comparing groups of equal size, middle-sool students
have a tendency to compare totals rather than calculate means: this is
reﬂected in the responses of the students viewing the paper protocol. e
students using TinkerPlots, however, do not follow this alternative, but
most students produce plots where visually they can see the relationships
between the two classes in the plots they have created. For the smallest
classes (see Figure 24.7), a few students cli through the individual data
cards to make a decision. For the most diﬃcult part of the protocol—
comparing classes of diﬀerent sizes where the smaller class has the larger
proportion of higher scores—students can oose from several
representations rather than be ﬁxed on one pair of frequency distributions
on paper. Many of the paper-based students continue to use totals and
hence oose the wrong group as “beer.” Although not all TinkerPlots-
based students aieve the correct response, they do not use totals for the
comparison. e plots in Figure 24.8 show two students’ approaes (le
and right) in TinkerPlots.
e major aﬀordance oﬀered by TinkerPlots is the ﬂexibility it gives
students to create their own representations of the data to display their
understanding (see also Fitzallen & Watson, 2010, 2011). e use of bins
rather than totally separating the data along an axis, whi is what
experienced users would be expected to do, illustrates that students can use
this aracteristic of the soware and stop separating the data at whatever
point they feel they have enough information to answer the question. e
Plot on the le of Figure 24.9 shows the use of four bins to answer the
easiest of the four class comparisons, whereas the Plot on the right shows a
similar use of bins for the most diﬃcult part. What is interesting is how the

student displays emergent intuitive proportional reasoning in explaining
her understanding of the story in the Plot (on the right).
It kinda looks like this one [Bla] did beer ’cos most of them are up there [5–9] and there is
only 4 up there [0–4] … Pink could be beer because it’s got 25 up there and 17 there
[comparing 5–9 for Pink and Bla] so there is more that has 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 than Bla. But Bla
got less down here [0–4] because it’s got less people than this [Pink] class … You never know if
you have the same [number] in both classes then you might’ve got a more even thing … Bla
did beer actually because this one’s [Bla] got less people in it but 11 [Pink] got it wrong, got
like 1, 2, 3, 4 and only 4 got it here [0–4] [Bla] and 17 got it there [5–9] [Bla] but 25 got it
there [5–9] [Pink] only because there’s more in the Pink class.
(Watson & Donne, 2009, p. 15)
Another example of the aﬀordance of ﬂexibility in TinkerPlots is the
availability of data in three formats. Students can cli through the data
Cards (shown in Figure 24.7) in the “sta” one by one, they can drag down
a Table with all cases listed in order (not shown in Figure 24.7), or they can
cli on any icon in the Plot and the associated data Card appears at the top
of the sta. Students who answer the paper version of the protocol only
have one way to consider the data as presented. Although it is reasonable
to assume that all students using TinkerPlots would be familiar with the
paper representation from previous classroom experiences, many oose
another type of Plot. For a teaer observing and interacting with students
in both contexts, mu more is learned about the students’ creative
understanding of the purpose of making a graph in the TinkerPlots seing,
rather than just knowing the students can recognize a traditional graph
format. is is not to say that all students interviewed with TinkerPlots
make appropriate oices between the two classes, just as some of the
paper-based similarly do not. e point is that with TinkerPlots there is a
good chance of determining the difficulty the students are experiencing.


Figure 24.8 Plots created by students for the final part of the Comparing Groups protocol.
 

Figure 24.9  Use of bins by students to solve comparison questions.
A further aﬀordance of TinkerPlots for assessment found by Allmond
and Makar (2014) grows from focusing on the transition from the Hat plot
to the Box plot for explaining variation when comparing two data sets. e
Hat plot is unique to TinkerPlots, whereas the Box plot is common in all
secondary statistics curricula. As seen in the two plots in Figure 24.10, the
Hat plot portrays visually the same information as the Box plot except that

the median is missing from the Hat. e associated data are usually visible
with the Hat plot (as in the ﬁgure) but not in the more common
representations of the Box plot (although it is possible to view them in
TinkerPlots). Students experience the discussion of variation when
comparing two data sets through initially exploring pairs of staed dot
plots, moving to the addition of the Hat plot, following by the Box plot
with the data visible, and ﬁnally seeing the Box plot without the data.
When completing assessment tasks students generally use the soware to
progress from qualitative to quantitative descriptions of diﬀerence with
relative ease, demonstrating understanding oen not shown by older
students introduced directly to the “bare” Box plot (e.g., Bakker, Biehler, &
Konold, 2005).
As seen in these examples, the aﬀordances for learning oen translate
into aﬀordances for assessment. is is particularly true if TinkerPlots itself
is used as the setting for carrying out the assessment of learning.

Figure 24.10  A Hat plot showing data and a Box plot without the data.

Other Mathematics Learning
It is not surprising to ﬁnd aﬀordances from learning with TinkerPlots that
are associated with other areas of the curriculum. An example of this,
associated with proportional reasoning, occurs when Watson and English
(2013b) are using TinkerPlots to build upon classroom Chance trials with
grade 4 students. To introduce the concepts of expectation and variation to
the students, there is a discussion of how many heads they would expect to
get when tossing a coin 10 times. It is agreed that with a probability of 1/2
of geing a head, they can expect to get ﬁve heads. Some however suggest
that it might not be exactly ﬁve, maybe four or six, showing some
anowledgment of variation. To their surprise, there is quite a lot of
variation in their outcomes, with the number varying in one class between
three heads and nine heads. e obvious aﬀordance of TinkerPlots in this
context, as noted in some earlier examples, is to allow students the
opportunity to increase the sample size and simulate large numbers of coin
tosses, comparing the variation among the repeated outcomes as the
sample size increases. As the students wat the heights in the Plot get
closer and closer together, they are learning about the eﬀect of sample size
and are able to express this verbally as the “variation gets less” as the Plot
shows the heights closer and closer to their expectation of 1/2. In comparing
the absolute diﬀerence in the number of heads and tails, however, the
numbers generally increase with increase in sample size. is is shown in
Figure 24.11.
When students aempt to summarize their ﬁndings by doing several
repetitions of the computer simulations for the same sample size to show
how close the number of heads is to half of the number of tosses, they oen
do so by ploing the “number of heads.” Doing this for two diﬀerent
sample sizes, either by hand or in TinkerPlots, and comparing the plots,
does not show the diﬀerence in variation because the scales on the plots are

usually diﬀerent, as shown in Figure 24.12. e variation, however, is
considered the same by students because of the visual impact. e
aﬀordance of TinkerPlots in this situation is creating cognitive conﬂict and
showing that the range of variation in the top Plot is ﬁve whereas in the
boom Plot, where the variation is supposed to decrease, the range of
variation is 12. For a teaer this leads to questioning about why the plots
look similar and what this has to do with the scales on the plots.
Figure 24.11  The results of simulating tossing a coin an increasing number of times, observing the
heights of H and T, and finding the difference between the number of Hs and the number of Ts.

Figure 24.12  Different scales for repetitions of different numbers of coin toss.
It is the mathematics of percentage, whi represents in one number a
part compared to a whole, that is critical to the solving of the dilemma in
Figure 24.12. Comparisons can be made across wholes, that is, across
diﬀerent sample sizes of 10 or 50 tosses. e percentages then show on the
same scale how close the numbers of heads (the parts), are to half of the
total, whi is the expected outcome in this case. is is shown in Figure
24.13, where plots on the same scale using percentage show clearly the
decrease in variation as the sample size increases.
Rubin and Hammerman (2006) also emphasize the aﬀordance of using
proportions in the form of percents to “equalize” groups of unequal size,
represented in bins in TinkerPlots anowledging that for some middle-
sool students this is a new or unconsolidated idea. Overall, two
aﬀordances emerge for focusing aention on students’ understanding or
misunderstanding of the use of percentage and on the necessity to be aware
of scale when comparing two graphs. e solutions to these issues may not
appear within the soware itself, but the feedba provided by TinkerPlots

should provide the teaer with starting points for remediation, either
providing clues within the program (Figure 24.13) or working with pencil
and paper. ese observations are the same as those of Ireland and Watson
(2009) when working with grade 6 students.
Figure 24.13 Plotting percentage on the same scale to distinguish variation for 10 samples of coin
tosses of different sizes.

Constraints
Kennewell (2001) thinks of constraints as providing structure and guidance
for an activity to occur and learning to take place. When soware su as
TinkerPlots is employed in the classroom, it is useful to consider whether
the constraints support or inhibit other aspects of the soware that are
considered aﬀordances. Further, it is possible to ask if aﬀordances may also
inhibit learning.
One of the constraints imposed on the creation of Plots in TinkerPlots is
that when a numerical aribute is placed on an axis, the program
automatically introduces an ordered scaling, either in bins or on a
continuous scale. is structure forces the student to view data values in an
ordered fashion. An example of the diﬀerence from what a student might
do by hand is seen in Figure 24.14 where a student’s hand-created table
accurately records measurements of a classmate’s arm span but the student
does not feel the necessity to order the values, only to show their
frequency. Although the data can be entered into TinkerPlots in the same
order as seen in the student’s table, the Plot—while retaining the
frequencies—forces order and displays the shape of the distribution and the
outlier. Whether this structural constraint can also be thought of as
aﬀordance depends on how the student responds to the representation and
perhaps on the teaer’s pedagogical content knowledge in reinforcing the
experience as one of learning. A related constraint is the initial listing of
categorical variables on axes in alphabetical order, as observed by Hall
(2008). She notes, however, that the drag-and-drop feature of TinkerPlots
means that in this situation the order can be easily anged to suit the
requirements of the user.
Another structural constraint of TinkerPlots in relation to creating Plots
within the soware is the range of types of plots that can be created. is
range, including icons (as in Figure 24.14), value bars, value circles, and

fused rectangular or circular representations, presents both freedom of
oice and the necessity to appreciate what ea type can meaningfully
represent. On the le of Figure 24.15 are fused representations. e pie
art is shaded from white to very dark to show the increase in arm span
length, while the histogram is based on quite large intervals. On the right of
Figure 24.15 are two-dimensional representations, using bins to display
value icons. e bins result from categorical data (names) or intervals for
measurements. In terms of aﬀordances, the range of representation types
would appear to provide lile opportunity for displaying understanding in
the top two plots but provide a creative, less conventional, opportunity to
show understanding in the bottom two plots.
e appreciation of the constraints of the Sampler is of particular interest
in relation to knowing the models for probability that are common to
students. In Figure 24.16, at the top are two Samplers to model the tossing
of a single coin twice; at the boom there are two Samplers to model the
tossing of a single die once. On the le, the two Samplers display the
elements in the Mixer and they are seen bouncing around the Mixer before
one pops out at the top. at element is immediately replaced before
another random selection is made. On the right the two probabilities are
modelled with Spinners. In the top right, Sampler, heads and tails are no
longer equally likely to be osen, while in the boom right Sampler ea
outcome for the die is equally likely. In these cases a Spinner is seen to
rotate before coming to rest on a section, whi is then the result. e two
diﬀerent Samplers present two diﬀerent constraints for students. Teaers
hence need to be aware of whi constraint will lead to meaningful
understanding for students and whether there is an aﬀordance in leing
students oose their devices within a Sampler and explain how they work
to others in the class. e speed of the Sampler is also a constraint. For
some students, it may be necessary to continue to run the Sampler at a
Medium or slower speed in order to reinforce the repeated trials that are

occurring. No “action” of the Mixer or Spinner is seen on Fast, and for some
students the affordance of understanding the process may be lost.


Figure 24.14 A constraint of TinkerPlots is that it forces order on numerical data.
e structure of TinkerPlots allows a number of ways (constraints) for
completing a modelling process with the Sampler. Students given the
oice may ﬁnd greater aﬀordance for understanding in one approa than
another. e Mixer shown in the upper-le corner of Figure 24.16, for
example, models the tossing of one coin twice. What about the tossing of
two coins, once ea? Can the Sampler be used to model this behavior? Are
the outcomes the same? e answers are “yes” but students may not have
this advanced understanding. As shown in Figure 24.17, the Sampler has the
ability (constraint) to test this conjecture, where on the right a second Mixer
is set up in the Sampler and ea Mixer tosses one coin once. e Sampler
on the le of the ﬁgure is set up as in Figure 24.16 but relabeled as “Coin1
Coin2.” Figure 24.18 shows the results of running Sampler 1 ﬁve times (le)
and of running Sampler 2 ﬁve times (right). ese results are not identical
but students have the further opportunity (constraint) to run the two
Samplers repeatedly and see if the results become close. Figure 24.19 shows
the results of 1,000 trials for ea model (Sampler). e diﬀerent constraints
for modeling of the coin become an aﬀordance for building understanding
that the two conditions for tossing results are equivalent in the same
underlying model.


Figure 24.15 Four Plots to show arm-span measurements.
Figure 24.16 Samplers for tossing a coin twice or a die once with a Mixer (left) or Spinner (right).
As the statistical questions become more complex, the constraints for
modeling in TinkerPlots become more numerous, creating dilemmas both
for students and for teaers. An example of working through constraints is
shown in the study of Sta and Watson (2013), where two teaers work
with their grade 10 mathematics classes on a ﬁve-week unit, leading to
using resampling (see also Watson, 2014; Watson & Chance, 2012) as an
introduction to informal statistical inference. e teaers in the study,
although having used TinkerPlots with younger students in less allenging

contexts, have not used the Sampler before or carried out resampling
investigations. e students have not used TinkerPlots before. Although the
teaers understand the principles involved, they have not had the
opportunity to develop the high level of pedagogical content knowledge of
the aﬀordances and constraints required to answer students’ questions, or in
some cases the tenical knowledge of the soware to retrieve the situation
in TinkerPlots when students go astray. Hence in embarking on ambitious
goals for employing TinkerPlots, it is necessary for teaers to appreciate
the alternative pathways students may take through the constraints.
Over the course of the unit most of the students develop greater mastery
within the TinkerPlots constraints, though still under the guidance of the
instructions and teaer assistance. Talk in the classroom shis from
predominantly needing help to ﬁx tenical issues or to get help within the
constraints, to conversations about the meaning of the data. e teaer is
able then to gain a greater insight into the thinking of the students and the
students themselves are more engaged in discussing the work. e
culminating investigation uses a multistep process of random reallocation of
data to determine if experimental data are due to ance alone or a caused
result. Many students are able to conduct this investigation without
instruction and create a report of their ﬁndings explaining what they did
and what they found. For some students however, their language las
sophistication.

Figure 24.17 Samplers using Mixers to model tossing two coins once.
One informal inference task is based on data from an experiment with 30
mildly to moderately depressed people taken to the Caribbean for
swimming four hours per day for four weeks, half swimming with dolphins
and half not (Rossman, 2008). e data in Figure 24.20 show the results for
no improvement or improvement for the patients and students are asked if
it is reasonable to claim that the treatment was successful. Having gained
experience within the structure (constraints) of TinkerPlots using the
Sampler in ways related to activities shown in Figures 24.17, 24.18, and
24.19, students are able to work within the constraints of a two-Mixer
Sampler that randomly reallocates the results of the experiment to the
treatment and control. Redoing this a large number of times makes it
possible to estimate how likely it is that the results could have occurred by
ance rather than be due to the treatment. e concrete nature of a
TinkerPlots experience as complex as this exempliﬁes the balance of
aﬀordances and constraints that leads to understanding of an inferential
process not available to grade 10 students through theoretical statistics (e.g.,
chi-square tests, in this case).
e openness and ﬂexibility constraints of TinkerPlots empower students
to create, ange, manipulate, and repeat operations in TinkerPlots

unimpeded. Although su functionality opens up opportunities for using
exploratory data analysis (Tukey, 1977) and active graphing strategies
(Ainley & Pra, 2014; Ben-Zvi & Aridor, 2014), for some students,
TinkerPlots may open the door too wide. is is evident in some studies
that require students to construct simulations or model data in TinkerPlots
when using the Sampler and Plot functions with tertiary statistics students
(Noll, Gebresenbet, & Glover, 2012), with preservice teaers (Podworny &
Biehler, 2014), and with grade 9 students (Saldanha & McAllister, 2014).
ese studies ﬁnd that some students experience diﬃculty imagining how
to construct a statistical model and also keeping tra of the resampling
process. ese issues may arise because students do not have the statistical
reasoning experience and baground necessary to take advantage of the
aﬀordance of freedom that TinkerPlots oﬀers. Like Sta and Watson
(2013), these researers note that students are able to develop conﬁdence
and engage in statistical reasoning once the statistical model is constructed
under instruction.
Figure 24.18 Results from using the Samplers in Figure 24.17.

Figure 24.19 Results for 1,000 tosses of two coins using the Samplers in Figure 24.17.
Figure 24.20 Results of Swimming With Dolphins experiment.
Podworny and Biehler (2014) support their preservice teaers by
utilizing a simulation seme that involves making them draw diagrams
and describe verbally all parts of their simulations. ese teaers are able
to oose to use the simulation seme either as a planning tool prior to

running the simulation or as a documentation and reﬂection tool aer the
simulation. Regardless of when the simulation seme is used, it helps the
students to identify the purpose of ea step in the simulation, what can be
learned at ea step, and how that informs other steps. Saldanha and
McAllister (2014) also suggest that students would beneﬁt from activities
that require them to identify the processes and objects generated by the
resampling process and how they contribute to the graphical distributions
produced. ey contend that this supports students to establish and
maintain robust mental images of the resampling process and its products.
Because of the diversity of the constraints in TinkerPlots it is important
for teaers to be aware of their potential either to support or hinder
students’ developing understanding. Again the pedagogical content
knowledge of the teaer is built on knowing well both the aﬀordances and
constraints of the soware. is will enable them to make the decisions
about when and how to scaﬀold student learning depending on the learning
goals and outcomes targeted within learning experiences.

Conclusion
e examples of aﬀordances documented in this apter for TinkerPlots
illustrate the learning that takes place when students or teaers are using
TinkerPlots. ere is no intention to claim that TinkerPlots creates the
learning experience in isolation from contexts and perhaps prompting from
other facilitators. To gain the most from the aﬀordances of TinkerPlots,
planning must be put into procedural instructions, scaﬀolding, provocative
questions, reﬂective questions, and possible extension activities. What is
demonstrated here is that resear around the world has gone beyond
showing what the soware can do, to providing evidence that learning
takes place in relation to the statistical principles that underpin the makeup
of the paage. e discussion of constraints, with the potential conﬂict of
meaning with other connotations of the word constraint, illustrates the
complexity involved when moving from doing to learning. e structure
and guidance provided by the soware need to be taken into account in
judging the quality of the learning affordance.
TinkerPlots and statistics have been the focus of this apter on soware
and mathematics education because there is no equivalent soware that
provides the range of aﬀordances described here in a form that is accessible
to and understandable by sool students. Although soware applications
exist in other areas of the mathematics curriculum, the critical necessity to
handle large data sets for meaningful learning within statistics, demands
that aention be given to the aﬀordances, in conjunction with the
constraints, of TinkerPlots.
Anowledgment: e authors anowledge useful conversations with
Dr. Sue Stack in preparing this chapter.

References
Ainley, J., & Pratt, D. (2014). Expressions of uncertainty when variation is partially determined. In K.
Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg,
e 
Netherlands: 
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_9A1_AINLEY.pdf.
Allmond, S., & Makar, K. (2014). From hat plots to box plots in TinkerPlots : Supporting students to
write conclusions whi account for variability in data. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould
(Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_2E1_ALLMOND.pdf.
Australian Education Council. (1991). A national statement on mathematics for Australian sools.
Melbourne: Author.
Bakker, A., Biehler, R., & Konold, C. (2005). Should young students learn about box plots? In G.
Burrill & M. Camden (Eds.), Curricular development in statistics education. International
Association for Statistical Education (IASE) Roundtable, Lund, Sweden, 2004 (pp. 163–173).
Voorburg, The Netherlands: International Statistical Institute.
Bakker, A., Derry, J., & Konold, C. (2006). Using tenology to support diagrammatic reasoning
about center and variation. In A. Rossman & B. Chance (Eds.), Working cooperatively in
statistics education. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on the Teaing of
Statistics. Salvador, Bahai, Brazil, July 2–7. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Association
for Statistical Education and the International Statistical Institute. Retrieved from http://iase-
web.org/documents/papers/icots7/2D4_BAKK.pdf.
Ben-Zvi, D. (2006). Scaﬀolding students’ informal inference and argumentation. In A. Rossman & B.
Chance (Eds.), Working cooperatively in statistics education. Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Salvador, Bahai, Brazil, July 2–7. Voorburg, e
Netherlands: International Association for Statistical Education and the International Statistical
Institute. Retrieved from http://iase-web.org/documents/papers/icots7/2D1_BENZ.pdf.

Ben-Zvi, D., & Aridor, K. (2014). Students’ emergent roles in developing their reasoning about
uncertainty and modeling. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics
education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics.
Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical Institute.
Retrieved from http://iase-web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_9A3_ARIDOR.pdf.
Ben-Zvi, D., Gil, E., & Apel, N. (2007). What is hidden beyond the data? Helping young students to
reason and argue about some wider universe. In D. Pra & J. Ainley (Eds.), Reasoning about
informal inferential statistical reasoning: A collection of current resear studies. Proceedings of
the Fih International Resear Forum on Statistical Reasoning, inking, and Literacy  (SRTL-
5). August 11–17. Warwick, UK: University of Warwick.
Biehler, R., Ben-Zvi, D., Bakker, A., & Makar, K. (2013). Tenology for enhancing statistical
reasoning at the sool level. In M. A. Clement, A. J. Bishop, C. Keitel, J. Kilpatri, & A.Y.L.
Leung (Eds.), ird international handbook on mathematics education (pp. 643–689). New York:
Springer.
Bower, M. (2008). Aﬀordance analysis—mating learning tasks with learning tenologies.
Educational Media International, 45(1), 3–15.
Brown, J., Stillman, G., & Herbert, S. (2004). Can the notion of aﬀordances be of use in the design of
a tenology enried mathematics curriculum? In I. Pu, R. Faragher, & M. McLean (Eds.),
Mathematics education for the third millennium: Towards 2010. Proceedings of the 27th Annual
Conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia (Vol. 1, pp. 119–124).
Sydney, NSW: MERGA.
Browning, C., Goss, J., & Smith, D. O. (2014). Statistical knowledge for teaing: Elementary
preservice teaers. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics
education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics.
Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical Institute.
Retrieved from http://iase-web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_2F2_BROWNING.pdf.
Browning, C., & Smith, D. O. (2015). Utilizing tenology to engage statistical inquiry in light of the
standards for mathematical practice. In D. Polly (Ed.), Cases of tenology integration in
mathematics education (pp. 205–226). Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Burgess, T. (2014). Student perspectives on being introduced to using TinkerPlots for investigations.

In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of
the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18.
Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical Institute. Retrieved from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_2B3_BURGESS.pdf.
Chi, H. L. (2007). Teaing and learning by example. In J. Watson & K. Beswi (Eds.), Essential
resear, essential practice. Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the Mathematics
Education Research Group of Australasia (Vol. 1, pp. 3–21). Adelaide, SA: MERGA.
Day, L. (2013). Using statistics to explore cross-curricular and social issues opportunities. The
Australian Mathematics Teacher, 69(4), 3–7.
delMas, R., Garﬁeld, J., & Zieﬄer, A. (2014). Using TinkerPlots to develop tertiary students’
statistical thinking in a modeling-based introductory statistics class. In T. Wassong, D.
Frisemeier, P. R. Fiser, R. Homuth, & P. Bender (Eds.), Using tools for learning
mathematics and statistics (pp. 405–420). Heidelberg: Springer Spektrum.
Fitzallen, N. (2006). A model of students’ statistical thinking and reasoning about graphs in an ICT
environment. In P. Grootenboer, R. Zevenbergen, & M. Chinnappan (Eds.), Identities, cultures and
learning spaces. Proceedings of 29th annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear
Group of Australasia (pp. 203–210). Sydney: MERGA.
Fitzallen, N. (2007). Evaluating data analysis soware: e case of TinkerPlots. Australian Primary
Mathematics Classroom, 12(1), 23–28.
Fitzallen, N. (2012). Interpreting graphs: Students developing an understanding of covariation. In J.
Dindyal, L. P. Cheng, & S. F. Ng (Eds.), Mathematics education: Expanding horizons. Proceedings
of the 35th annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia (pp.
290–297). Sydney: MERGA.
Fitzallen, N. (2013). Characterising students’ interaction with TinkerPlots. Tenology Innovations
in Statistics Education, 7(1), Article 2. Retrieved from www.escholarship.org/uc/item/1074n1dp#.
Fitzallen, N., & Brown, N. (2006). Evaluating data-analysis soware: Exploring opportunities for
developing statistical thinking and reasoning. In N. Armstrong & C. Sherwood (Eds.), IT’s up here
for thinking. Proceedings of the Australian Computers in Education Conference (CD-ROM).
October 2–4. Lesmurdie, WA: Australian Council for Computers in Education.
Fitzallen, N., & Watson, J. (2010). Developing statistical reasoning facilitated by TinkerPlots. In C.

Reading (Ed.), Data and context in statistics education: Towards an evidence-based society.
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics. Ljubljana,
Slovenia, July 11–16. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical Institute. Retrieved
from www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~iase/publications/icots8/ICOTS8_8A4_FITZALLEN.pdf.
Fitzallen, N., & Watson, J. (2011). Graph creation and interpretation: Puing skills and context
together. Traditions and [new] practices. Proceedings of the joint conference of the Mathematics
Education Resear Group of Australasia and the Australian Association of Mathematics
Teachers (pp. 203–209). Sydney: MERGA.
Fitzallen, N., & Watson, J. (2014). Extending the curriculum with TinkerPlots: Opportunities for early
development of informal inference. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in
statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of
Statistics. Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_8D3_FITZALLEN.pdf.
Frisemeier, D. (2014). Comparing groups by using TinkerPlots as part of a data analysis task—
Tertiary students’ strategies and diﬃculties. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.),
Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the
Teaing of Statistics. Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
Web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_8J3_FRISCHEMEIER.pdf.
Garﬁeld, J., delMas, R., & Zieﬄer, A. (2012). Developing statistical modelers and thinkers in an
introductory, tertiary-level statistics course. ZDM: e International Journal on Mathematics
Education, 44, 883–898.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). e theory of aﬀordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting,
and knowing: Toward an ecological psyology  (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Goldenberg, E. P. (1991). e diﬀerence between graphing soware and educational graphing
soware. In W. Zimmerman & S. Cunningham (Eds.), Visualization in teaing and learning
mathematics (pp. 77–86). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Goyne, J. S., McDonough, S. K., & Padge, D. D. (2000). Guidelines for evaluating educational

software. The Clearing House, 73(6), 345–348.
Hall, J. (2008, July). Using Census at Sool and TinkerPlots to support Ontario elementary teaers’
statistics teaing and learning. In J. Garﬁeld & M. G. Oaviani (Chairs), Topic 6: Building
collaboration between mathematics and statistics educators in teaer education, Joint
ICME/IASE Study: Teaing statistics in sool mathematics. Challenges for teaing and
teaer 
education, 
Monterrey, 
Mexico. 
Retrieved 
from
www.ugr.es/~icmi/iase_study/Files/Topic6.htm.
Harradine, A., & Konold, C. (2006). How representational medium aﬀects the data displays students
make. In A. Rossman & B. Chance (Eds.), Working cooperatively in statistics education.
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on the Teaing of Statistics (CD-ROM).
Salvador, Bahai, Brazil, July 2–7. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical Institute
and the International Statistical Institute.
Hoyles, C., Bakker, A., Kent, P., & Noss, R. (2007). Aributing meanings to representations of data:
The case of statistical process control. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 9, 331–360.
Hudson, R. A. (2012). Finding balance at the elusive mean. Mathematics Teaing in the Middle
School, 18, 301–306.
Ireland, S., & Watson, J. (2009). Building an understanding of the connection between experimental
and theoretical aspects of probability. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics
Education, 4, 339–370.
Jonassen, D. H., & Land, S. M. (Eds.). (2000). eoretical foundations of learning environments.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jones, K. S. (2003). What is an affordance? Ecological Psychology, 15(2), 107–114.
Kazak, S., Fujita, T., & Wegerif, R. (2014). Year 6 students’ reasoning about random ‘bunny hops’
through the use of TinkerPlots and peer-to-peer dialogic interactions. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, &
R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands:
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_9F1_KAZAK.pdf.
Kazak, S., & Konold, C. (2010). Development of ideas in data and ance through the use of tools
provided by computer-based tenology. In C. Reading (Ed.), Data and context in statistics

education: Towards an evidence-based society. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference
on the Teaing of Statistics . Ljubljana, Slovenia, July 11–16. Voorburg, e Netherlands:
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/documents/papers/icots8/ICOTS8_8D2_KAZAK.pdf.
Kazak, S., Wegerif, R., & Fujita, T. (2014). Supporting students’ probabilistic reasoning through the
use of tenology and dialogic talk. In S. Pope (Ed.), Proceedings of the 8th British Congress of
Mathematics Education (pp. 215–222). Noingham, UK: British Society for Resear into
Learning Mathematics.
Kennewell, S. (2001). Using aﬀordances and constraints to evaluate the use of information and
communications tenology in teaing and learning. Journal of Information Tenology for
Teacher Education, 10(1–2), 101–116.
Kidman, G. C., & Nason, R. (2000). When a visual representation is not worth a thousand words.
Tenology in Mathematics Education Conference (CD-ROM). December 11–14. Auland:
University of Auckland and Auckland University of Technology.
Konold, C. (2007). Designing a data analysis tool for learners. In M. C. Love & P. Shah (Eds.),
Thinking with data (pp. 267–291). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Konold, C., & Harradine, A. (2014). Contexts for highlighting signal and noise. In T. Wassong, D.
Frisemeier, P. R. Fiser, R. Homuth, & P. Bender (Eds.), Using tools for learning
mathematics and statistics (pp. 237–250). Heidelberg: Springer Spektrum.
Konold, C., Harradine, A., & Kazak, S. (2007). Understanding distributions by modeling them.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 12(3), 217–230.
Konold, C., & Lehrer, R. (2008). Tenology and mathematics education: An essay in honor of Jim
Kaput. In L. D. English (Ed.), Handbook of International Resear in Mathematics Education
(2nd ed., pp. 49–72). New York: Routledge.
Konold, C., & Miller, C. (1994). DataScope. (Computer soware). Santa Barbara, CA: Intellimation
Library for the Macintosh.
Konold, C., & Miller, C. D. (2005). Tinkerplots: Dynamic data exploration. (Computer soware).
Emeryville, CA: Key Curriculum Press.
Konold, C. & Miller, C. D. (2011). TinkerPlots: Dynamic data exploration. (Computer soware,
Version 2.0). Emeryville, CA: Key Curriculum Press.

Land, S. M., Hannaﬁn, M. J., & Oliver, K. (2012). Student-centred learning environments:
Foundations, assumptions and design. In D. Jonassen & S. Land (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of
learning environments (2nd Ed., pp. 3–26). Hoboken, NJ: Taylor & Francis.
Lehrer, R., Kim, M. J., & Sauble, L. (2007). Supporting the development of conceptions of statistics
by engaging students in measuring and modeling variability. International Journal of Computers
for Mathematical Learning, 12(3), 195–216.
Madden, S. (2014). Designing tenology-ri learning environments for secondary teaers to
explore and prepare to tea statistics. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability
in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of
Statistics. Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_9E2_MADDEN.pdf.
Manor, H., Ben-Zvi, D., & Aridor, K. (2014). Students’ reasoning about uncertainty while making
informal statistical inferences in an “integrated pedagogic approa.” In K. Makar, B. deSousa, &
R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands:
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_8C2_MANOR.pdf.
Meletiou-Mavrotheris, M., Paparistodemou, E., & Stylianou, D. (2009). Enhancing statistics
instruction in elementary sools: Integrating tenology in professional development. The
Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, 6(1–2), 57–78.
Ministry of Education. (1992). Mathematics in the New Zealand curriculum. Wellington, NZ:
Author.
Monteiro, C., Asseker, A., Carvalho, L., & Campos, T. (2010). Student teaers developing their
knowledge about data handling using TinkerPlots. In C. Reading (Ed.), Data and context in
statistics education: Towards an evidence-based society . Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Ljubljana, Slovenia, July 11–16. Voorburg, e
Netherlands: 
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/documents/papers/icots8/ICOTS8_3B1_MONTEIRO.pdf.
Murray, T., Blessing, S., & Ainsworth, S. (Eds.) (2003). Authoring tools for advanced tenology

learning environments: Toward cost-eﬀective adaptive, interactive and intelligent educational
software. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards for
school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author.
Noll, J., Gebresenbet, M., & Glover, E. D. (2012). A modeling and simulation approa to informal
inference: Success and allenges. In D. Ben-Zvi & K. Makar (Eds.), Teaing and learning
statistics. Proceedings of the 12th International Congress on Mathematical Education, Topic
Study Group 12 (pp. 141–150). Seoul, Korea, July 8–15.
Paparistodemou, E., & Meletiou-Mavrotheris, M. (2008). Developing young students’ informal
inference skills in data analysis. Statistics Education Resear Journal, 7(2), 83–106. Retrieved
from www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~iase/serj/SERJ7(2)_Paparistodemou.pdf.
Podworny, S., & Biehler, R. (2014). A learning trajectory on hypothesis testing with TinkerPlots—
Design and exploratory evaluation. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, & R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in
statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on the Teaing of
Statistics. Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands: International Statistical
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_9A2_PODWORNY.pdf.
Rossman, A. J. (2008). Reasoning about informal statistical inference: One statistician’s view.
Statistics Education Research Journal, 7(2), 5–19. Retrieved from www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/serj.
Rubin, A., & Hammerman, J. K. (2006). Understanding data through new soware representations.
In G. F. Burrill (Ed.), inking and reasoning with data and ance  (pp. 241–256). Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Saldanha, L., & McAllister, M. (2014). Using re-sampling and sampling variability in an applied
context as a basis for making statistical inferences with conﬁdence. In K. Makar, B. deSousa, &
R. Gould (Eds.), Sustainability in statistics education. Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on the Teaing of Statistics . Flagstaﬀ, AZ, July 13–18. Voorburg, e Netherlands:
International 
Statistical 
Institute. 
Retrieved 
from http://iase-
web.org/icots/9/proceedings/pdfs/ICOTS9_6C2_SALDANHA.pdf.
Soenfeld, A. H. (1998). Making mathematics and making pasta: From cookbook procedures to
really cooking. In J. G. Greeno & S. V. Goldman (Eds.), inking practices in mathematics and

science learning (pp. 299–320). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Sta, S., & Watson, J. (2013). Randomness, sample size, imagination and metacognition: Making
judgments about differences in data sets. Australian Mathematics Teacher, 69(4), 23–30.
Tukey, J. W. (1977). Exploratory data analysis. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Watson, J. M. (2006). Statistical literacy at sool: Growth and goals. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Watson, J. M. (2014). TinkerPlots as an interactive tool for learning about resampling. In T. Wassong,
D. Frisemeier, P. R. Fiser, R. Homuth, & P. Bender (Eds.), Using tools for learning
mathematics and statistics (pp. 421–436). Heidelberg: Springer Spektrum.
Watson, J. M., & Chance, B. (2012). Building intuitions about statistical inference based on
resampling. Australian Senior Mathematics Journal, 26(1), 6–18.
Watson, J. M., & Donne, J. (2009). TinkerPlots as a resear tool to explore student understanding.
Technology Innovations in Statistics Education, 3(1), 1–35.
Watson, J. M., & English, L. D. (2013a). Data and measurement in year 4 of the Australian
Curriculum: Mathematics. In S. Herbert, J. Tillyer, & T. Spencer (Eds.), Mathematics: Launing
futures. Proceedings of the 24th biennial conference of the Australian Association of
Mathematics Teachers (pp. 157–165). July 10–13. Adelaide: AAMT.
Watson, J. M., & English, L. D. (2013b). e power of percent. Australian Primary Mathematics
Classroom, 18(4), 14–18.
Watson, J. M., & Fitzallen, N. (2010). Development of graph understanding in the mathematics
curriculum. Report for the NSW Department of Education and Training. Sydney: State of New
South Wales through the Department of Education and Training. Retrieved from
www.curriculumsupport.education.nsw.gov.au/primary/mathematics/assets/pdf/dev_graph_undst
Webb, M. E. (2005). Aﬀordances of ICT in science learning: Implications for an integrated pedagogy.
International Journal of Science Education, 27(6), 705–735.
Weissglass, J., & Cummings, D. (1991). Dynamic visual experiments with random phenomena. In W.
Zimmerman & S. Cunningham (Eds.), Visualization in teaing and learning mathematics (pp.
215–223). Washington, DC: Mathematical Association of America.
Weissglass, J., eis, N., & Finzer, W. (1986). Hands-on statistics: Explorations with a microcomputer.
Belmont, CA: Wordsworth.

Yilmaz, Z. (2013). Usage of TinkerPlots to address and remediate 6th grade students’ misconceptions
about mean and median. Anthropologist, 16(1–2), 21–29.

25 The Use of Digital Technology in
Mathematical Practices
Reconciling Traditional and Emerging
Approaches
Luis Moreno-Armella and Manuel Santos-Trigo
Cinvestav-IPN, México

Introduction
e pervasive presence of digital tenologies in society, and their
transformative powers in this second decade of the 21st century, remind us
that we have entered new times full of allenges for educational systems.
is is globally true even if one recognizes diﬀerent levels of economic
development of countries around the world. Signiﬁcant and increasing
availability of digital tenologies has opened windows for people to
explore new social spaces of participation and eventually redeﬁne their
own identity. In Mexico, there are about 99 million mobile phones, whi
means 86 phones per ea 100 inhabitants. During a trip in the subway, in
Mexico City, one can observe how people become isolated whilst using
their phones (basic cell phones and even smartphones) for messaging and
playing games. Isolation, however, is apparent as the phones mediates their
presence in another place. Identity involves presence in social space, but
now, social space is extended into a realm of virtual reality, on a permanent
basis. e phone is the key to enter and participate in this enlarged
infrastructure of society. Friedman (2007) uses the notion of flatness to
explain and argue that, with the use of tenology resources, more people
are involved or can directly collaborate in addressing and discussing societal
concerns than ever before. He writes: “what the ﬂaening of the world
means is that we are now connecting all the knowledge centers on the
planet together into a single global network … in an amazing era of
prosperity, innovation, and collaboration, by companies, communities, and
individuals” (p. 8). Digital tenologies have transformed and are
transforming human relations and human cognitive powers. Friedman’s
book, among others, provides ample evidence of this fact. At the moment,
the use of cognitive tenologies (Pea, 1985) could be seen as amplifiers of
human cognition. For instance, the use of a handheld calculator with
Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) can help us solve problems that involve

ﬁnding the roots of a given polynomial. is is something we could do
without the handheld device, but it is faster and convenient to rely on this
recourse. Like a magnifying glass, a cognitive tenology can improve an
ability we already possess. People usually develop this cognitive aﬀordance
when they begin representing and exploring tasks through this tenology.
However, in the long run, this is not quite the only proper role. Like a
Trojan horse, a cognitive tenology begins working stealthily in our mind
and aer a while it becomes part of our cognitive resources. is is the case
with the tenology of writing, for instance. As Donald (2001, p. 302) has
explained, literacy skills transform the functional aritecture of the brain
and have a profound impact on how literate people perform their cognitive
work. e complex neural components of a literate vocabulary, Donald
explains, have to be hammered by years of sooling to rewire the
functional organization of our thinking. Similarly, the decimal system
(Kaput & Sorr, 2008, p. 212) ﬁrst enlarged access to computation and
eventually paved the way to the Modern Age. Today, we cannot imagine
the world without these tenologies. ey have become part of our
infrastructure—obviously mu more than mere ampliﬁers. at is, they
have become essential tools that everyone learns and uses to sustain
individual and social activities. ey have rewired, as Donald (2001) wrote,
the functional organization of individual brains and, at the same time, have
become coextensive with our culture. It is the omnipresence of tenologies
in society that eventually endow them with invisibility: they blend into
society, as people are increasingly accustomed to their effects.
us, tenologies eventually become natural and transparent in the
social world, the truly human ecology.
We need to develop the critical capabilities to translate scientiﬁc and
tenological developments into our realities, more importantly, into our
educational 
realities. 
Scientiﬁc 
knowledge 
undergoes 
tangible
transformations before entering into the classroom. One comprehensive

framework to guide and understand this translation of scientiﬁc knowledge
into the knowledge taught in sools is provided by the theory of didactic
transposition (Chevallard, 1985). Put simply, didactic transposition includes
ways to reorganize knowledge so that the new resulting version is available
as educational material.
is transposition creates a tension between social expectations, on one
side, and what an educational system can deliver and oﬀer to learners on
the other. It is important to recognize that a sool culture always leaves
signiﬁcant marks on students and teaers’ values. As Artigue (2002) has
aptly expressed, “these [culture] values were established, through history,
in environments poor in tenology, and they have only slowly come to
terms with the evolution of mathematical practice linked to tenological
evolution” (p. 245). However, there is a fact that must be singled out: e
emergent knowledge produced through the digital media is diﬀerent from
the knowledge emerging from a paper-and-pencil medium, because the
mediating artifact is not epistemologically neutral. at is, the nature of the
knowledge is inextricably linked to the mediating artifact (Moreno-Armella
& Hegedus, 2009, p. 501). We will have an opportunity to discuss this issue
broadly, later in this chapter.
It is important to recognize the existence of a natural tension between
the past and the future, but it is also possible to resolve it if we realize that
the prudent face looks into the past, and the innovative face looks into the
future.
Today, our students are increasingly digital natives—and as teaers, we
are digital immigrants (Prensky, 2010). Yet, even if we speak (digital)
tenology with an accent, we need to blend past tenologies with the
new ones.
In this context, sool culture requires a gradual but permanent
reorientation of its practices, and of its cognitive and epistemological
assumptions, for students to gain access to powerful mathematical ideas. In

our view, the classroom should be conceived of as the central nervous
system of the educational process. However, that classrooom, as well as the
educational system in toto, are open systems and consequently are under
the multidimensional influence of its social and cultural environments.
Today, we have new ways to represent and communicate our
experiences, in particular, to communicate the knowledge we have
acquired. For example, communication tenologies facilitate not only
direct interaction among resear communities, but also the sharing of
experiences and results.
Boino, Artigue, & Noss (2009) present a collaboration project that
involves several European resear teams discussing goals and ways to
frame tenology-enhanced learning from diﬀerent theoretical traditions.
But all this is not just about knowledge: it is centrally about knowing. As
Smidt and Cohen (2013) pointed out, a computer, in 2025, will be 64
times faster than it is in 2013. is is a huge increase in computational
power that should help individuals reorganize their ways of thinking,
including their problem solving approaches. We cannot foresee, today, what
this would imply for society in general and for education in particular in the
next decades.
Mathematics is part of our culture and lives; it is embedded in every
digital artifact, phone, computer, eBook, and so on. Eventually, we are
compelled to ask: What is the new role of mathematics in contemporary
societies increasingly saturated by the use of digital artifacts? How can we
use available tenologies (including smartphones) to foster students’
development of sense-making actitivies and reasoning? us, we are forced
to understand the strategies that teaers follow to appropriate the digital
artifacts at their rea. For instance they can use conveyance tenologies
o r mathematical action tenologies (Di & Hollebrands, 2011). On one
hand, the former allow the teaer to present or communicate
mathematical ideas in the classroom. Even if these tenologies are not

mathematics speciﬁc (Microso PowerPoint, LCD projectors, for instance)
they are important for integrating the classroom around the discussion of
someone’s point of view with respect to a mathematical idea. Mathematical
action tenologies (Di & Hollebrands, 2011), on the other hand, are used
to 
activate 
and 
improve 
exploration, 
conjecture 
formulation,
argumentation, and in general, mathematical ways of thinking.

A Focus on Mathematical Tasks
In the last 10 years we have consistently been involved in several national
resear projects that aim to analyze and discuss the extent to whi the
use of digital tenologies provide teaers and learners with new avenues
to grasp and develop mathematical knowledge (Moreno-Armella & Santos-
Trigo, 2008). During the development of those projects we have addressed
themes related to teaers’ involvement in problem-solving activities that
enhance the use of several digital tools, curriculum reforms, and ways to
design and implement mathematical tasks in actual learning scenarios
(Santos-Trigo & Camao-Maín, 2009). Our resear approa includes
working directly with teaers at public institutions through seminars and
workshops. ere, teaers have an opportunity to identify and discuss
international developments around the use of digital tenologies su as
those published in handbooks and resear journals, and ways to frame
them in their actual teaing practices. Indeed, several of the tasks used in
this apter to illustrate ways of reasoning that emerge when learners think
of and approa the tasks through the tools’ aﬀordances came from those
projects. at is, tasks play an important role not only in fostering learners’
construction of mathematical knowledge, but also in documenting students’
ways of reasoning associated with the use of digital technology.
It is a truism that education necessitates the permanent and sustainable
transformation of teaers. In Mexico, a country with a population of 112
million, there are 34.8 million students and about 1.8 million teaers. e
student population between 15–18 years old represents 12.5% and this is the
sector that will grow faster in coming years. ere are 286,000 teaers for
this sector and 328,000 university teaers. At the university level there are
3.2 million students, whi represents 9.1% of the global student population.
ese updated ﬁgures come from the Ministry of Education (SEP) and oﬀer
a partial view of the social realities that constitute the environment where

teaers work and will develop their professional lives. e tension
between local traditions and global transformations, or national and
international innovation, is permanent. We need, as educational researers,
to transform ideas that we think are important and spread them along the
permanent professional development of teaers. ey are our closest
colleagues.

Guide and Being Guided by an Artifact
Imagine the early encounter of a student with a violin. Aer the ﬁrst
sessions, the student comes home with pain in her shoulders, ne, and
hands. Perhaps the violin is out of tune, but in certain ways the violin is
presenting some resistance to the student’s eﬀorts to conquer it. ese
initial obstacles and shortcomings are some of the constraints the artifact
imposes on a would-be-violinist. One could say that the student’s learning
i s being guided by the structure of the violin. Imagine, now, the same
student some 15 years later, as a brilliant professional violinist, in the
middle of a concert. No pain in her hands, ne, or shoulders. e music
ﬂows smoothly with her performance and now, the violin is invisible,
meaning that the violinist overcame all those early shortcomings years ago:
today, the musician guides the violin to express her music and her artistic
sensibilities. It is as if the violinist was able to create a distortion of reality
mediated by the violin (almost) an organic part of her skills. In our view,
artifacts and activity inﬂuence ea other, ﬂow through ea other, and
even more: the music, the violin, and the artist are coextensive,
coterminous. us, the subjects’ activities are mediated by the use of the
artifact, which also influences the subjects’ actions.
e long bidirectional process through whi the music student
internalizes the violin, overcoming all its resistances, takes place within a
cultural medium. It is within a culture that the musician ﬁnds the motives
and the concomitant aesthetic values that fill her efforts with meaning.
is short narrative aims to describe the nature of the relationship
between a person and an artifact that she/he wants to use for accomplishing
a task. ere is a deep level of complexity—tenical, cultural, and
cognitive—implicit in this narrative. We shall try to reveal a signiﬁcant
piece of this complexity in the following pages when we reﬂect on learning
and teaching mathematics with the mediation of digital technologies.

Working with teaers in our graduate program has been an invaluable
opportunity to learn how they deal with digital tenologies like Geogebra,
installed in computers, for instance. e teaers are motivated because
they will use this tenology when they return to their classrooms. ere is
a professional commitment as well as an increasing social pressure to gain
ﬂuency with these artifacts—we ﬁnd cell phones in the subway as well as in
the schools.
In the ﬁrst decades of the present century there have been serious eﬀorts
t o problematize the presence of CAS and Dynamic Geometry Soware
(DGS) in the classroom. Besides having been installed in material artifacts
(calculators, computers, smartphones, and so on), CAS and DGS are
semiotic artifacts because they mediate semiotic tasks when we are, for
instance, trying to coordinate several symbolic registers of a mathematical
object. We can illustrate this with the analysis of area variation of a family
of rectangles with ﬁxed perimeter through a discrete approa (a table), a
graphic generated via loci of points, or in terms of an algebraic model.
Teaers need to understand the workings of these artifacts, and their
syntactical rules, in order to use them meaningfully as mediators of
mathematical knowledge. For this to happen, there must be a melody to be
played, that is, teaers need a mathematical task. e task is an incentive
for teaers to ﬁgure out how to integrate in meaningful ways the symbolic
artifact to their own intellectual resources in order to solve that task. If a
person succeeds in integrating the artifact to his/her cognitive resources to
solve a task, then, Verillon and Rabardel (1995) explain that the artifact has
become an instrument. For instance, when we compute the multiplication
of two large numbers our cognitive activity is mediated by the positional
system we use to represent numbers. We ﬁnd it very natural to proceed as
we usually do. e positional system in base 10 is more than a cultural
artifact: it has become an instrument of our reason to deal with numbers.
is is in sheer contrast to computing with numbers wrien in base, say,

seven. In this case we have a cultural artifact that most people have not
transformed into an instrument to think in numbers and solve problems.
Let us introduce another example: An aritect begins using speciﬁc
soware to design his buildings. Taking proﬁt from the plasticity of the
visual images that the soware provides, the aritect can imagine a new
plan, a new design. Gradually he will begin thinking of his design with and
through the soware. e aritect will incorporate the soware as part of
his thinking and one day, the soware will have disappeared as su. Now
it is coextensive with the aritect’s thinking whilst solving design tasks.
e soware has become an instrument and the design activities are
instrumented activities.

A Symbolic Mode of Existence
e drawing of a air is a representation of the air, but it is not the
actual air: we cannot sit down on the drawing. We are reminded of the
famous René Magrie’s painting e Treaery of Images : there is the
image of a pipe and, below the image, the words: ceci n’est pas une pipe
(this is not a pipe). Imagine Magrie had drawn a triangle instead of the
pipe: this is not a triangle. Knowing that he could smoke with the real pipe
represented on the canvas, we can ask: Can he bring to the fore a real
triangle? Obviously, the answer is no. However, if we have a representation
of the triangle, what is that “other thing” that is being represented on the
canvas? Of course it is not a concrete, material thing, like Magritte’s pipe.
We have to look for a diﬀerent answer. Writing has the power to
crystallize an idea and give it a tangible level of objectivity. is is what
happens with mathematical notation systems, i.e., symbolic representations.
But how does it happen in mathematics? For instance, we have the
experience of periodicity (day-night-day again) and we create a periodic
function—that is, a conceptual entity—to deal with the diversity of these
phenomena. At its early stages, mathematical concepts are born from
human perceptions or conceived from activities like building a round
object. Later, the symbolic representation that captures our original
perception or experience establishes links with other concepts and
eventually becomes the initial steps for even further elaboration of
mathematical concepts. is is similar to what we ﬁnd in a dictionary: one
looks for the meaning of a word and the dictionary provides a description
with other words. Words do not live a full life if they are isolated; they need
to live in networks. is happens to mathematical concepts as well. For
instance, students can easily sear for online sources to explore a concept’s
meaning and applications, and they can even ask and discuss their peers’
views and comprehension of those concepts.

With teaers we have used this example: It is known that the number of
atoms in the universe is of the order 1085. en, what is the meaning of the
number 10400 ? Apparently, there are numbers that have no referent but
they still are numbers: they are the result, for instance, of arithmetic
operations. is problem, simple as it appears to be, opens the door to
interesting (epistemological) discussions with teaers. Reference is found
not only in the material world, indeed, reference is found in the world of
human actions that extend the material world.
So far, we have been trying to depict the conceptual path walked
through with teaers. We have been reminded of the importance to invite
the teaers to communal reﬂections and discussions about conceptual
diﬃculties that may be lurking ahead when a student tries to appropriate a
piece of mathematics at school.
Saying that a mathematical entity is a cultural object crystallized by
symbolic means, from human activity, needs detailed unpaing, especially
if one is thinking of education. René Thom, in his plenary lecture at ICME 2,
1972 said: “e real problem that confronts mathematics teaing is not
that of rigor but the problem of the development of meaning, of the
existence of mathematical objects” (Thom, 1972, p. 202)
One of us remembers a geometry class where students were asked to
prove that in a triangle the length of ea side is less than the sum of the
lengths of the other two sides. A student came to the board with a cord to
measure the sum of two sides and verify that the resulting piece of cord
was longer than the third side. We had previously discussed that a straight
line was like a tight cord. e discussion that students engaged (including a
discussion about the triangle Earth-Sun-Moon) to prove the theorem,
taught the teaer how diﬃcult it was for students to understand that a
mathematical object was a conceptual entity and that the only way to
access it is through a symbolic representation (Duval, 2006). Even more, one
representation is not enough to exhaust all the features of a mathematical

entity. In that sense, the mathematical entity is always under construction.
It is the la of ostensive referrals to mathematical entities that generates
this sense of elusiveness that students feel, quite oen, whilst dealing with
mathematical problems. However, it is a maer of levels of abstraction and
generality that we have to deal with. Students need to feel they are dealing
with something that has a palpable existence (Lakoﬀ & Nuñez, 2000).
Indeed, there is evidence that the process of learning a concept is facilitated
when the student has the opportunity to work with a ri diversity of
symbolic representations of that concept.
To approach these and other delicate matters, we turn to digital media.

Vignettes and Exemplars: Geometry and Calculus.
Like the two faces of Janus that look to the past and to the future, education
looks to tradition and innovation. We cannot forget that today’s curriculum
has deep roots in the ways mathematics has been conceived traditionally
with paper and pencil—and we cannot forget, either, the importance of the
available digital armamentarium, resources that teaers can incorporate
into their teaing practices. But even if digital tenologies are not fully
integrated within the sool mathematical universe, they will gradually
erode and transform the mathematical ways of thinking embedded in the
traditional system. In Mexico, a government proposal to provide online
resources to all elementary sools became important to discuss ways to
transform textbooks into interactive materials where students explore
mathematical ideas from diverse perspectives.
To consider this dilemma, the tension between tradition and innovation,
we explore digital representations of mathematical entities. Doing so will
reveal properties of these entities that lie hidden or opaque, to begin with.
Our goal is to develop a transitional way of thinking more in agreement
with the requirements of education today. For instance, simple mathematics
objects su as the perpendicular bisector that appears in elementary
education are reconceptualized when they are explored dynamically (see
the task in the following section). Indeed, this concept becomes crucial for
generating and exploring all conic sections studied at the high-sool level
(Moreno-Armella & Hegedus, 2009; Santos-Trigo & Ortega-Moreno, 2013).
At this point, it is crucial that these reﬂections take place in a classroom
with teaers. We cannot conceive of transforming education without the
conscientious efforts of the teachers. This is strategic.
Let us begin now presenting some of the aforementioned vignees and
exemplars pertaining to mathematical ways of thinking for teachers.

A Reconceptualization of the Perpendicular
Bisector
Of course teaers, could describe this geometric object, but did they
understand it? Had they used it in meaningful ways? ese are questions
we wanted to explore. For our work, we decided that understanding meant
the moment when a cultural artifact (Troue, 2004) (as the perpendicular
bisector) became an instrument integrated with other cognitive
instruments. Yet, this was rather restricted, so we seared for the moment
the teaers in the classroom were aware of the instrument and they could
use it to solve a task. is approa did cohere with the possibilities for
active exploration within the digital environment. We oﬀered the following
task for exploration. Let us consider the segment AB and its perpendicular
bisector (as shown in Figure 25.1).
At this point the idea was to use the perpendicular bisector as an
organizing principle to explore conic sections. We suggested the
construction of triangles with the third vertex C on the perpendicular
bisector and then asked teaers to explore the locus of D (D is the
intersection point of the perpendicular bisector of side BC and the bisector
of angle CAB) as C travels along the perpendicular bisector of AB (see
Figure 25.2). Teaers got a locus that looked like a conic section. Now the
problem began: Is it a conic section?

Figure 25.1  Perpendicular bisector.
e ﬁgure does not do justice to what happened next. At that moment
teaers were puzzled: e question was unexpected. ey had worked
with conic sections using the traditional analytic expressions. Now, where
were the coordinate axes? Aer a while a teaer, Victor, realized they
could try “to cover” the locus with a conic section passing through ﬁve
points of the locus. e Geogebra dynamic system provides a command to
draw a conic that passes through ﬁve points and teaers had used it
extensively. Following this idea, teaers understood (aer a mediating
discussion) that the way to disprove the conjecture was legitimate, as they
had used something infrastructural: the conic section passing through ﬁve
points. ey found the conic that disproved the result by dragging and
rotating the vertices and the segments in the ﬁgure. is is crucial: they
dragged, rotated the figure while preserving the underlying structure.
We thought it was more productive to begin with a problem that would
ﬁnd a solution by means of a counterexample. e lesson learned was that

dragging is a mediator for exploring. As a teaer, Laura, said, “If
something is true you cannot destroy it by dragging it.” e window to
structure was opened. In the next session, Alvaro came with the
construction shown in Figure 25.3.
Figure 25.2  “Conic” section.

Figure 25.3  Another counterexample.
His ﬁve points for the conic were E, F, G, H, and I. He began playing
with the construction by moving Point I along the locus and observing the
different conics.
e way to introduce the ﬁve-point construction as an infrastructural
artifact in the digital medium was establishing the similarity with (i) two
points determine one straight line; (iii) three points determine one circle.
Then we discussed the fact that mathematics was embedded in the medium.
Discovering the Parabola

Teaers were very enthusiastic about the experience of solving a problem
by means of a counterexample. e next time we decided to try a variant
of the former exemplar. Instead of taking the bisector of angle CAB, we
suggested that teaers work with the intersection point of the
perpendicular bisector of CB and the perpendicular to line b at C as shown
in Figure 25.4.
is time the locus is a parabola and the straight line b is the directrix;
the focus is Point B. Teaers had already worked with the deﬁnition of the
parabola as the locus of points equidistant from a line (the directrix) and a
point (the focus). ey identiﬁed b as the directrix and B as the focus—but
what we did not expect was the fact that, to identify the locus as a parabola,
they rotated the figure a right angle to the left, as shown in Figure 25.5.
ey hid the segments and points that were not relevant for the original
deﬁnition of the parabola as a locus. We were wondering why they had to
rotate the graph as it was clear that the locus as shown in Figure 25.4 is a
parabola. It was clear for us but not for them: e deﬁnition of parabola
always comes with this graph (Figure 25.5), so an inertia is created due to
the fact that the graphical representation of the conic reﬂect our own body,
as when we draw on the slate. ere is a sense of vertical and a sense of
horizontal that are present when one tries to recognize a shape. It is clear
that this event illustrates the embodiment of knowledge (Moreno-Armella
& Hegedus, 2009).

Figure 25.4  The locus of D as C travels on b.

Figure 25.5  Identifying the locus.
us, simple mathematical entities su as triangles or circles can be
represented digitally and become a platform or departure point to identify
and explore more complex entities. is is the case with the following
exemplar:
Looking for the Hidden Conics
Draw a circle with center C. On the circle we oose Point E and draw line
CE. en, we select Point F on line CE and draw the segment FG. We take
the perpendicular bisector of FG. is perpendicular bisector intersects line
CE at H (Figure 25.6).
We asked: What is the locus of Point H when Point E travels the circle?
Figure 25.7 shows that the locus seems to be a hyperbola.

Figure 25.6  Dynamic triangle and perpendicular bisector.

Figure 25.7  What is the locus of Point H when Point E travels along the circle?
Drawing the locus of H is an infrastructural aﬀordance of the
environment. In this context, it is a point-and-cli action. Teaers were
amazed with the environment’s answer. Indeed, the locus seemed to be a
hyperbola. But was it? At this time, the teaers were almost lost; they
could not devise a plan of action. At our suggestion they measured the
distances involved and found that the segment HF was congruent to
segment HG. But—and this was Manuel’s conclusion—that always happens
because H is on the perpendicular bisector of FG! ey drew the segment
HG and things became clearer. It took another half an hour to write:

We want to emphasize that the ability to drag points and observe the
smooth morphing of the locus was instrumental for reaing the right
conclusion. In this case the moving point was F. at made the teaers
propose that C and G as the foci of the hyperbola. ere is no doubt:
Motion is worth a thousand pictures.
It was visible that by moving Point G (this time F was ﬁxed) diﬀerent
loci were obtained. We observed that they were moving G far from the
circle, so we decided to ask: What happens if G gets closer to the circle?
We kept quiet for a while as they discovered that suddenly the hyperbola
morphed into a figure that seemed to be an ellipse.
Teaers found astounding this sudden morphing into an “ellipse” when
Point G got closer to the circle. ey had proven aer a while playing with
the resources provided by the environment that d(C, H) – d(H, G) was a
constant equal to d(C, F). Now, the morphed figure seemed to be an ellipse
It was not the diﬀerence but the sum: d(C, H) + d(H, G) = d(C, E), a
constant for every position of H on the perpendicular bisector of segment
FG.
That made clear for them that the locus was, indeed, an ellipse.
Eventually, teaers came to perceive that the position of F on line CE
has “the key” (their words) to decide if the conic was a hyperbola or an
ellipse.
We thought, at that point, that it was time to simplify the construction by
identifying Points E and F. en we asked the teaers to ﬁgure out how to
draw a tangent to the ellipse from any Point C inside this circle (see Figure
25.9).
We will omit this discussion, whi completed a basic dynamic analytic

geometry course, as we want to share a couple of Calculus examples that
we discussed with another group. However, we consider important to oﬀer
some reﬂections based on the previous teaing-teaers experience before
the Calculus exemplars.
A Brief Reflection
e Point F (see Figures 25.8 and 25.9) is a hot-point (Moreno-Armella &
Hegedus, 2009) because if we keep ﬁxed all other points, in these
constructions, Point F controls the underlying structure of conics we can
display. What is really central is that the environment provides these points
in every construction. Emphasizing this idea made teachers aware that what
we have on the screen are not simply dynamic drawings but geometric
structures. It was the movement that made the structure visible: the
structure is hidden behind any particular rendition on the screen. One of the
teaers, Laura, mentioned that the idea that the structure is visible through
movement was similar to camouﬂaged objects: if a moth is standing still on
a tree, then the bird (its predator) cannot see the moth, unless the moth
moves. Of course, the similarity ends here as seeing the structure is a very
complex cognitive process. What one sees, through the digital, executable
representation is a conceptual entity (Moreno-Armella & Hegedus, 2009).
At this point we pondered over the pertinence of going ba to the
discussion on the nature of mathematical entities. We found that working in
a dynamic environment where learners could drag a ﬁgure, and modify the
length of a segment, for instance, gave them an opportunity to explore the
behavior of a family of objects within the same configuration.

Figure 25.8  Ellipse with foci C, G.

Figure 25.9  The new construction.
In all the preceding examples, the basic geometric construction has been
the perpendicular bisector. is construction is the organizing principle for
exploring conic sections the way we chose to follow.
Action does not belong (exclusively) to the user and neither does it to the
environment; both user and environment are actors and reactors. For
instance, if we drag a triangle on the screen, it seems as if we are able to
hold that ﬁgure with our hands and transform it. User and environment are,
from the point of view of agency, coextensive. us, we speak of coaction
between the user and the environment, not just between the user and the

artifact. Coaction is the broader process within whi an artifact is being
internalized as a cognitive instrument. Yet, in the social space of the
classroom there can be a collective actor. One participant can observe how
another drives the tenology at hand and then incorporate what she
observed into her subsequent strategies. At the end participants can act and
react to the environment in ways that are essentially diﬀerent from their
initial actions. We can learn from, through, and with the others. So the
traditional triangle user-tenology-task has to be enlarged: coaction
becomes embedded in a social structure. Culture cannot be factorized from
the tenology appropriation processes, and tenology cannot be
factorized from culture.

Two Exemplars From Calculus
Digital media, with their executable representations (Moreno-Armella,
Hegedus, & Kaput, 2008, p. 105), have transformed the traditional
mathematics of ange and accumulation. ere is a profound cognitive
diﬀerence between applying a geometric transformation, on paper, to
rotate or dilate a triangle (where all the action takes place in human
imagination) and applying that transformation through its executable
version and perceiving it on the screen. us, variation, ange, and
accumulation are no longer restricted to the wrien version of Calculus.
However, paper-and-pencil tradition cannot be ignored and le aside. We
have to allow its representational redescription in terms of digital
representations. In fact, there are many mathematical entities that can be
redescribed, translated into digital environments and explored there. In our
work with teaers we always intend to take advantage of digital
representations for going deeper into the mathematics that we discuss and
explore with them. In the next pages we will introduce two exemplars
from elementary Calculus that have been the maer of intensive
discussions in the classroom.
Area Approximation
Pierre de Fermat (1601–1665) solved, in a very original way, the problem of
computing the area under a parabola: y = xp, p ≠ 1. Fermat began by
subdividing the interval [0, 1] into an inﬁnite sequence of subintervals with
end-points of the form zn, with n = 1,2,3,… and Z a ﬁxed number 0 < z < 1.
at is, Fermat used an inﬁnite subdivision of the interval by means of a
geometric progression as suggested by Figure 25.10.
It takes some work to ﬁnd a closed expression for the sum of the areas of

the rectangles, but Fermat did it. Aerwards, Fermat’s reasoning was to
eliminate the error, that is, to ﬁll the white triangles over the rectangles. At
this point, we decided to stop the narrative (indeed, avoid the
computations) and ask the teaers, taking into account their already
gained experience with digital environments, how they could explain
Fermat’s result. ey had some experience working with sliders; the
answer came aer a collective and very emotional discussion in the
classroom (Vizgin, 2001). Let us see the next figures.
Figure 25.11 on the le shows a ﬁxed value of Z < 1, and six rectangles.
e slider is used to control the number of rectangles. Figure 25.12 on the
right shows six rectangles, but now the value of Z is closer to 1. One can
observe that the process of approximation depends not only on the number
of rectangles (in principle, there is an inﬁnite number of rectangles) but on
how close to 1 is Z. If Z is closer to 1, then we need more rectangles.

Figure 25.10  Infinite subdivision.


Figure 25.11  Increasing the number of rectangles.


Figure 25.12  Obtaining a better approximation.
We certainly believe that the teaers were able to understand the basic
idea behind an approximation process, notwithstanding the contextual
constraints. We have called these kinds of particular contexts domains of
abstraction: ere is something general “hidden” below the context in
question (Moreno-Armella & Sriraman, 2010, pp. 224–225).
It became tangible for the teaers that the environment is full of
“treasures” (they used this word), aﬀordances, let us say, that enable the
user to express her/his mathematical ideas. ere is no neutral artifact, no
neutral environment. Ea artifact drives the actions of the user (individual
or collective) and is driven by the user in a coextensive process that leaves
no one unanged. As a cognitive agent, the user eventually incorporates
the artifact to his/her cognitive resources. at is what we do when add
two numbers: we do not see, anymore, the decimal notation system that
after years of schooling has become incorporated as a cognitive instrument.
Among the treasures the teaers became aware of, sliders and dragging
were instrumental for their mathematical thinking: ese became
instruments to deal with and control continuous and discrete variation.
One of our goals was to help the teaers to develop conceptual and
computational ﬂuencies. at is, the tool’s aﬀordances are vehicles to
represent and explore concept meaning and its uses in problem-solving
activities. We believe this is possible if teaers have at their hands the
mediation of dynamic, digital environments.
It is important to realize that blending mathematical ideas originally
developed in static media with their digital redescriptions has the potential
to open windows into a new mathematical culture in the classroom.

 
Figure 25.13  A tangent segment.
The Visual Derivative

One of the main obstacles to developing a sound vision of the derivative is
not being able to conceive of it as a number. Once the derivative has been
introduced as the slope of the tangent line to the graph, at one point, in
most cases this tangent is used to locate maxima or minima of the function.
is is done by following a meanical procedure, almost a mantra: ﬁnd the
derivative; make it equal to zero … and so on. But the important step of
ﬁnding the derivative and trying to understand what it says about the
function globally is almost never taken. is is the inertial eﬀect we talked
about previously. It is part of school culture.
We decided to discuss this issue, taking as a starting point the graph of a
function and the tangent line at a point of the graph. en we took a small
segment of the tangent line around the point of tangency as shown in
Figure 25.13. e idea we wanted to introduce was that a short—a very
short indeed—segment of the tangent line around a point of tangency could
generate the graph of the function. Next we dragged the segment
(activating the trace for the segment) and we produced the ﬁgure on the
right in Figure 25.13.
en a discussion began about the meaning of close when we say that
the tangent line is the best approximation to the function around a point.
Aer a while we proposed that the teaers discuss the following situation
in whi we hid the graph of the function but kept visible the tangent
segment as in Figure 25.14.
en, we dragged the segment (with the trace active) and showed that
we could recover the curve, the whole curve. Some teaers were amazed,
and then one of them essentially asked: “What does the tangent know?”
Another replied: “It does not have to know anything, because the curve is
hidden but not erased.” So, in a sense dragging the segment was a way to
uncover the hidden curve. We thought this discussion was very valuable
indeed; something deep was ﬂoating in the atmosphere of the classroom.
We thought the time was right for making explicit a seed about the

fundamental theorem of Calculus. We have simply to extend some ideas
that were already under discussion with the teaers. If you have the
function then you have the tangent lines—and reciprocally, if you have the
tangent lines you can recover the function.
 

Figure 25.14  Recovering the graph.
Figure 25.15  Graphing the derivative.
Figure 25.15 illustrates how we tried to animate this discussion.
is time, our emphasis was on establishing that ea time you have the
function, in fact you have two functions: the one you already have, and the
derivative function that maps the behavior of the original function. In these
tasks, we were trying to emphasize the conceptual ﬂuency beyond the
operational fluency that the teachers were more familiar with.
It has become clear from the vignees and examples we have previously
outlined, that our math intuitions rely in very speciﬁc ways on action and
motion, and that the digital environment has provided our group of
teaers a great service: it has helped them to transform metaphorical
thinking on motion and action into sound cognitive instruments.

Simulation and Modeling: Another Exemplar
e use of digital tenology also plays an important role in constructing
dynamic models of tasks or situations that involve realistic contexts. For
example, Figure 25.16 shows a tru that is approaing a certain underpass
where there is a sign indicating the maximum clearance (the height of the
bridge). e bridge is located just at the base of a descending roadway
(Figure 25.16). What data and conditions do we need to know in order to
ﬁgure it out whether the tru could clear the bridge? What is the eﬀect of
the inclination of the roadway on the height of the tru when passing
under the bridge? (A similar task appears in NCTM, 2009 and Santos-Trigo
and Barrera-Mora, 2011).
High-sool teaers worked on this task. Initially they spent signiﬁcant
time making sense of the task statement and discussing questions regarding
dimensions of the tru, wheel positions, height of the bridge, etc. At this
stage the goal was to think of a two-dimensional representation of the
problem in terms of mathematical objects (lines, rays, angles, rectangles,
circles, etc.). Figure 25.17 is a simpliﬁed representation of the roadway, the
bridge, and the inclination angle of the roadway.

Figure 25.16  The truck entering into an underpass.
Figure 25.17  The roadway, the bridge, and the inclination angle of the roadway.

Figure 25.18  A task model constructed through the software.
During the process of constructing a dynamic model of the situation,
teaers relied on a set of considerations and assumptions to represent
information embedded in the task in terms of mathematical objects. For
example, the roadway was represented through two intersecting lines, L
and L', the wheels were represented with circles, the tru box with a
rectangle, and the height of the bridge with a segment. In addition, when
the positions of the wheels were all on the tilted position or on the
horizontal position (aer the ba wheels have crossed the bridge), the
sides AB and DC were parallel to line L' and, aer the ba wheels crossed
the bridge, to line L (the roadway; see Figure 25.19). Likewise, it was
assumed that the tru’s tilting eﬀect, whi might produce a shiing load
on the truck’s wheels, does not distort the height of the truck.
In the model (Figure 25.19), Point M was a mobile or pivot point, Point Q
was osen at a ﬁxed distance equal to 4.5 cm from P (height of the bridge).
It is observed that by moving point M along line L, the height of the tru,
measured as the distance from Point P (bridge initial point) to Point R, the
intersection point of the perpendicular to line L through Point P and the
upper side of the rectangle (segment DC) (Figure 25.19) anges depending

on the position of Point M. e trace le by Point R when Point M is
moved along line L represents the graph of the trunk height variation as a
function of the position of Point M. Under these conditions, the teaers
visualized that there was a position for Point M where the height of the
tru reaes a maximum value (Figure 25.19). us, a tru with a height
of 4.5 meters could not clear the bridge, since at one position of M its height
is larger than the clearance under the bridge. In other words, the height of
the bridge must be larger than 4.61 meters in order for the truck to clear.
Figure 25.19  Graphic representation of the variation of segment PR as Point M is moved along line
L.

Figure 25.20  Three representations of the problem: the position of the truck, a table showing the
variation of the height, and its graphic representation.
Teaers discussed the fact that the use of the tool does not require
expressing symbolically the relation between the position of the tru and
its height. It was suﬃcient to relate the position of the tru’s front (Point
M) with the corresponding height (Point S) and later the locus of S when
Point M is moved along line L (the roadway) generated the graph of the
variation of the height. By moving the Point M along the line L, a table
including values for diﬀerent positions of the point and the associated
height of the truck can be produced (Figure 25.20).

Final Thoughts
In 1996, world ess ampion Garry Kasparov played a mat against
Deep Blue, an IBM supercomputer. Kasparov wrote in TIME magazine that
he could feel, even smell a new kind of intelligence across the table.
Aer almost 17 years, Kasparov’s story seems up-to-date; this new
intelligence shapes our actions and behaviors. e zeal that let our
community to face the allenge of thinking about thinking has been
moving indeed. Today, this issue has come to the fore because the presence
of digital tenologies has made clear that we cannot restrict intelligence to
“its confining biological membrane” (Donald, 1991, p. 359).
e externalization of memory that inaugurated this momentous stage
developed into symbolic tenologies. But even if one could feel an
intelligence siing on the page of a novel, that was human intelligence
indeed.
Kasparov’s feelings had a diﬀerent source. Societies are already (or will
be sooner than later), saturated with the presence of visible and invisible
computers. Not all of them play ess but some are able to control the
ﬂight of a huge airplane across the Paciﬁc. Others can give us the location
of the restaurant we are looking for, or compute a complex mathematical
model that we human beings cannot compute with static symbolic
technology alone.
If the power of digital tenologies is broadly tangible, there is no reason
to expect they will not have as well a profound impact at the level of
formal education. Educators have to cross that Rubicon and understand that
the executable, symbolic, representations are key to making even more
tangible the zone of potential development of social, distributed
intelligence. Indeed, intelligence is a network phenomenon and we have to
conceive of it globally, seamlessly, in a move that includes all kinds of
intelligences, such as that Kasparov caught a glimpse of across the table.

What about sools? We might say that old habits die hard—but it is not
just a maer of habits, it is more a maer of transformation of cultures. e
new classroom with the possibility of sharing an expressive medium, like
the digital environment, can help us organize open mathematical
discussions and foster a continuous reﬂection within a social space in
permanent evolution. In this space, the meaning of mathematical entities
evolves with the opportunities to directly manipulate them.
Mathematical entities, as explained previously, are only indirectly
accessible through semiotic representations (Duval, 2006). Consequently,
the only way of gaining access to them is using, for instance, words,
symbols, expressions, or drawings. But no representation exhausts the
represented entity. Nevertheless, any mathematical representation has su
a crystallizing impact on how mathematical entities are experienced that
when we work with it, we have the feeling of working inside a Platonic
mathematical reality. But this is only an illusion that lurks beneath the
surface. Mathematical reality is a human reality even if it is a virtual one:
one cannot forget that humans have the power to extend their world of
experience symbolically.
Closer to our professional interests is the mode of existence that teaers
have experienced whilst working with the dynamic geometry environment
and when they analyzed and discussed a design activity whose goal was to
construct a dynamic model involving a tru approaing an underpass. In
all these activities, it is made tangible that we can explore and experiment
on dynamic representations of mathematical entities as if they were
material objects (Santos-Trigo & Reyes-Rodríguez, 2011). In fact, the
executable nature of dynamic representations enables the learner to
continuously modify those representations while preserving their structural
features. is reﬂects a profound diﬀerence from the static representations
of traditional mathematics at sool. e kind of intelligence living in the
executable representations extends human action with digital artifacts into

the social space of the classroom. e end result of this process is an
instrument loaded with the intelligence shared in the classroom. In practice,
it took long weeks for the teaers to master and embody new ways of
interacting with the virtual reality of digital entities. No artifact is
epistemologically neutral; consequently, there is a disruption in the taken-
for-granted aspects of what it means to think mathematically in digital
contexts. In this view, an instrument—that is, the internalized artifact—is a
template for action. It is relevant here to mention that, with the instrument,
the learner can explore new landscapes of mathematical validation. In fact,
the notion of theorem in motion embodied in the dynamic digital
environment comes to the fore; this is how we conceive of it. en,
reconsidering the transformation of static entities through executable
representations, we are opening a window to new mathematical entities
whose proper ecology is the digital. But it is not the sear of the object per
se what moves us as researchers, but the search for new ways of thinking.
We expect that the mathematics of ange and variations, through their
digital embodiments, will contribute to a substantial gain in students’
development of conceptual understanding and computational fluency.

Acknowledgments
e preparation of this apter was partially funded from two resear
projects: Conacyt-Mexico, Reference 168543 and Plan Nacional I+D+I del
MCIN, Reference EDU2011–29328.

References
Artigue, M. (2002). Learning mathematics in a case environment: e genesis of a reﬂection about
instrumentation and the dialectics between technical and conceptual work. International Journal
of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7, 245–274, 2002.
Boino, R. M., Artigue, M., & Noss, R. (2009). Building European collaboration in tenology-
enhanced learning in mathematics. In N. Balaeﬀ, S. Ludvigsen, T. de Jong, A. Lazonder, & S.
Barnes (Eds.), Tenology-enhanced learning: principles and products. (pp. 73–87). Dordret:
Springer Netherlands.
Chevallard, Y. (1985). La transposition didactique—Du savoir savant au savoir enseigne. Grenoble :
La Pensee sauvage.
Di, T. P. & Hollebrands, K. F. (2011). Focus in high sool mathematics: Tenology to support
reasoning and sense making. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: ree stages in the evolution of culture and
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Donald, M. (2001). A mind so rare. New York: Norton.
Duval, R. (2006). A cognitive analysis of problem of comprehension in a learning of mathematics.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 61, 103–131.
Friedman, T. L. (2007). e world is ﬂat. A brief history of the twenty-ﬁrst century  (updated and
expanded edition.) New York: Picador/Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kaput, J., & Sorr, R. (2008). Changing representational infrastructures anges most everything.
e case of SimCalc, Algebra, and Calculus. In G. W. Blume & M. K. Heid (Eds.), Resear on
tenology and the teaing and learning of mathematics: Vol. 2 . Cases and perspectives (pp.
211–253). Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing.
Lakoﬀ, G., & Nuñez, R. E. (2000). Where mathematics comes form. How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Moreno-Armella, L., & Hegedus, S. (2009). Co-action with digital tenologies. ZDM: e
International Journal of Math Education, 41, 505–519.
Moreno-Armella, L., Hegedus, S., & Kaput, J. (2008). From static to dynamic mathematics: Historical
and representational perspectives. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68(2), 99–112.

Moreno-Armella, L., & Santos-Trigo, M. (2008). Democratic access and use of powerful mathematics
in an emerging country. In L. English (Ed.), Handbook of International Resear in Mathematics
Education (2nd ed., pp. 319–351). Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Moreno-Armella, L., & Sriraman, B. (2010). Symbols and mediation in mathematics education. In B.
Sriraman & L. English (Eds.), eories of Mathematics Education (pp. 224–225). Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag.
National Council of Teaers of Mathematics (NCTM). (2009). Focus in high sool mathematics
reasoning and sense making. Reston, VA: Author.
Pea, R. D. (1985). Beyond ampliﬁcation: Using the computer to reorganize mental functioning.
Educational Psychologist, 20(4), 167–182.
Prensky, M. (2010). Teaching digital natives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin/Sage.
Santos-Trigo, M., & Barrera-Mora, F. (2011). High sool teaers’ problem solving activities to
review and extend their mathematical and didactical knowledge, PRIMUS, 21(8), 699–718.
Santos-Trigo, M., & Camao-Main, M. (2009). Towards the construction of a framework to deal
with routine problems to foster mathematical inquiry. PRIMUS, 19(3), 260–279.
Santos-Trigo, M., & Ortega-Moreno, F. (2013). Digit tenology, dynamic representations, and
mathematical reasoning: extending problem solving frameworks. International Journal of
Learning Technology, 8:2, pp.186–200.
Santos-Trigo, M., & Reyes-Rodríguez, A. (2011). Teaers’ use of computational tools to construct
and explore dynamic mathematical models, International Journal of Mathematical Education in
Science and Technology, 42(3), 313–336.
Smidt, E. & Cohen, J. (2013). e new digital area. Reshaping the future of people, nations and
business (eBook edition). New York: Random House and Google.
om, R. (1972). Modern mathematics: Does it exist? In A. G. Howson (Ed.), Developments in
mathematics education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Troue, L. (2004). Managing the complexity of human/maine interactions in computerized
learning environments: Guiding students’ command process through instrumental orchestrations.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9, 281–307.
Verillon, P., & Rabardel, P. (1995). Cognition and artifacts: A contribution to the study of thought in
relation to instrumented activity. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 10(1), 77–101.

Vizgin, V. (2001). On the emotional assumptions without whi one could not eﬀectively investigate
the laws of nature. The American Mathematical Monthly, 108(3): 264–270.

26 Computerized Environments in
Mathematics Classrooms
A Research-Design View
Rina Hershkowitz
The Weizmann Institute for Science
Michal Tabach
Tel-Aviv University
Tommy Dreyfus
Tel-Aviv University

Introduction
Curriculum development is the process of developing a coherent sequence
of learning situations, together with appropriate materials, whose
implementation has the potential to bring about intended ange in
learners’ knowledge.
e situation is especially complex when the activity of curriculum
development is aimed at learning mathematics in an environment in whi
the beneﬁt from the potential of computerized tools has a central role. In
their comprehensive apter, “Computer-based learning environments in
mathematics,” Balaeﬀ and Kaput (1996) explained why they think that
tenology’s power is primarily epistemological, and added: “While
tenology’s impact on daily practice has yet to mat expectations from
two or three decades ago, its epistemological impact is deeper than
expected” (p. 469).
Any curriculum development project is embedded in its own socio-
cultural context, but there are also many common features between
diﬀerent projects. e CompuMath project was a large-scale mathematics
curriculum development, implementation, and resear project for a
computerized learning environment at the junior high-sool level. is
project will be used here as a window through whi curriculum
development is seen as a comprehensive, and theoretically and practically
consistent activity. We will focus on resear processes that were a central
component of the project.
While constrained by the mandatory national syllabus in Israel, the main
goal of the project was to design and create a learning environment in
whi junior high-sool students are engaged in meaningful mathematics
through the systematic use of computerized tools. By meaningful
mathematics we mean that students’ main concerns are mathematical
processes rather than ready-made algorithms. Problem-situations used

systematically may provide a natural environment for students’ activities of
investigating and solving problems, thus avoiding an environment
consisting of ritual procedures imposed by the teaer or the textbook. In
particular, inductive explorations were conceived as generalizing numerical,
geometrical, and structural paerns, making predictions and hypotheses,
and explaining, justifying, and proving these hypotheses. Su processes
have the potential to be ampliﬁed (Lagrange, Artigue, Laborde, & Troue,
2003; Pea, 1985) in a tenological environment, whi can be used as an
“inquiry laboratory.”
e CompuMath project is an example of a curriculum development
project in whi not only theoretical frameworks and relevant cultural
artifacts (su as computerized tools) were taken into account but also
lessons learnt from research and from development in previous projects and
previous phases of the same project. At the beginning of the project the
team leaders did have experience with curriculum development,
encouraging investigations and argumentations by students as individuals,
groups, and whole class communities—a working inquiry classroom
(Artigue and Blomhøj, 2013)—in line with a socio-cultural view about
mathematics and its learning. We1 did not know, however, how this
experience would play out in a tenology-ri environment. We could
only hypothesize the potential of computer tools. at is, we laed
experience with the systematic integration of tenological tools and with
consistent use of their potential. As designers, we had not yet acquired the
needed instrumentation knowledge. Hence, based on our own use and
familiarity with computerized tools, we ose to integrate the use of open,
general-purpose, tenological tools (graphical tools, spreadsheets, dynamic
geometry soware, and Computer Algebra Systems), and to beneﬁt from
their potential in learning mathematics. A discussion about criteria for
choosing computerized tools may be found in Hershkowitz et al. (2002).
e development team had to deal with many facets of theory, resear,

and practice of development and implementation: practices were fed by
theory and resear, and vice versa. e team functioned as a cell eager to
live and develop, whose life was in large part determined by its interaction
with an unknown outside world. rough this interaction, the curriculum
development activity constantly redefined its own components.
Like many other researchers (e.g., Perret-Clermont, 1993; Yackel & Cobb,
1996), we felt the shortcomings of cognitive theories, methodologies, and
tools for describing and interpreting learning and teaing processes in the
classroom. We thus adopted activity theory (Engeström, 1987; Kuui, 1996)
as a theoretical frame. e construction of knowledge was analyzed while
students were investigating problem-situations in diﬀerent contexts.
Resear became a crucial component in the curriculum development
activity, in design-research-redesign cycles.
e curriculum development project was a comprehensive process with
three stages:
i. The predesign stage involving considerations before starting the actual
development and research work;
ii. The initial design-research-redesign stage consisting of a ﬁrst design of
isolated activities and their implementation in a few classrooms,
accompanied by classroom resear on learning and teaing practices
(observations, data collection, and analysis);
iii. e expansion stage comprising the creation of coherent sequences of
redesigned activities forming a complete curriculum and its
implementation, including the dissemination of the curricular aims and
“spirit” on a large scale.
Details on these stages may be found in the ﬁrst two versions of this
apter, whi appeared in earlier editions of the Handbook. e current
apter is a follow-up. e apter by Hershkowitz et al. (2002) in the ﬁrst

edition of this Handbook describes and analyzes the stages of the
CompuMath project, as a paradigm for resear-intensive development and
implementation of holistic and long-term curricula to be enacted in
computerized learning environments. In that apter, the aracteristics of
the project are described with particular reference to the use of
computerized tools and to design-resear-redesign cycles. Narratives
representative of the process of curriculum development in functions,
geometry, algebra, and statistics are presented. e narratives focus on
major issues in curriculum development, on diﬀerent ways of using open
computerized tools, and on diﬀerent ways in whi resear interacts with
design.
In the version of the apter that appeared in the second edition of this
Handbook (Taba, Hershkowitz, Arcavi, & Dreyfus, 2008), we describe a
component of the project that evolved from the teaing and learning of
beginning algebra within the CompuMath curriculum and uses the
paradigm of a computer-intensive environment in whi computer tools
are available to the students at all times. We discuss its novel aracteristics,
the design processes, the teaing and learning trials, the accompanying
research, and its interaction with the design.
e aim of the present apter is to highlight the resear component of
the CompuMath project and to discuss its long-term eﬀect, as it continues
to inﬂuence our and others’ work. ree consecutive resear strands will
be described. e ﬁrst section concerns the role of resear in the
development of isolated activities; the second section concerns the resear
accompanying the development of speciﬁc approaes to entire subjects
su as geometry or algebra or to certain topics within these subjects; and
the third investigates how knowledge is constructed in tenological
learning environments and how this knowledge develops and shis in the
classroom.

Research Concerning the Development of Isolated
Activities
At the beginning of the project, we needed to acquire experience in how to
design activities that would integrate the beneﬁt of open tenological tools
in an inquiry classroom. erefore, the ﬁrst realization in ea topic
consisted of the design of mathematical activities and the investigation of
their impact in trial classrooms. In order to continuously base further design
on insights already gained, the activities in ea topic were isolated rather
than in sequence. ese activities were scaered at “key points” along the
curriculum. e development was aracterized by the dilemmas
concerning the translation of the contents prescribed by the mandatory
syllabus into trial activities that conform to the project team’s emerging
standards concerning meaning, investigations, and argumentation, and to
their enactment in the classroom. ese activities later became the skeleton
around whi the yearlong course was built in the next development and
research cycle.
Hence, the implementation and resear concerning the isolated
activities had several goals: to learn about the feasibility of su activities in
the classroom; to evaluate an eﬀective activity structure; to learn about the
orestration processes of the teaer in su an environment; to study
learning processes that emerged during su activities; and to learn about
instrumentation processes that took place.
We designed activities comprising several phases based on our previous
design experience on one hand, and on our goal to maximize the potential
of the tenological tool for mathematics learning on the other hand. We
also took into account relevant resear and design papers (e.g., Kaput,
1992; Balacheff & Kaput, 1996; Pea, 1985).
Isolated activities were structured so as to allow for interaction among
students in small groups, as well as interaction between the teaer and

students, and between individuals or groups and computerized tools. Our
pedagogical standards includes the following:
Students’ work is (often) organized around problem-situations.
Most of the investigative work with the problem-situation is done in
small collaborative groups; computerized tools are available, and
students decide when and how to use them.
Students write group or individual reports, in whi they are
encouraged to reconstruct, compare, and critique the steps they and
others went through.
e teaer plays several roles, being alternatively a facilitator for
individuals and small groups, a modeler, and a coordinator of debates
around verbal reports and critiques (syntheses). Su syntheses
provide opportunities for students to report, evaluate, and critique
their collaborative or individual work in a public forum.
In this section we illustrate the interplay of resear and development
during the design of an isolated activity by means of a paradigmatic
example from the subject of functions. In this isolated inquiry activity
students were given a problem-situation in whi they were invited to raise
hypotheses and then use multirepresentational soware to e their
hypotheses by using algebraic formulas, drawing graphs, constructing a
table of values, and passing from one presentation to another as they
investigate the problem-situation. Students were encouraged to decide
whi representations to use, when and how to link them, and in whi
medium to work.
The Research on the Overseas Activity
Our paradigmatic example of this resear strand is the resear

accompanying the Overseas activity (Hershkowitz & Swarz, 1999), whi
belongs to the functions course for the ninth grade. is activity was
purposefully designed to investigate the phases in the structure of an
activity, students’ ability in making hypotheses, students’ awareness of the
quality of hypothesizing processes, the nature of diﬀerent reﬂective
processes in diﬀerent phases of the activity, and the orestrating role of
the teaer during the activity. Concurrently, the role of the computerized
tool in the hypothesizing and problem-solving phases was studied.
e structure of the Overseas activity consists of the following four
phases:
Phase 0—Students were given the following homework assignment
(Figure 26.1).
Phase 1—Equipped with their eight paper models (their homework from
Phase 0) and with graphing calculators, students worked in groups of four
on the following worksheet (Figure 26.2).
Figure 26.1  The homework assignment (Phase 0).

Figure 26.2  Phase 1 of the Overseas activity.
Phase 2—Ea group was asked to write a common report concerning
their ideas and steps of the problem-solving process.
Phase 3—The activity ended with a teacher-led collective reflection.
e various phases of the activity were documented and analyzed in a
few ways: For Phase 0, we had the paper models that students brought
from home. Phases 1, 2, and 3 were documented by two video cameras; one
focused on a focus group or the students’ community as a whole and the
second focused on the teaer. ree observers who took ﬁeld notes were
present throughout the activity. In addition the group reports from Phase 2
were collected and analyzed.
In the following we discuss each of the main phases in detail.
Phase 1
e declared aim of the developers in this phase was to foster

hypothesizing and to allenge the students to ﬁnd the dimensions of the
ideal container. Hypothesizing became a central concern for some groups,
whereas other groups moved on quily to “solve” the problem with the
aid of their graphing calculators. e four students in the observed group
(Miri, Liat, Osnat, and Hanna) were actively engaged in generating and
confronting hypotheses. By doing so for about 40 minutes, they tried to
rea a consensus regarding a suitable hypothesis. Only aer that did they
allow themselves to use an algebraic formula in order to draw the graph
with the graphing calculator. ey then read oﬀ the minimum by
“walking” on the graph in no time. To them, the solution process with the
graphical calculator was only a way to e the quality of their
hypotheses. ey began by computing the surfaces of the models they
brought from home with the help of their graphical calculators. en, they
relied on the size and shape of the models to start hypothesizing: Osnat
raised the ﬁrst hypothesis (H1) and justiﬁed it by intuitive considerations
based on two of the models: Because the height of the container is
multiplied by four, the minimum surface is when the height is as small as
possible. From this point on, the four students generated hypotheses that
mated the measurements of more than two of their models. Hanna
hypothesized H2: e smaller the height, the bigger the surface, whi she
supported using two other model surfaces. While H2 mated two models,
it contradicted others and the girls found themselves in a situation of
conﬂict. Aer some computations of the dimensions of more container
models, they moved to a new local hypothesis, H3. In an argumentative
process in whi all four students participated, the two local hypotheses (H2
and H3) were confronted, numerical computations were used as evidence,
and models were compared through manipulations. Hanna declared that H2
and H3 contradict ea other and proposed the construction of a table. Liat
bridged H2 and H3 by proposing H4: ere must be a segment between 1/2
and 1, maybe it gets smaller there, as if it’s not constant, it has to be like

that [gesturing a parabola shape in the air]. Hanna completed the
formulation of H4: Perhaps it’s a parabola or something like that. e
dialectic process continued, while the girls constructed an orderly table of
values. Aer raising some more local hypotheses, they confronted H4 with
data in the table and interpreted the behavior of the function. is was
agreed upon by all four students.
We see in this example that hypothesizing is embedded in argumentative
moves. e argumentative process we just described was dialectic in the
sense that it consisted of raising hypotheses and refuting them or bridging
between them. e hypotheses were formulated on the basis of arguments
whose nature varied along the ain of actions: from intuitive arguments,
based on visual considerations of the models, via arguments based on data,
arguments based on conﬂicts with data, and arguments based on conﬂicts
between hypotheses, to an argument based on logical considerations, whi
integrates local hypotheses while encompassing a broad range of data. e
ﬁnal hypothesis was agreed upon by the students only when all of them felt
convinced. en they wrote a correct formula, and used their graphical
calculators to obtain the graph and ﬁnd a numerical answer rather quily.
While the students’ motive in Phase 0 was to inquire about relations among
dimensions of the open containers, in Phase 1 their common motive was to
ﬁnd the best hypothesis. Solving for the actual dimension of the ideal
container served to conﬁrm their oice rather than being an important end
in itself.
Phase 2
e group’s report generally describes their actions in Phase 1. e
requirement to report caused the students to distance themselves in time
and perspective from their previous actions and to reﬂect on their problem-

solving process. In this reﬂective action, they constructed a purification
process of the actual problem-solving process. Unimportant details were
deleted, and parts without progress were skipped (Hershkowitz & Swarz,
1999, p. 84).
Phase 3
In Phase 3, the teaer initiates a whole-class discussion in whi the
groups’ work is reported, evaluated, and agreed on or refuted with the aim
of aieving a synthesis. Hence, a sequence of communicative acts was
performed publically and enabled learning from the groups’ actions in
Phases 1 and 2. e teaer ﬁrst encouraged a group to report on their
hypotheses. is triggered other groups to respond and to extend the
discussion, including what makes a good hypothesis. She then asked for
students’ collective and individual moves performed to e their
hypotheses and solve the problem. One of the foci of the discussion relates
to the teaer’s question: When and how did the students make use of their
graphing calculators during Phase 1?
Insights Concerning Isolated Activities
Like the observations on the Overseas activity reported here, members of
the CompuMath team observed, documented, and analyzed ea of the
isolated activities that were developed. Similar design-resear-redesign
cycles were carried out also for activities in other topics in the CompuMath
project, including geometry (Hadas, Hershkowitz, & Swarz, 2000),
statistics (Ben-Zvi & Arcavi, 2001), and beginning algebra (Taba, Arcavi,
& Hershkowitz, 2008; Tabach, Hershkowitz, & Arcavi, 2008).
e analysis of the observations, and the conclusions the team was able

to draw, served as the basis for the design of further activities, as well as for
improving the observed activities themselves. In this way, the team
accumulated experience concerning the development of learning
opportunities through the power of computerized tools, and through
inquiry during problem-solving processes. At the same time, anges in
classroom practices were noted. ese investigations enabled us to outline
some conclusions regarding the design and realization of an isolated activity
in a computer learning environment.
1. e power of tenological tools to deal with a large variety of
mathematical data makes ri problem-situations possible; for
example, in the Overseas activity students found a local minimum of a
function, whi is a composition of a rational and quadratic function—
a type of task not accessible to ninth graders without a graphical tool
(Yerushalmy & Chazan, 2002).
2. Asking students to make hypotheses about possible solutions before
solving the problem is a valuable didactic tenique. Students were
able to delay the actual solution and accept hypothesizing as a
valuable activity.
3. Students have and use the opportunity to move among representations
in order to progress. Students’ behavior suggests that in a ri
problem-situation within computerized learning environment, inquiry
is a natural process.
4. Leing students carry out and report on the inquiry in groups is
beneﬁcial, because social interaction in the group can support
mathematical argumentation: students complete, oppose and criticize
others’ proposals, progressing towards consensus among the group.
5. Reﬂection can be initiated, for example by requiring students to write
a group report on their inquiry process, as was done in the Overseas
activity, and other isolated activities along the sool year (Friedlander

& Tabach, 2001).
6. A teaer-led synthesis in a session with the entire class is useful for
many reasons. Students can be given an opportunity to report on their
work and to practice participation in classroom debates, in whi they
can criticize and be criticized. e teaer can use their reports to raise
criticism and evaluation, as well as for a synthesis of the main
processes students went through. e session thus aﬀords another
opportunity for reﬂection. Last, but not least, su a synthesis allows
the teaer to deﬁne the common knowledge, whi she expects the
students to have gained as well as socio-mathematical norms she
wishes to convey, su as making hypotheses before ﬁnding a
numerical answer (Taba, Hershkowitz, & Dreyfus, 2013). In the
Overseas activity, for example, she made it clear that the goal is not to
present results but to reﬂect on the process they had gone through, in
particular how they had hypothesized possible solutions.
Classroom resear thus gave us a large amount of input in an area in
whi we had lile experience from prior cycles of curriculum
development: we learned that in computerized learning environments, ri
problem-situations (including engaging in functions other than linear and
quadratic ones) and extended multiple-phase activities and inquiry are
possible, and we learned how to design su activities. We also learned
about the teaer’s role in inviting students to act diﬀerently in ea of the
phases, so as to have diﬀerent opportunities for reﬂection. ese model
activities later served as models during further curriculum development
(see Heid, Sheets, & Matras, 1990, for parallel experiences).

New Dilemmas in Teaching “Old” Mathematical
Topics
Design and development of curriculum raise the need to oose a speciﬁc
approa to ea mathematical topic at hand and to generate a coherent
sequence of activities to implement this approa. In this section, we
exemplify how diﬀerent studies have supported the decision on and
development of su approaes that take into account the potential of
computerized learning environments. As paradigmatic examples for this
strand of research we briefly describe three studies.
The Linear Equations Example
As a team, we oscillated between two approaes for teaing linear
equations: a functional approa and a more static algebraic approa. On
one hand, in the tenological reality in whi students are able to present
graphs of many functions and e their intersection points by “walking”
on the graph, the notion of “equation” can be invested with additional
meaning. In su a learning environment one could oose to describe an
equation as the intersection point of two anging phenomena (f(x) = g(x)),
or as equating a anging phenomenon to a given value (f(x) = c). On the
other hand, equations in the classical approa were considered as
representing a static situation, were a missing (unknown) value needs to be
found. Both approaes are important for future mathematics learning of
the students.
While the classical approa includes useful algorithms for solving
diﬀerent types of equations in symbolic notation, a functional approa to
solving equations provides other advantages. For example, Yerushalmy
(2009) claims that:

Tenology, su as graphing calculators or function graphing soware, provides students with
opportunities to investigate algebraic ideas by linking the symbolic representation of functions
and symbolic manipulations with their numeric and graphic representations. Central to su a
function-based approa to algebra is the earlier introduction of a particular way of viewing
equations—a deﬁnition of an equation as a type of comparison of two functions—and the use of
this definition as a primary resource in constructing student understanding of school algebra.
(pp. 56–57)
is raises the question whether the approaes can be combined. In the
CompuMath project we interweaved the two approaes to solving linear
equations and investigated the cognitive eﬀect of our integrated approa.
Here we present one resear study about this issue: e development of
the perceptions of an eighth-grade class of students concerning equations
(Stein, 2002). Two focus students, Gila and Noam, were followed along the
sool year in ﬁve activities and three tests. e work of the two students
in the activities was recorded, transcribed, and analyzed. Data regarding the
three tests were collected from the entire class, to allow the researers to
situate the work of the two students in the class as a whole. e course was
designed to start from a functional approa, a natural continuation to the
beginning algebra course from seventh grade, for about two months. Next,
the algorithm for solving linear equations was studied. Finally, the two
approaches were interwoven.
Gila encountered the notion of equation ﬁrst in its functional context, as
comparison between anging phenomena, corresponding with the design
and teaing of the topic in class. As the course advanced, Gila was able to
work with equations with the functional approa, even without an extra-
mathematical situation. Her ability to act with this approa allowed her to
also handle nonlinear comparisons in direct analogy to the linear ones.
However, while learning to simplify and solve equations according to the
conventional approach by adding equivalent expressions to each side, it was
notable that Gila found it diﬃcult to connect the symbolic equation and its
solution to a graphical representation. From her work at this point in time it

was clear that she did not see in the symbolic equation a comparison
between two anging phenomena. However, towards the end of the
course, she learned to draw the graphs and explain the meaning of their
intersection as a point in whi the graphs “meet at the same time and
place.” From this we can conclude that the situation supports the bridging
of Gila’s ideas of the functional approa and the conventional approa. In
addition, it seemed that Gila no longer needed the support of the extra-
mathematical situation. We could see that she perceived the equation both
as a comparison between two anging phenomena and as an algebraic
equation or inequality, and she was able to use a collection of
representations and tools to solve equations.
Noam also encountered the notion of equation ﬁrst in its functional
context. She began by perceiving an equation as comparison between
anging phenomena. Yet, Noam already knew the algorithm for solving
equations by acting on its two sides from the beginning, and she used this
algorithm whenever she had to solve an equation. We think that she used
the algorithm since she perceived the equation as an “open sentence,” under
the conventional approa. She was able to provide a (mathematical)
situation for a given equation. During the time in whi the algorithm for
working on both sides of equations was learned in class, Noam had
diﬃculties in connecting it to a graphic representation. Temporarily, she
was not able to see the equation as a comparison between two phenomena.
However in a further stage of the learning, she was able to perceive
equations in both approaches, with the support of a situation or without it.
In addition, it was found that at the end of the sool year most students
in the class were able to move ﬂuently and ﬂexibly between the two
approaches to solving equations.
Multirepresentational Approach to Function

A dilemma related to the development of the functions course was whether
and to what extent to include the use of multiple representations in a single
problem-situation as classroom practice along the entire course. Our
approa to integrate the use of multiple representations as a norm was
supported by the literature (e.g., Kaput, 1992; Swarz & Dreyfus, 1995) and
strengthened by Dolev-Cohen’s (1996) resear within the CompuMath
project.
Dolev-Cohen (1996) documented and analyzed the work of ninth-grade
students during a functions course along the sool year. Here we bring one
case study from her resear. It aimed to clarify when and how three ninth-
grade students pass from one representation to another while dealing with
a problem-situation in a computer-based environment. Students were asked
to consider three animal populations in a park: zebras, lions, and eagles. e
zebra population was described graphically according to g(x) = 400 – 20x.
e lion population was described verbally according to h(x) = 60x. Here
we focus on the part of the activity shown in Figure 26.3.
Figure 26.3  Part III of the Animal Park problem-situation.


Figure 26.4  Diagrams of representations and moves among them used by each student (Dolev-
Cohen, 1996).
e work of ea student on Part III is presented graphically in Figure
26.4. We can see that (a) Students A and B moved between two
representations mostly, while Student C moved among the three
representations; (b) while Students A and B mostly used a single
presentation for answering ea task, Student C moved frequently among
representations while answering a question. at is, Student C is more
ﬂexible in moving among the three representations. In general, Dolev-
Cohen (1996) found that students who were ﬂexible enough to ange
representations within the same task succeeded beer in solving functions
problem-situations as compared to their peers. Dolev-Cohen’s ﬁndings
encouraged us to incorporate multiple representations in the design of the
whole CompuMath curriculum.
Note: ere are points in between the diﬀerent questions. ese points
show the students’ transitions between representations within a given
question (e.g. Student C makes four transitions in estion c: from
numerical to graphical, to algebraic, and back to graphical representations).
The Role of Proof and Proving in Geometry
For mathematicians, proofs play an essential role in establishing the validity
of a statement and in enlightening its meaning (Rota, 1997). Euclidean
geometry of triangles, quadrilaterals, and circles forms part of the
mandatory curriculum. An analysis of “classical” teaing materials in
Euclidean geometry and the resear concerning the “classical” strategies of
teaing Euclidean geometry indicate that students have many diﬃculties
with proving, that the mathematical and practical importance of proofs in

mathematical activities remain hidden, and that students do not feel a need
for proving. Hence, it is important to create classroom activities in whi
the student becomes aware of these aspects of proofs (Zaslavsky,
Nickerson, Stylianides, Kidron, & Winicki-Landman, 2012).
Following Hanna (1990) and Hersh (1993), we believed that in sool
geometry proofs should explain to students why the theorem is true, by
providing a set of reasons that derive from the phenomenon itself. e
advent of dynamic geometry environments in the mathematics classroom
raised a dilemma concerning the place of proof in the curriculum, since
conviction can be obtained quily and relatively easily: e dragging
operation on a geometrical object enables students to apprehend a whole
class of objects in whi the conjectured aribute is invariant, and hence to
convince themselves of its truth (de Villiers, 1998). e role of design and
teaing in this environment is then to also raise and create a need to
explain why the conjectured attribute is true.
Dreyfus and Hadas (1996) argue that students’ appreciation of the roles
of proof can be aieved by activities in whi the empirical investigations
lead to unexpected, surprising situations. Activities of this kind let students
experience the need for proof in order to explain the surprising ﬁndings,
and sometimes even in order to be convinced what the correct conclusions
are.
Diﬀerent kinds of activities were developed in this “spirit” in a resear-
design way within the CompuMath project:
a. Comprehensive inquiry activities, where the geometrical fact
discovered as invariant of a geometrical feature is surprising. is
surprise is the trigger for the question why and for the proof as answer
to this question (Dreyfus & Hadas, 1996).
b. Geometrical 
constructions 
under uncertainty conditions, where
students try to construct a ﬁgure satisfying given conditions (Hadas &

Hershkowitz, 1998).
c. Activities in whi the measurement and graphical options of the
dynamic geometry soware are used, in order to present the dynamic
variations of a geometrical phenomenon in real time, also in the
graphical and numerical modes. In su a context, questions and
hypotheses raised in one mode may be answered in other modes, and
in this way the investigation itself is enriched (Arcavi & Hadas, 2000).
d. Activities in whi one cannot ﬁnd any example for a conjecture one
has made. Situations of uncertainty like this lead to the dilemma:
Should one continue the empirical sear or aempt to understand the
impossibility? Hadas and Hershkowitz (1998) argued that, by careful
design, based on experimentation and cognitive analysis of students’
actions, situations can be constructed in whi students will feel the
need for proof.
To sum up, in order to cope with students’ conviction based on empirical
experience only and to create a need for deductive explanations, we
developed a collection of innovative activities intended to cause surprise
and uncertainty. A more detailed description of this approa to proving in
Euclidean geometry was included in the ﬁrst edition of this Handbook
(Hershkowitz et al., 2002, pp. 672–678).

Processes of Learning in the Classroom
A question that naturally arose at later stages of the project was: What did
students learn and consolidate, and how? What mathematical concepts and
strategies remain with them? ese questions led us to reﬁne the
description of the mathematical knowledge we intended to be constructed
in the classrooms by the students and to analyze their processes of
constructing this knowledge. We found the notion of abstraction to be
useful for this purpose. We have been considering not only what abstraction
could mean in the framework of this curriculum project, but also how
processes of abstraction manifest themselves empirically in the project’s
classrooms. Hence, our approa to abstraction emerged between two
poles: analysis of experimental data and the need to build a theoretical
framework.
For this purpose, a theoretical methodological framework—Abstraction
in Context (AiC)—was developed. In this section, we present an analysis
according to this framework of a pair of beginning algebra students
learning about algebra as a tool for justification.
Theoretical Underpinnings of Abstraction in
Context
Following Piaget, several mathematics educators have proposed
descriptions of the process or meanism by whi students shi their focus
from the concrete to the abstract (see Dreyfus, 1991, for a brief review). For
most of these educators, abstraction proceeds from a set of mathematical
objects (or processes) and consists of focusing on some distinguished
properties and relationships of these objects rather than on the objects
themselves. is process of abstraction is thus a process of

decontextualization—of ignoring the objects—together with some of their
features and relations. It is linear, proceeding from the objects to the class
or the structure, which may then be considered an object on a higher level.
is classical view of abstraction has raised criticism. For example, van
Oers (1998) used the activity theory view of context for conceptualizing:
“Starting from an assumption that conceives of context as constitutive of
meaning, it becomes clear that the notion of ‘decontextualization’ is a poor
concept that provides lile explanation for the developmental process
toward meaningful abstract thinking” (1998, p. 135). e dependence on
contextual elements su as the personal history of the solver, social
interactions, and the use of tools conforms to the views of theorists who
recognize the importance of context in processes of abstraction.
One way to describe abstraction without reference to decontextualization
has been proposed by Davydov (1972/1990). Davydov’s theory leads the
researers to a second major diﬀerence between the cognitivist and the
sociocultural views of abstraction. Davydov (1972/1990) developed an
epistemological theory to account for a dialectical connection between
abstract and concrete: Abstraction starts from an initial, simple,
undeveloped ﬁrst form, whi need not be internally and externally
consistent. e development of abstraction proceeds from analysis, at the
initial stage of the abstraction, to synthesis. It ends with a consistent and
elaborate ﬁnal form. It does not lead from concrete to abstract but from an
undeveloped to a developed form of abstract in whi new features of the
concrete are emphasized.
The AiC Framework and the RBC+C Model
Our intention to answer the questions raised at the beginning of this section
and our related experience in classrooms raised the need for an operational

deﬁnition of abstraction. We adopted Davydov’s approa and translated it
to the following operational definition:
Abstraction is an activity of vertically reorganizing previously constructed mathematics into a
new mathematical structure.
e term activity is to be taken in the sense of activity theory, implying
that context needs to be fully taken into account. e phrase previously
constructed mathematics refers to the outcomes of previous processes of
abstraction, whi may be used during the current abstraction activity. e
phrase new mathematical structure relates to the knowledge construct
emerging in the current activity. e phrase reorganizing into a new
structure implies the establishment of hitherto unknown mathematical
relationships that requires highly theoretical and empirical thought. Finally,
we borrowed the term vertically from the Dut culture of Realistic
Mathematics Education (RME), in whi researers speak about vertical
mathematization (de Lange, 1996; Treﬀers & Goﬀree, 1985) as “an activity
in whi mathematical elements are put together, structured, organized,
developed etc. into other elements, oen in more abstract or formal form
than the originals” (Hershkowitz, Parzysz, & van Dormolen, 1996, p. 177).
e RME approa emphasizes the integrative role of vertical
mathematization. It is mainly this integration, whi comes about through
the establishment of new connections during the process of abstraction, that
we point to by means of the term vertically. e word new in our
deﬁnition of abstraction is crucial: it expresses that, as a result of
abstraction, learners participating in the activity conceptualize something
that was previously inaccessible to them.
In order to empirically investigate processes of abstraction we needed to
devise a way to make the mental activity of abstraction observable. As
activities are composed of actions, and actions are frequently observable,
we decided to use epistemic actions (Pontecorvo & Girardet, 1993), namely

mental actions by means of whi knowledge is used or constructed. We
consider a speciﬁc set of epistemic actions, to be introduced next, because
they are characteristic of abstraction. Epistemic actions are often revealed in
suitable seings. For example, seings with ri social interactions are good
frameworks for observing epistemic actions.
Our deﬁnition of abstraction served as the theoretical guide to the
establishment of an operational model for studying abstraction
experimentally. is deﬁnition is the result of a dialectical boom-up
approa. e deﬁnition is thus a product of oscillating between the
researers’ theoretical perspective on abstraction and experimental
observations of students’ actions, actions the researers judged to be
evidence of abstracting. is oscillation between theoretical principles and
empirical data is highly nonlinear.
Hershkowitz, Swarz, and Dreyfus (2001) deﬁned and described three
epistemic actions as constituent of a model. Processes of knowledge
construction are expressed in the model through three observable and
identiﬁable epistemic actions: Recognizing, Building-with, and Constructing
(RBC). Recognizing takes place when the learner recognizes that a speciﬁc
previous knowledge construct is relevant to the problem he or she is
dealing with. Building-with is an action comprising the combination of
recognized constructs in order to aieve a localized goal, su as the
actualization of a strategy or a justiﬁcation or the solution of a problem.
e model suggests constructing as the central epistemic action of
mathematical abstraction. Constructing consists of assembling and
integrating previous constructs by vertical mathematization to produce a
new construct. It refers to the ﬁrst time the new construct is expressed by
the learner. It does not refer to the construct becoming freely and ﬂexibly
available to the learner; this is part of the construct’s consolidation.
Recognizing and building-with actions are oen nested within
constructing actions. Moreover, constructing actions are at times nested

within more complex or holistic constructing actions. erefore the model
is called the nested epistemic actions model of abstraction in context, or
simply the RBC+C model. The second C stands for consolidation.
An Example
Figure 26.5  The Seals activity.
As an example for this line of theory and resear we present a study with
dyads of seventh graders at the beginning of an Introduction to Algebra
course (Dreyfus, Hershkowitz, & Schwarz, 2001).
e study was conducted in a spreadsheet learning environment. e
task was based on number arrays of the form shown in Figure 26.5. e
students had never used algebra as a tool for justifying a general statement,
nor had they used the extended distributive law (a + b)(c + d) = ac + ad +
bc + bd, though they had met and used the simple one a(c + d) = ac + ad.
The students were asked to create a formula for the array using the variable
X (see Figure 26.5) in a spreadsheet, to substitute numbers for X, and to
suggest as many properties of su arrays as they could ﬁnd. e students
were asked—for one property aer the other—whether it always holds, and
to justify their claims. Most dyads found many properties. e task then
focused on some properties, the most complex of them being the diagonal
product property (DPP), namely that the diﬀerence of the products of the
diagonals of an array equals 12. Many dyads were surprised to see, using
the spreadsheet, that the DPP holds for ea number they substituted for X.
e activity design thus led the students to use algebra for justifying a
general statement. Most but not all student pairs succeeded in generating

components of the equation (x + 2)(x + 6) – x(x + 8) = 12, whi in turn led
them to the need for the extended distributive law (although the law was
not expressed in formal terms). us, underlying the task design for the
study were two mathematical principles: the use of algebra as a tool for
justiﬁcation, and the discovery of the extended distributive law, both
previously unknown to the students. From the point of view of the
designer, these were two intended new constructs, and the task was
designed so as to create a need for these two constructs, to be denoted by
C1 (algebra as a tool for justification) and C2 (extended distributive law).
e work of two dyads on this activity has been video recorded,
transcribed, and analyzed at the micro level by Dreyfus et al. (2001). We
illustrate this analysis here with the following transcript excerpt from one
of these dyads. They start from the simple distributive law.
Ha
113
So, like, see, X plus 8, X, like, then it is 8X plus XX.
Ne
114
Again?
Ha
115
Wait. X times X plus 8, right? This is XX, like, X, X twice, so
it’s XX.
Ne
116
Yes.
Ha
117
And X times 8 is 8X.
…
Ha
121
So, like, one does the distributive law.
Ne
122
Ah, yes.
…
Ha
133
And this [pointing to (x + 2)(x + 6)] …
Ne
134
It’s impossible to do the distributive law here. Wait, one can
do …
Ha
135
This is 6X.
Ne
136
This is 6X times X and 6X times 2.
Ha
137
Wait, first, no …
Ne
138
Yes.

Ha
139
No because this is X plus 6, this is not 6X, it’s different. Wait.
First one does … X; then it’s XX plus 2X, and here 6X plus
24. Then …
…
Ha
152
Ah, it’s XX plus 8X, but I don’t know, like, how this
[pointing to (x + 2)(x + 6)] will also be XX plus 8X. Like, it
HAS to be.
We then analyzed the students’ discourse in terms of the three epistemic
actions: In lines 113–121, the students recognize elementary algebraic
elements (e.g., 115) and build-with them (e.g., 117) the simple distributive
law in the present context (113, 121). In lines 133–134, they ﬁnd themselves
in front of an unknown situation, but, due to the design, they are ﬁrmly
aware of the simple distributive law. ey recognize (135) and build-with
(136) algebraic elements, including the simple distributive law (137, 139), to
rea a new (to them) result (139). Since this is the ﬁrst time they have used
and verbalized the extended distributive law, the process leading up to line
139, including 133–139, is considered a constructing action, leading to C2.
is constructing action is constituted by the collection of the R and B
actions in this excerpt plus the connections between them, whi make
them into a single whole. It is in this sense that we say that R and B actions
are nested within the constructing action. As we can see, the constructing
action leading to C2 is nested within the constructing action, leading to C2,
the use of algebra as a tool for justification.
We assume that a new construct is rather fragile at ﬁrst, and surmise that
when met again, it will progressively become consolidated. Consolidation
implies that the student will be able to recognize the construct more easily
in further activities and to build-with it with increasing ease and ﬂexibility.
Hence we hypothesize that tracing the genesis of an abstraction passes
through three stages:

1. A need for a new construct,
2. the emergence of a new construct, a new abstract entity in whi
recognizing and building-with previous constructs are nested, and
3. the consolidation of the new construct facilitating one’s recognizing it
with increased ease and building-with it in further activities.
e general meanism described here outlines the functioning of the
RBC+C model. e core of the model relates mainly to the second stage of
the model, namely the constructing of a new abstract.
Again this is a paradigmatic example. It shows how students construct
new knowledge interactively. is knowledge construction aracterizes
learning in rich activities and carefully designed learning environments. e
model allowed us to study students’ constructing of knowledge in small
groups. e AiC line of resear was further developed within the
CompuMath project as well as beyond it, by teams linked to the project and
by others (see Swarz, Dreyfus, & Hershkowitz, 2009; Dreyfus,
Hershkowitz, & Swarz, 2015 for surveys). In the next section we will
relate to the latest development of AiC and RBC+C.

Discussion
In this discussion section, we describe the resear strands exempliﬁed
earlier, from a more holistic point of view.
As mentioned in the section entitled “Resear Concerning the
Development of Isolated Activities,” the initial design-resear-redesign
stage was aracterized by the process of isolated activity development
through resear, as exempliﬁed by the Overseas activity and the
accompanying resear study. e process was a dialectic one, during
whi design and resear inﬂuenced ea other. As was shown in the
“Isolated Activities” section, the resear on the Overseas activity has led to
the insight that hypothesizing is linked to activity in computerized learning
environments, whi in turn is linked to the establishment of connections
between numeric, symbolic, and graphic senses. Similarly, research on other
isolated activities yielded other insights. Summing these up, the various
aspects considered in the design process include the content, the underlying
view of mathematics as a living subject that can be investigated, the
intended mathematical thinking processes (generalizing, hypothesizing,
reﬂecting, and justifying), the potential of computer tools, and the
classroom organization (including redistribution of learning responsibilities
between students and teacher).
e resear on isolated activities showed us that several diﬀerent
approaes were possible to many topics, and this necessitated resear
with a somewhat larger curricular mesh size. In other words, the transition
from resear on isolated activities to a curricular continuum necessitated
decisions on taking speciﬁc approaes to speciﬁc topics. is was
illustrated in the section entitled “New Dilemmas in Teaing ‘Old’
Mathematical Topics” by resear studies on linear equations, on proof in
geometry, as well as on multirepresentational environments for functions.
e resear ﬁndings by Stein (2002) informed the team that taking a two-

pronged approa to equations—interweaving functional and algebraic
considerations—is beneﬁcial for learning: Students become ﬂexible in their
understanding of what an equation is and how it may be solved in diﬀerent
tenological environments. is was the case even with respect to
nonlinear equations, whi students had not yet learned to solve
(Friedlander & Stein, 2001). e study on geometric proof led to an
analogous curricular insight: Interweaving an inquiry approa in a
tenological environment with a paper-and-pencil environment for
proving showed beneﬁcial eﬀects on learning. ese studies thus led to the
principle that interweaving several approaes to a topic may be beneﬁcial
to learning.
Similarly, other resear studies on approaing other topics have led to
other principles, including the following.
The Use of Representations in Computerized
Environments
Kaput (1992) pointed out that in the presence of dynamic soware
environments, notation systems that are static in other environments
become dynamic. As a consequence, the gap between a symbolic notation
system and others (like numerical and graphical ones) becomes less
signiﬁcant. Adding to this the ﬁndings from our resear discussed earlier
led us to enhance the use of multiple representations in designing further
activities and to convey the message that it is legitimate for students to
oose their own representation in order to solve a problem. is was done
by presenting information about a situation in more than one
representation (e.g., Figure 26.3) or by explicitly asking students to start
their work by giving several representations for the same phenomenon, and
only aerwards asking questions about the phenomenon (e.g., Friedlander

& Taba, 2001; Taba & Friedlander, 2012). e questions were phrased
so as to avoid guiding the solution process towards a speciﬁc
representation. Also, we incorporated reﬂective questions that speciﬁcally
addressed pros and cons of using diﬀerent representations for the solution
process, in order to draw students’ aention to these issues. It is worth to
note that linking representations is even easier today, due to the
development of soware paages su as Geogebra, but the guiding
principles are the same.
Generalizations and Explanations
We asked students to generalize from numerical paerns, from visual
paerns, or from graphical paerns. is was done by ﬁrst providing
several particular cases of a phenomenon, followed by a request to create
additional particular cases, and then to express the phenomenon in a more
general way, possibly using more than one representation to express the
generality (verbal, graphic, and symbolic). Next, students are asked to
explain the generalization they have found. Sometimes, several possible
generalizations are presented, some correct and some wrong, and students
are asked whether they can justify them, possibly with the aid of
computerized tools (Taba, Hershkowitz, & Swarz, 2006; Taba &
Friedlander, 2012). Hence, the principle of asking students to make
generalizations and explain them was given a dominant place in the design
of activities.
Raising the Question of Why
One of the critiques raised against the use of dynamic computer soware,
especially in geometry, is that students are able to see large numbers of

examples via the dragging mode of the soware, and hence they will no
longer experience a need to prove. Indeed, this power of the tools
allenged us as curriculum designers. Purposeful task design, in whi the
learner faces a puzzling phenomenon, may be a key answer for sustaining
the need to proof in the computation era, as we elaborated in the “New
Dilemmas” section (Hadas et al., 2000; Dreyfus & Hadas, 1996; Prusak,
Hershkowitz, & Schwarz, 2012).
Encouraging Students to Become Autonomous
Learners
In the topic of statistics in the CompuMath project, students carried out
their own small-scale projects (Ben-Zvi & Arcavi, 2001; Hershkowitz et al.,
2002). is encouraged the team to expand the idea of empowering
learners’ autonomy in other mathematical topics. At the beginning of this
subsection, we reported on students’ freedom to oose their preferred
representation; this served as an initial step towards more far-reaing
student autonomy in learning (see, e.g., Taba, Hershkowitz, Arcavi and
Dreyfus, 2008; Tabach et al., 2013).
Aer many curricular units were created and implemented according to
the principles just discussed, the AiC framework and the RBC+C model
emerged as responses to the team’s need to investigate in depth what
conceptual and structural mathematical knowledge students learn and how
they learn it within the CompuMath project (see the section entitled
“Processes of Learning in the Classroom”). Looking ba on our “resear
journey” with AiC, we observe that we passed from investigating
construction of knowledge by individual learners or dyads with an
interviewer in a laboratory seing, to investigating focus groups of two to
four students in a working classroom. e ﬁrst phase served to develop the

AiC framework and the RBC+C model (Hershkowitz et al., 2001; Dreyfus
et al., 2001). In the second phase, we applied the RBC+C model for
analyzing students’ abstraction processes as they worked in a small group in
a classroom (Dreyfus et al., 2015; Hershkowitz, Hadas, Dreyfus, & Swarz,
2007; Tabach et al., 2006; Schwarz et al., 2009).
It is worth emphasizing that the AiC framework was created while we
were struggling to beer understand the products and processes of learning
in tenological environments. We think that tenological tools have an
important role to play in processes of abstraction (Kidron & Dreyfus, 2010;
Taba et al., 2006; Weiss & Dreyfus, 2009). ey may accelerate students’
need for constructing new knowledge. Students’ need for constructing new
knowledge is the ﬁrst step in the process of abstraction according to the
model. In addition, the ability aﬀorded by tenological tools to document
—explicitly and at the micro level—students’ actions while abstracting may
enable researers to reﬁne their observational and analytical tools, and
hence to trace students’ processes of abstraction in a more reﬁned way. e
micro-level nature of this resear provides a tool for investigating and
improving curricular micro design.
As mentioned at the end of the “Processes of Learning” section, AiC
resear is continuing in Israel and elsewhere, concerning learning
processes in tenological and nontenological environments. Its most
recent development concerns resear about constructing and shiing
knowledge in classrooms. For this purpose, we coordinated the AiC and
RBC+C framework with another theoretical methodology, Documenting
Collective Activity (DCA, Rasmussen & Stephan, 2008), to study the ways
in whi knowledge spreads in the classroom, within and between diﬀerent
social seings: the whole-class community and small groups (Hershkowitz,
Taba, Rasmussen, & Dreyfus, 2014; Taba, Hershkowitz, Rasmussen, &
Dreyfus, 2014). e main ﬁndings concern the role of students as
knowledge agents in shis of knowledge between small groups and the

whole-class community.
In summary, our resear related to the CompuMath project started by
focusing on cognition, but integrated more and more aspects of classroom
practices, socio-mathematical norms (Hershkowitz & Swarz, 1999),
comparison between CompuMath classes and other ninth-grade classes
(Swarz & Hershkowitz, 1999) and instrumentation processes (Taba,
Hershkowitz, Arcavi and Dreyfus, 2008) as it progressed. We see this
apter as an example of how operative needs lead to resear that has a
scope and value transcending the operative needs that triggered it. Su
research may initiate new educational activity cycles.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our colleagues who took part directly or indirectly
in the journey of the CompuMath project and the resear that
accompanied it. Some of that resear and the preparation of this apter
were partially supported by the Israel Science Foundation under grant
number 1057/12.

Note
1. “We” is used with slightly diﬀerent interpretations at diﬀerent places in the apter: Sometimes
it refers to the authors, sometimes to the CompuMath team leaders, and at other places to
various combinations of team members—see also the acknowledgment at the end of the chapter.

References
Arcavi, A., & Hadas, N. (2000). Computer mediated learning: An example of an approa.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 5, 25–45.
Artigue, M., & Blomhøj, M. (2013). Conceptualizing inquiry-based education in mathematics. ZDM
—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45, 797–810.
Balaeﬀ, N., & Kaput, J. (1996). Computer-based learning environments in mathematics. In A. J.
Bishop, K. Clements, C. Keitel, J. Kilpatri, & C. Laborde (Eds.), International handbook of
mathematics education (pp. 469–501). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ben-Zvi, D., & Arcavi, A. (2001). Junior high sool students’ construction of global views of data
and data representations. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 45, 35–65.
Davydov, V. V. (1972/1990). Soviet studies in mathematics education: Vol. 2. Types of generalization
in instruction: Logical and psyological problems in the structuring of sool curricula (J.
Kilpatri, Ed., & J. Teller, Trans.). Reston, VA: National Council of Teaers of Mathematics.
(Original work published in 1972).
de Lange, J. (1996). Using and applying mathematics in education. In A. J. Bishop, K. Clements, C.
Keitel, J. Kilpatri, & C. Laborde (Eds.), International handbook of mathematics education (pp.
49–97). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
de Villiers, M. (1998). An alternative approa to proof in dynamic geometry. In R. Lehrer & D.
Chazan (Eds.), Designing learning environment for developing understanding of geometry and
space (pp. 369–393). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Dolev-Cohen, O. (1996). e passage between representations as an action of aracterizing student’s
learning in an interactive computer based environment. Unpublished MA thesis, e Hebrew
University, Jerusalem. [In Hebrew]
Dreyfus, T. (1991). Advanced mathematical thinking processes. In D. Tall (Ed.), Advanced
mathematical thinking (pp. 25–41). Dordret, e Netherlands: Kluwer, Mathematics
Education Library.
Dreyfus, T., & Hadas, N. (1996). Proof as answer to the question why. ZDM—e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 28, 1–5.
Dreyfus, T., Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. (2001). Abstraction in Context II: e case of peer

interaction. Cognitive Science Quarterly, 1, 307–368.
Dreyfus, T., Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. (2015). e nested epistemic actions model for
abstraction in context—eory as methodological tool and methodological tool as theory. In A.
Bikner-Ahsbahs, C. Knipping, & N. Presmeg (Eds.), Approaes to qualitative resear in
mathematics education: Examples of methodology and methods. Dordrecht: Springer, Advances.
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding. An activity-theoretical approa to developmental
research. Helsinki: University of Helsinki.
Friedlander, A., & Stein, H. (2001). Students’ oice of tools in solving equations in a tenological
learning environment. In M. van den Heuvel-Panhuizen (Ed.), Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp. 441–448).
Utrecht, The Netherlands: PME.
Friedlander, A., & Taba. M. (2001). Promoting multiple representations in algebra. In A. A. Cuoco
& F. R. Curcio (Eds.), e roles of representation in sool mathematics  (pp. 173–185). Reston,
VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 63rd Yearbook.
Hadas, N., & Hershkowitz, R. (1998). Proof in geometry as an explanatory and convincing tool. In A.
Olivier & K. Newstead (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22st PME Conference (Vol. 3, pp. 25–32).
Stellenbosch, South Africa: PME.
Hadas, N., Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. B. (2000). e role of contradiction and uncertainty in
promoting the need to prove in dynamic geometry environments. Educational Studies in
Mathematics, 44, 127–150.
Hanna, G. (1990). Some pedagogical aspects of proof. Interchange, 21, 6–13.
Heid, M. K., Sheets, C., & Matras, M. N. (1990). Computer—enhanced algebra: New roles and
allenges for teaers and students. In T. J. Cooney & C. R. Hirsh, Teaing and learning
mathematics in the 1990s (pp. 194–204). Reston, VA: National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics, 52nd Yearbook.
Hersh, R. (1993). Proving is convinsing and explaining. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 24, 389–
399.
Hershkowitz, R., Dreyfus, T., Ben-Zvi, D., Friedlander, A., Hadas, N., Resni, N., Taba, M., &
Swarz, B. B. (2002). Mathematics curriculum development for computerized environments: A
designer-researer-learner-activity. In L. D. English (Ed.), Handbook of international resear in

mathematics education (pp. 657–694). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hershkowitz, R., Hadas, N., Dreyfus, T., & Swarz, B. B. (2007). Processes of abstraction, from the
diversity of individuals’ constructing of knowledge to a group’s “shared knowledge.”
Mathematics Education Research Journal, 19, 41–68.
Hershkowitz, R., Parzysz, B., & van Dormolen, J. (1996). Shape and space. In A. J. Bishop, K.
Clements, C. Keitel, J. Kilpatri & C. Laborde (Eds.), International handbook of mathematics
education (pp. 161–204). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. B. (1999). Reﬂective processes in a tenology-based mathematics
classroom. Cognition and Instruction, 17, 65–91.
Hershkowitz, R., Swarz, B. B., & Dreyfus, T. (2001). Abstraction in context: Epistemic actions.
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 32, 195–222.
Hershkowitz, R., Taba, M., Rasmussen, C., & Dreyfus, T. (2014). Knowledge shis in a probability
classroom—A case study coordinating two methodologies. ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 46, 363–387.
Kaput, J. (1992). Tenology and mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.), Handbook of
resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 515–556). Reston, VA: National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics.
Kidron, I., & Dreyfus, T. (2010). Interacting parallel constructions of knowledge in a CAS context.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 15, 129–149.
Kuui, K. (1996). Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer interaction
research. In B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness (pp. 17–44). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lagrange, J. B., Artigue, M., Laborde, C., & Troue, L. (2003). Tenology and mathematics
education: A multidimensional study of the evolution of resear and innovation. In A. Bishop,
M. A. Clements, C. Keitel, J. Kilpatri, & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.), Second international handbook of
mathematics education (pp. 237–269). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Pea, R. D. (1985). Beyond ampliﬁcation: Using the computer to reorganize mental functioning.
Educational Psychologist, 20, 167–182.
Perret-Clermont, A.-N. (1993). What is it that develops? Cognition and Instruction, 11, 197–205.
Pontecorvo, C., & Girardet, H. (1993). Arguing and reasoning in understanding historical topics.
Cognition and Instruction, 11, 365–395.

Prusak, N., Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. B. (2012). From visual reasoning to logical necessity
through 
argumentative 
design. Educational 
Studies 
in 
Mathematics, 
79, 
19–40.
doi:10.1007/s10649-011-9335-0
Rasmussen, C., & Stephan, M. (2008). A methodology for documenting collective activity. In A. E.
Kelly, R. A. Lesh, & J. Y. Baek (Eds.), Handbook of innovative design resear in science,
tenology, engineering, mathematics (STEM) education (pp. 195–215). New York: Taylor &
Francis.
Rota, G.-C. (1997). Indiscrete thoughts (pp. 131–135). Boston, MA: Birkhäuser.
Swarz, B. B., & Dreyfus, T. (1995). New actions upon old objects: A new ontological perspective on
functions. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 29, 259–291.
Swarz, B. B., Dreyfus, T., & Hershkowitz, R. (2009). e nested epistemic actions model for
abstraction in context. In B. B. Swarz, T. Dreyfus & R. Hershkowitz (Eds.), Transformation of
knowledge through classroom interaction (pp. 11–41). London, UK: Routledge.
Swarz, B. B., & Hershkowitz, R. (1999). Prototypes: Brakes or levers in learning the function
concept? e role of computer tools. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 30, 362–
389.
Stein, H. (2002). Changes in the equation concept and its solution methods in a tenological
learning environment. Unpublished MA thesis, the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot. [In
Hebrew]
Taba, M., Arcavi, A., & Hershkowitz, R. (2008). Transitions among diﬀerent symbolic
generalizations by algebra beginners in a computer intensive environment. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 69, 53–71.
Taba, M., & Friedlander, A. (2012). Five considerations in task design—e case of improving
grades. Investigations in Mathematics Learning, 4, 32–49.
Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., & Arcavi, A. (2008). Learning beginning algebra with spreadsheets in a
computer intensive environment. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 27, 48–63.
Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., Arcavi, A., & Dreyfus, T. (2008). Computerized environments in
mathematics classrooms: A resear-design view. In L. D. English, M. B. Bussi, G. A. Jones, R. A.
Lesh, B. Shriraman, & D. Tirosh (Eds.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics
education (2nd ed., pp. 784–805). New York: Routledge.

Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., & Dreyfus, T. (2013). Learning beginning algebra in a computer
intensive environment: Design, diﬃculties, and reality. ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 45, 377–391. doi:10.1007/s11858–012–0458–2
Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., Rasmussen, C., & Dreyfus, T. (2014). Knowledge shis in the classroom
—A case study. Journal of Mathematics Behavior, 33, 192–208. doi:10.1016/j.jmathb.2013.12.001
Taba, M., Hershkowitz, R., & Swarz, B. B. (2006). Constructing and consolidating of algebraic
knowledge within dyadic processes: A case study. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 63, 235–
258.
Treﬀers, A., & Goﬀree, F. (1985). Rational analysis of realistic mathematics education—e
Wiskobas program. In L. Streeﬂand (Ed.), Proceedings of the 9th International Conference for the
Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2. pp. 97–121). Utrecht, The Netherlands: OW&OC.
van Oers, B. (1998). The fallacy of de-contextualization. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5, 143–153.
Weiss, D., & Dreyfus, T. (2009). Model based construction of fraction comparison. In M. Tzekaki, M.
Kaldrimidou & H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Conference of the International
Group for the Psychology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 1, p. 489). Thessaloniki, Greece: PME.
Yael, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Socio-mathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in
mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27, 458–477.
Yerushalmy, M., (2009). Tenology-based algebra learning. Epistemological discontinuities and
curricular implications. In B. B. Swarz, T. Dreyfus & R. Hershkowitz (Eds.), Transformation of
knowledge through classroom interaction (pp. 60–69). London, UK: Routledge.
Yerushalmy, M., & Chazan, D. (2002). Flux in sool algebra: Curricular ange, graphing
tenology, and resear in students learning and teaer knowledge. In L. D. English (Ed.),
Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (pp. 725–756). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zaslavsky, O., Nierson, S., Stylianides, A., Kidron, I., & Winii-Landman, G. (2012). e need for
proof and proving: Mathematical and pedagogical perspectives. In G. Hanna & M. de Villiers
(Eds.), Proof and proving in mathematics education—the 19th ICMI study (pp. 215–230). New
York: Springer, New ICMI Study series, Vol. 15.

27 E-Textbooks in/for Teaching and
Learning Mathematics
A Potentially Transformative Educational
Technology
Birgit Pepin
ESoE, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Ghislaine Gueudet
CREAD, University of Brest, France
Michal Yerushalmy
Department of Mathematics Education, University of Haifa, Israel
Luc Trouche
French Institute of Education, École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France
Daniel I.Chazan
Center for Mathematics Education, University of Maryland, United States

Introduction
In e Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to Our Changing Society (1992),
Professor of Management Peter Druer lays out ways in whi
tenologies are transforming, and will continue to transform, industries
throughout the world economy; for many workers, what aracterizes
work life now is the continual need to adapt to tenological ange. Su
anges are not limited to the world of work: tenology is transforming
interactions with media, and this also relates to books. is apter focuses
on one way in whi tenology may transform educational processes and
bring about new educational dynamics. Speciﬁcally we examine ways in
whi e-book tenology might inﬂuence one genre of book, the
(mathematics) textbook.
is apter’s focus on e-textbooks is a lile diﬀerent than the focus of
many who do resear on tenology in mathematics education. For many
years, tenology in mathematics education has focused on support for
student activity in classrooms. While two of the authors have wrien, in
previous editions of this Handbook (Yerushalmy & Chazan, 2002, 2008),
about curriculum development and tenology, and the impact of various
tools and approaes on teaing and learning, we explore in this apter
deep evolutions in the learning, teaing, and professional development
processes that digital resources, in particular e-textbooks, may create as
they potentially transform current educational practice. We suggest that
these potential transformations in teaing and learning require new
resear perspectives (Gueudet, Pepin, & Troue, 2012). Further, we
suggest that there are interesting opportunities—and even an urgent need—
to renew resear perspectives on tenology and teaers’ participation in
the design phase of tenology tools, in particular on e-textbooks used and
designed by teaers. In this apter, we present a synthesis of resear and
development studies on e-textbooks, and analyze the crucial evolutions

connected with their design and use.
At the same time that our focus on e-textbooks is slightly diﬀerent than
what is oen done in the name of tenology in mathematics education.
is focus is consonant with greater interest in general in the role of
textbooks in mathematics education. Textbook conferences in Europe and
Asia (e.g. International Conference on Sool Mathematics Textbooks, East
China Normal University, Shanghai, 2011; International Conference on
Mathematics Textbook Resear and Development, University of
Southampton, July 2014) and the recent ICMI Study 22 Conference on Task
Design in Mathematics Education” in Oxford (see proceedings: Margolinas,
2013) evidence the renewed interest in textbook resear in mathematics
education (Fan, Zhu, & Miao, 2013). Recent studies (e.g. ZDM Special Issue
45[5]) address new issues and point to new roles for the textbook (e.g.
Yerushalmy, 2013), not only as a tool for students and teaers, but also as
interface between policy and practice (Pepin, Gueudet, & Trouche, 2013a).
e textbook is commonly seen as the major curriculum resource in the
classroom for teaers and students, and many authors claim that the
textbook is an important artifact and a major source of provision of
educational opportunities (Haggarty & Pepin, 2002, Smidt, 2012). From
the resear literature, it is clear that textbooks are a vital ingredient for
mathematics teaers’ lesson preparations and their pedagogic practice (e.g.
Gueudet, Pepin, & Troue, 2013a). Perhaps as importantly, they may be
seen as vehicles and tools for teaer learning and professional
development (Brown 2009; Collopy, 2003). At the same time, mathematics
textbooks are perceived to reﬂect the views expressed in national curricular
documents, and hence what the country views as appropriate for their
students to learn, and how (Smidt, McKnight, Valverde, Houang, &
Wiley, 1997, Valverde, Biani, Wolfe, Smidt, & Houang, 2002). In short,
mu resear has gone into analyzing traditional textbooks and their use
in mathematics classrooms (Fan, 2013). e ICMI Study 22 discussion

document states that “most teaers use textbooks and/or online paages
of materials as their total or main source of tasks” (Margolinas, 2013, p. 11).
It is reasonable to argue that resources su as textbooks/e-textbooks
and other materials (also digital materials, e.g. worksheets) are an
important part of the context in whi pupils and teaers work. In
recognition of the central importance of su documents, the framework
for the ird International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS)
included large-scale cross-national analyses of mathematics curricula and
textbooks as part of its examination of mathematics education and
aainment in almost 50 nations. Concerns have been expressed about the
quality of textbooks, for example, and about their persuasive inﬂuence. It
appears that textbook content, and how it is used, are signiﬁcant inﬂuences
on students’ opportunities to learn and their subsequent aievement
(Robitaille & Travers, 1992). It is also commonly assumed that textbooks
are one of the main sources for the content covered and the pedagogical
styles used in classrooms (Valverde et al., 2002). Teaers oen rely heavily
on textbooks in their day-to-day teaing when they decide what to tea,
how to tea it, and the kinds of tasks and exercises to assign to their
students. Hence, it seems sensible to analyze e-/textbooks with respect to
their “quality.”
It is clear that both content and structure depend on the textbook’s
design, whether traditional or digital textbooks. In this apter we
investigate textbook design, focusing on its use and developments brought
about by digital means, and we examine the ways in whi the interfaces
(e.g. between teaers, textbook authors and learners) may be diﬀerent as
compared to traditional textbooks. To provide speciﬁc examples, with e-
textbooks, interfaces may change in terms of the following.
Interactions amongst teaers: digital means oﬀer opportunities for
teaers to easily prepare lessons together, in particular if the

necessary tools are provided by the e-textbook—hence more
opportunities for collective work.
Interactions between teaers and textbook authors: if teaers can
ange the content of the book (e.g. in terms of the sequencing of
topic areas, and within topic areas the learning trajectories suggested,
or indeed the tasks provided and the digital ‘tools’ used for particular
tasks), these anges may be approved by the textbook author group,
and subsequently included in the book—hence teaers become quasi-
authors of the textbook, and the authority of the text changes.
Interactions between teaers and learners: e-textbooks may provide
interfaces for teaers and pupils to easier communicate, for example
in terms of feedba on (wrien) homework (whi may be in or out
of class).
Textbooks are now oen complemented by digital materials (e.g. ﬁles to be
projected during the lesson by the teaer; exercises using particular
software; etc.). ICMI Study 22 asked the following question:
How can or should new digital formats inﬂuence textbook design: e.g. use of podcasts, twier,
and other social media; implications for design and coherence of materials (either original digital
design or transfer from print) if teachers are able to select tasks in varied orders?
(Margolinas, 2013, p. 19)
is question is complex and encompasses several aspects of the evolutions
resulting from digital means, in particular the following: digital means
provide new opportunities for the structuring of textbooks for their use by
teaers, and they open up new possibilities for design and further
evolutions. To address this issue we will start by working toward a
deﬁnition of an e-textbook. To do so, we have to begin with a
aracterization of the role of textbooks in compulsory sooling. From
there, we will move on to examine how e-textbooks have the potential to

ange both teaers and students’ interactions with textbooks. roughout
these sections of the apter, we will oﬀer periodic “windows” into the use
of e-textbooks in teaing and learning. Finally, we will illustrate how the
presence of e-textbooks calls for reconceptualizations of constructs, su as
“quality” and “coherence,” whi researers have been using in resear
on textbooks; thus, one might say that e-textbooks are allenging existing
constructs in mathematics education research.

E-Textbooks: Working Towards a Definition
Studying e-textbooks involves being able to identify their nature, to deﬁne
what an e-textbook is. However, to date there is no clear notion or
deﬁnition of an e-textbook. We cannot provide a “complete” deﬁnition, but
we can work toward su a goal. For example, whilst we can claim that a
textbook is a book, there is no corresponding claim for e-textbooks. We
discuss this next, with both general considerations and examples provided
by our resear. Developing a deeper understanding of the nature of e-
textbooks involves examining their (potential) features and their structure
in particular, but also their design modes, and investigating the similarities
and diﬀerences between paper textbooks and e-textbooks in terms of
design.
Textbooks as Artifacts of Compulsory Schooling
Books have been crucial tools for mathematical communication; texts, like
Euclid’s Elements, were at the same time both compendiums of known
mathematical knowledge, as well as pedagogical texts that could form the
basis for studies (Herbst, 2002) and communicate aspects of mathematical
practice (Netz, 1999). More recently, the texts authored by Bourbaki were
intended to play a similar role (Guedj, 1985). e Fren mathematician
Cartier, from the Bourbaki Sool, wrote: “e mathematician belongs to
the civilization of the book” (Cartier & Chemla, 2000, p. 166, our
translation).
Textbooks, a new kind of mathematical text, came into existence with
the advent of compulsory formal sooling and eﬀorts to democratize
knowledge (Subring, 1987). ese new kinds of mathematical texts were
explicitly designed to communicate at the same time both to pupil and

teaer the mathematics (e.g. to supplement texts like Euclid’s Elements)
and the values that the author/s regarded appropriate for common sool
knowledge. Textbooks now commonly include exposition; worked
examples, exercises or questions, images, and more (Love & Pimm, 1996).
While at some times and in some places these specialized texts—textbooks
—are authored by people whose authority is taken for granted (Kidwell,
Aerberg-Hastings, & Roberts, 2008), in current times, these books are
either created by central educational authorities or wrien by individuals or
teams (mathematics teaers, educators, inspectors) to meet guidelines
produced by such authorities.
Distinguishing mathematical texts for sool from other kinds of
mathematical texts is a complex task (Proust, 2012). Moreover, the role they
play in sooling is of course crucial. Textbooks are meant to communicate
to the teaer what it is that students are supposed to learn and in whi
order (Westbury, 1990), and something about how it is that students are to
do so (Chazan & Yerushalmy, 2014). New electronic means of publishing
texts have the potential to ange the textbook industry, just as they have
anged the publication of other books. When textbooks are published as
paper books, they are wrien at one time and then produced. With this
mode of production, the teaer interacts with a ﬁnal product that is ﬁxed
and does not expand as it is used (except under the form of wrien notes in
the margins of the pages). When e-books are published in bits and bytes,
they now can potentially be continually edited and supplemented by a large
number of people; as books are edited in this way, su anges in mode of
publication can reshape the relationships between textbook author or
curriculum developer, teaer, and student. In particular, the nature of the
authority of the text in the classroom may shi. It is this potential that we
seek to explore in our discussion of e-textbooks.

Design of E-Textbooks
Whether in the form of dedicated hardware, tablet PCs, or a soware
format, digital books have allenged the object we used to refer to as a
“book.” Clearly, the 21st-century reader will be increasingly reading
materials in digital format, and may ﬁnd them both useful and aractive.
For a growing community of readers digital books have already anged
the book culture. It did not take too long for the textbook publishing
industry to follow these global anges and oﬀer digital textbooks. At ﬁrst
textbook publishers addressed the higher education audience, and recently
they have been targeting sools and soolteaers, both as authors and as
users.
e ﬁrst generation of digital textbooks may be considered “old wine in
new wineskin” (Gould, 2011); they were merely digitized versions of their
paper counterparts, integrating a given ﬁxed content, and supporting
limited interactivity only by means of sear and navigation of the digital
document. e second generation of digital textbooks bears a noticeable
ange in the object itself, opening new occasions for interactions,
personalization, and evolution of the content: an increasing number of
sool textbooks are now supplemented by continuously upgraded digital
resources that can be found on the Web, su as the ClassroomAid blog
(http://classroom-aid.com/educational-apps). 
Textbook 
publishers 
are
addressing a wide range of expected anges in the aﬀordances of the
digital object, including material aspects of weight and cost; the quality and
attractiveness of the material; the richness of the modes of presentation; and
the opportunities for personalization. Publishers oﬀer teaers the
possibility to personalize digital textbooks for their courses, emphasizing
ﬂexibility and inexpensive dynamic anges that allow soolteaers to
personalize the textbook by selecting from existing apters and content,
and even individualizing the book for ea student. us, the ange in the

object is also associated with an essential ange concerning design, teaer
agency, and authorship.
Different Types of E-Textbooks
Working towards a deﬁnition, we will introduce three types/models of e-
textbooks and describe examples corresponding to each type. Each example
describes a complex design but is used to illustrate speciﬁc aracteristic/s
that for us are central dimensions of e-textbooks and their use by teaers
or students.
1. e integrative e-textbook refers to an “add-on” type model where
the digital version of a (traditional) textbook is connected to other
learning objects (see Figure 27.1): a digital book that is ideologically
similar to a rigid paper textbook; i.e. it is a traditionally authored
textbook and many users are likely to use it as a digital version of a
paper textbook. In that sense, norms of authority, coherence, and
quality are not anging. But the integrative e-textbook allows for
users (teaers or developers) to add on or link to other learning
objects that traditionally are not assumed to be part of a textbook. It is
used by educational systems (sools, states, developers) as the core of
a Virtual Learning Environment—learning management, course
management, authoring tools to add or edit activities (by teaers),
etc.
2. 
e evolving 
or 
“living” 
e-textbook 
refers 
to 
an
accumulative/developing model where a core community (e.g. of
teaers, IT specialists) has authored a digital textbook that is
permanently under development due to the input of other practicing
members/teaers (see Window 1 and Figure 27.2). e Sésamath
system is an example of a sustained project of community-authored

resources. e use of su a textbook by teaers who are not
contributing is diﬀerent from the use of the integrative model, because
the evolving/“living” e-textbook emphasizes interactivity of “living”
resources (and we will show that in the subsequent section).
3. e interactive e-textbook refers to a “tool kit” model where the e-
textbook (authored to function only as an interactive textbook) is
based upon a set of learning objects—tasks and interactives (diagrams
and tools)—that can be linked and combined. e VisualMath example
(see Window 2) is an example for this type of textbook. It is
“traditionally” authored, thus representing the traditional view of
external authority. However, diﬀerent from the other models, (a) the
tasks are based on interactives that are an integral part of the textbook
(rather than being add-on tools); (b) it is designed to aﬀord object-
oriented navigation along mathematical objects and operations that
provide mathematical opportunities that can be taught in various
orders (like the museum visitors who visit art in different ways.)
e ﬁrst example (Figure 27.1) refers to the “add-on” model where the
digital version of a (traditional) textbook is linked to other learning objects.
Korea, considered as one of the leading countries in mathematics and
science aievements, became a leading innovator in the area of e-
textbooks, especially in sool mathematics and science. Korean publishers
hold an integrative view in whi textbooks remain the central learning
resource, surrounded by other types of facilitating media.
Other educational systems are adopting a similar view of the new
textbook (Taizan, Bhang, Kurokami, & Kwon, 2012). e Israeli education
system requires that ea textbook appears in at least one of three formats:
a digitized textbook; a digitized textbook that is enried with external
links and multimodal materials; and/or a textbook that is specially designed
to work in a digital environment and whi includes online tools for

authoring, learning, and management.
Figure 27.1 The integrated e-textbook. Source: Korea Education and Research Information Service
(KERIS), 2007.
us, while part of the digital textbook can also function as printed text,
the e-textbook integrates functions and uses (by teaers) that traditionally
were not part of textbook use, su as grading students’ work and
organizing their course.
e second example is the Sésamath e-textbook, developed in France
(see Window 1). is example refers to a system approa model, where a
core group/community (of teaers, IT specialists) has developed a hybrid
textbook that is continuously evolving through the input of other practicing
members. An e-textbook can be entirely designed by teaers, like in the
case of Sésamath. In this case teaers intervened as individual authors of
the e-textbook. However, even in the case of commercial publishers and
“expert” authors (e.g. “expert teaers”, inspectors, teaer educators),
teaers are not expected to be passive users of e-textbooks; they are
expected to personalize the book (see example in Window 2).

Window 1—Sésamath E-Textbook, a Living Resource System
Collaboratively Designed
Sésamath, a Fren online association of mathematics teaers (most of
them teaing in lower secondary sool, grades 6–9), started in 2001. Its
spirit is summarized on its Web site (www.sesamath.net/) as “Mathematics
for all” (Figure 27.2). e association started with a gathering of
approximately 20 mathematics teaers who shared their personal Web
sites and subsequently designed a “drill-and-practice” soware program
called Mathenpoche (whi stands for mathematics in the poet).
Mathenpoche has very quickly become very successful, and it has been used
by many teaers and students. e possibilities and opportunities for
organizing collaborative work, for oﬀering a set of ﬂexible resources and
tools, and for questioning (e.g. through discussions with researers) its
structure and development mode, led Sésamath to become a major
reference in the Fren educational landscape (Troue, Drijvers, Gueudet,
& Sacristan, 2013).
Since, 2005 Sésamath has designed textbooks for grades 6–10 and has
now become one of the most popular textbooks in France: 300,000
textbooks have been sold, representing 20% of a very competitive Fren
textbook market (Vieillard-Baron, 2009). Four elements can explain this:
1. e mode of design of these textbooks (Sabra & Troue, 2011)
involves a large number of actors. Many teaers (approximately one
hundred, for ea textbook) have contributed to the design in a
collaborative and iterative way, as “authors of content,” or “designers
of didactical scenarios,” or “testers,” or “experimentators” in classes (a
single teaer could have several roles, or ange roles at diﬀerent
moments).
e textbook resulting from this process is expected to ﬁt the wishes
and needs of a large number of teachers.

2. Far from being a simple textbook, the Sésamath textbooks constitute a
hybrid system of resources for teaing (i.e., including a classical
structure in apters, online supplements, and animated corrections).
Following their development helps to understand this systemic aspect:
the ﬁrst model of Sésamath textbooks was a single static book,
available both online (as a. pdf ﬁle, but also in. odt format, whi
allowed teaers to make modiﬁcations) and in hard copy,
accompanied by separated animations online, a set of
Mathenpoe exercises, etc. (i.e. a real resource system, see
Figure 27.1);
the second model was a ﬂexible and dynamic digital textbook
that a teaer could organize according to his/her needs, with
animation and extra exercises integrated in each chapter;
e third model was both a ﬂexible and dynamic digital textbook
and a laboratory for collaboratively adjusting the textbook to the
needs and projects of the community (sool, team of teaers).
is laboratory, named LaboMEP (whi stands for Laboratory
for Mathenpoche) allows teaers to develop and share their own
lessons, but also to diﬀerentiate their teaing according to the
results of their students (using an application—Pepite—that has
been developed through the collaboration of Sésamath with
researchers).
3. Sésamath has found an economic model that is well-suited to the
world of free soware (Vieillard-Baron, 2009): all Sésamath resources,
including the textbooks, can be freely downloaded. A printed-paper
version can be bought for half the price of other mathematics
textbooks in France. e sale of the books allows Sésamath to employ
seven teaers, who constitute the tenical infrastructure of the
association (all authors work without remuneration).
4. Sésamath resources are truly alive, as the association itself is alive

(Gueudet & Troue, 2009b). Once the textbooks have been produced,
they are constantly discussed in the community of users (in discussions
lists, forums, etc.), and they are regularly adjusted and “redesigned.”
For example, the grade 6 Sésamath textbook was comprehensively
revised in 2013, and it includes now open-ended problems and more
complex tasks than before.
Figure 27.2 The front page of the Sésamath Web site.
We provide the third example to illustrate the interactive model showing
the design of an interactive e-textbook that is based upon a set of
independent but conceptually connected learning objects, whi address

speciﬁc content and can be linked and combined to create learning
trajectories that reflect different pedagogical ideas (see Window 2).
Window 2—Visual Math Design Process and Structure
VisualMath has been designed to allenge traditional notions of what
sool mathematics is and how it can be taught and learned (more about
the rationale and baground can be found in the apters within the ﬁrst
and second editions of this Handbook (Yerushalmy & Chazan, 2002, 2008).
e VisualMath Function’s based algebra e-textbook is part of a geometry,
algebra and calculus curriculum development project that spans more than
25 years. It supports the “what” and the means for the “how” to tea and
learn a full sool-algebra course based on the concept of function. e
tasks and the interactives are all organized around a relatively small
number of mathematical objects (functions) and operations (with the
functions) represented and interactively manipulated by graphs, sketes,
numbers, and symbols. is object-oriented mapping of the curriculum
proposes a coherent organization of the algebra curriculum.
e 
term VisualMath indicates the emphasis of the program on
mathematical representations and especially on visualization. In this respect,
the program is a source for important ideas, as well as methods for students
to act on those ideas supported by visual feedba (Chazan & Yerushalmy,
2003). As teaers are expected to guide mathematical inquiry and take a
more active role in the ways diﬀerent resources are used to communicate
ideas in their class, a bound book that represents the curriculum plan and
assumes a linear progression for all students may not best serve teaing.
us, the learning units of the e-textbook are designed to support a variety
of progressions and sequences. roughout the development of VisualMath,
various formats of printed textbooks and of digital resources were
developed and studied.

Paper textbooks were part of the ﬁrst round of development (1992–
2002): digital interactive multiple-representation tools were designed to be
part of the work with the textbook, and these were oen used (by teaers)
for enriment, rather than as an integral necessary resource. e tasks
require making sense of problems, spending longer on analyzing givens,
constraints, relationships, and goals. Although problem solving can always
be helped by use of appropriate tools, it should be carried out strategically,
constructing viable arguments and critiquing the reasoning of others.
Expositions were replaced by proposals for hands-on explorations followed
by whole group teacher-led discussions.
2. e VisualMath e-textbook was designed anew, based on the printed
VisualMath algebra books, as a Web.1 learning environment. (e
development by Yerushalmy, Katriel, and Shternberg (2004) is further
detailed in Yerushalmy, 2013.) Its design was a joint eﬀort of the teams who
developed the tools for explorations and teaer-users groups who
participated as developers of the VisualMath tasks. e VisualMath Algebra
e-textbook accommodates two objects (functions), the linear and the
quadratic, and six operations on/with the objects (represent, modify,
transform, analyze, combine, and compare).
e design borrowed images from a “museum seing” and is consistent
with the distinction Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) made to describe linear
and nonlinear texts. It accommodates two exhibit halls (units): the linear
and the quadratic. Entering the hall, the tour leads to various galleries
(units) according to the central mathematical operations of functions (on
Reals): Modify, Transform, Operate and Compare two functions. Ea
gallery consists of a central piece that reﬂects the essence of the
mathematical concept at hand. e “art” is located in a few spaces,
engaging the visitor in learning a concept in diﬀerent ways: there are
interactive tasks (for problem solving), special-purpose tools (hands-on
explorations within limited scope of the gallery), interactive exercises’

generators (to improve skills), and an integrative project. As the quantity of
the “art” is too vast to be covered in a single course, decisions of oice and
sequencing should be made by the teaer. Major design eﬀorts were
invested in oﬀering interactive diagrams. An interactive diagram is a
relatively small and simple soware application (applet) built around a
preconstructed example (in contrast to tools). An interactive diagram
combines the characteristic features of a static diagram and of a tool.
3. e Algebra VisualMath e-textbook is currently being redesigned
aempting to support new teaers’ engagements with materials. It is
developed to function as Web.2 environment and includes a new set of
editing options that allow users to create courses, design their personal
version of the e-textbook, redesign the sequences, and rewrite tasks from
the authored materials.
Figure 27.3 The Graph Transformations unit of the VisualMath e-textbook: It offers a tool box; a
central piece of exposition; and three working spaces (on the left): Activity Tools, Tasks, and

Exercises.
We suggest here that a common feature of e-textbooks is that they
constitute networks of digital material that encompass the mathematical
content of a traditional textbook, but they also include diverse
supplementary tools, in particular those that support the learning of the
mathematical content. ey can have very diﬀerent structures, according to
the authors, publishers, or national policies. Nevertheless, many e-textbooks
seem to oﬀer possibilities for adaptations by teaers, for teaer
collaboration, and for building personal paths for students. Hence, we
contend that we can deﬁne an e-textbook as an evolving structured set of
digital resources, dedicated to teaing, initially designed by diﬀerent types
of authors, but open for redesign by teaers, both individually and
collectively.
e three models and examples presented illustrate these common
features and possible diﬀerences. Sésamath and VisualMath share a
perspective on how students learn mathematics: interactively, meeting
various tasks and oosing representations. Both e-textbooks propose
diﬀerent kinds of digital resources, their structure is not linear, and they can
be adapted and shaped by teaers according to their particular contexts
and teaing objectives. Interestingly, the Sésamath e-textbook was
designed solely by teaers; it did not, at least in the early stages,
incorporate mathematics education resear results (Gueudet et al., 2013a).
However, it has been continuously modiﬁed according to teaer-users’
remarks. VisualMath was designed by experts in the context of a long-term
resear and development project. In the currently designed version
teachers will be able to personalize the text by reordering or rewriting tasks
and adding new tasks and live resources. It will be important to study
paerns of use, su as oosing a path within the oﬀered original
materials, creating a “personal book” from the given materials, or adding

and dropping tasks and live resources. It will also be important to observe
whether the inserted anges and personalization will serve only the
teaers in their classrooms, or whether teaers will aempt to share their
work in online communities, as is happening with Sésamath.
We develop these examples further in subsequent sections, to investigate
the evolutions developing from the digital format, and moreover to
examine not only the features/designs of e-textbooks, but also their use by
students or teachers.

Use of E-Textbooks by Students and Teachers
Most authors agree that mathematics textbooks address both the teaer
and the learner (Love & Pimm, 1996). Rezat (2006), who allenges this
diotomy, suggests four triangular connections related to the use of any
textbook: student-textbook-mathematical knowledge; student-teaer-
textbook; teaer-textbook-mathematical knowledge (didactical); and
student-teaer-mathematical knowledge (represented by the textbook and
mediated by the teaer). A recent typology for analyzing digital programs
in mathematics by Choppin and colleagues (2014) oﬀers three themes
corresponding to the compound relations of resources, learning, and
teaing: students’ interactions with the program, curriculum uses and
adaptation, and assessment. In this section we approa general issues
illustrated by two examples: the ﬁrst focuses on student-text-knowledge,
and the second on the student-teaer-textbook triad speciﬁcally related to
digital interactive textbooks (supported by recent limited research results).
E-Textbooks and Changes in the Relationship
Between Students and Textbooks
Whilst indeed a textbook is most commonly conceptualized as an artifact
that is mediated and used primarily by the teaer, some recent studies
analyze student-textbook-mathematical knowledge relations. Engagement
with mathematics is a critical component when designing learning
experiences with e-textbooks. As it is a too large an issue to be addressed in
one section, we oose one aspect of engagement of students’ problem
solving with e-textbooks: learning with interactive visuals. Oﬀering
qualitative observations, Rezat (2013) describes how students oose tasks
for practicing on their own by identifying three utilization semes,

amongst them visual appearance similarity. Diagrams are core visual
elements of mathematics textbooks and increasingly more dominant in
reform textbooks (Love & Pimm, 1996). Yerushalmy’s (2005) review of
studies involving students’ engagement with diagrams in mathematical text
stresses that diagrams (intending to present information) are likely to
implicitly engage the viewer in meaningful interpretations. Resear of
problem solving by students suggests that diagrams can support structuring
students’ ideas by making them meaningfully visible and concrete, and they
may focus students on core aspects of the problem and engagement in their
own sense-making process (Murata, 2008). Engagement with diagrams has
also been studied by Bremigan (2005) who found that the modiﬁcation of
given diagrams or the construction of new diagrams in students’ solutions
are related to success in problem-solving. Naaliev and Yerushalmy (2013)
studied structures of design and aﬀordances of interactive diagrams and
analyzed students’ problem solving experiences with e-textbooks. Window
3 (below) offers an example:
Window 3—Students’ Engagements With Interactive Tasks of the
VisualMath E-Textbook
Yaniv, Lior, and Daniel, 13–14-year-old algebra students, were observed
while solving an unfamiliar task in the Linear Function modeling unit. e
task aims at understanding properties of linear graphs that are
mathematical models of animated motion. e diagram consists of two
representations of motion by seven cars: a simulation, and a hot-linked
position-time graph. e graph and the simulation are only partially linked:
motion occurs simultaneously on the simulation and on the graph but there
is no color mat, so the identiﬁcation process requires extracting data from
the simulation and the graph in order to link them.
Students began their work by activating the animation and observing the

motion of the cars (whi they called “dots”) as well as the related
animated dots on the graphs. ey ran through the entire race several
times, then identiﬁed a conﬂict between the two animated representations:
one “car” out of the six dots does not move, but all seven dots on the
graphs are in motion! ey stopped the animation and aempted to retell
the story of the motion by viewing the given static components and
identified the constant function graph that describes the static state.
Figure 27.4 A student working on the Linear Function modeling unit.
Yaniv:
Time doesn’t pass for it [for the dot].
Lior:
Time is constant—doesn’t move.
Yaniv:
Time passed for the dot but it [the dot] doesn’t use it because it
doesn’t have speed.
Lior:
No, the time does move. e dot doesn’t move during that
time… For all of them… time is passing but it [points at a dot
along the path] simply doesn’t move during that time.
Daniel:
Maybe. It doesn’t run. Time always anges but there is a
common starting point and then time starts. And it is
impossible to say that because it doesn’t move its time stops.
Lior:
Ah! I know, because in… wait a minute… in this dimension, the
dimension of the time it is impossible to control.
You can’t control because it is the x-axis and here time always

Daniel:
moves and can’t stand still. Only on the y-axis can you ange
[the position].
In the discussion the students started to treat the graph as a description of
a process taking place over time. ey discussed the graph in the static state
and began interpreting it. ey reaed a conclusion about time as an
independent variable: time always anges and it cannot be stopped, and
the passage of time cannot be controlled. e work they performed was
mental: formulating hypotheses and reaching conclusions.
Next, they activated the animation to verify the hypotheses and to
oose the appropriate graph for the dot that does not move. Although
they reaed the right conclusion and seemed to understand the situation,
they were still surprised when they identiﬁed a constant function line as the
graph that mated the static dot. ey continued to explain the correct
albeit peculiar result they arrived at regarding the static point, and
continued to explore relations between motion and distance-time graphs.
By imagining rather than executing motion they learned the two central
pieces of knowledge concerning motion: rate of ange and directional
motion.
While it was expected that students would engage more due to the
animation, and would experiment and try out diﬀerent answers, a
noteworthy ﬁnding in the demonstrated problem-solving process is the
unusually extensive mental work, encompassing an entire cycle of logical
argumentation 
(raising 
assumptions, 
deriving 
conclusions 
through
conjectures and refutations), whi eventually led to the solution. Our
evidence suggests that interactive tasks oﬀer engaging reading by
providing readers with explicit options for manipulating given examples
and especially diagrams (Naaliev & Yerushalmy, 2013). Although
aracteristics of problem-solving processes of complex allenges cannot
be aributed to a single factor, we were able to elicit the central role of the

boundaries, designed into interactive tasks, in the processes of interactive
learning. Whilst live-learning resources are oen empowered by aractive
video clips and animation-based demonstrations, we found that important
ﬁne tuning should be considered in the design of e-textbook tasks to
include 1) a well-planned interactive example that presents the necessary
repertoire of examples that would provide cognitive support (su as the
conﬂicting animations in the example above) rather than cognitive load; 2)
partial control and partial links between representations that help to
capture 
interesting “views,” 
but 
also 
a 
balance 
between 
the
experimentations and the analytic phases. More generally, students’
interactive learning of algebra occurred whilst reading and solving tasks of
interactive text that we studied in a long-term resear project. e
interactive 
tasks 
oﬀered 
experimentation 
with 
multiple-linked-
representations that reﬂect ba the student’s actions. We have evidence
that these tasks led to processes of personalization of the text and to the
development of main mathematical ideas within the boundaries designed in
the interactive diagrams. The design of the diagrams organized and directed
the process of development of the students’ knowledge, but the students
controlled the task, produced the given presentation of the task, and
formulated new questions.
Beyond the allenging problem solving, other interactive scenarios that
e-textbooks are oen designed to support are dynamic expositions (as the
one described in Window 4) and exercises for practice. Dynamic exposition
is designed to present an example and to aﬀord limited user control: for
example, dragging a given ﬁgure or running a video or simulation are
frequent elements used in either teaers’ illustrations or students’ own ﬁrst
exploration of a new term. Dynamic exposition contributes to the learner’s
awareness of whi features (of an object) make it a speciﬁc example, and
whi features can be varied to form a class of similar or related examples.
e widespread use of examples in mathematics textbooks serves as a

means of communication and mediation between learners and ideas. If
examples are well selected, the variations between examples are the means
by whi students can distinguish between essential and redundant features
(Goldenberg & Mason, 2008, Watson & Shipman, 2008). One of the unique
features of the computerized environment lies in the possibility for
systematically creating multiple related examples. In contrast, the design
assumption in regard to exercises is that they are performed aer students
have constructed correct (though not necessarily complete) concept images
and concept deﬁnitions (Tall & Vinner, 1981). e strength of tenology in
this phase of learning includes the large quantity of exercises generated
semi-randomly (random within constraints) for practice, and the diﬀerent
types of feedba that can be designed to support skills practice with
understanding, even in domains that traditionally oﬀer rote exercises. e
self-generation and analysis of examples and practice with understanding
are two central topics currently within the scope of the design of
assessment systems that could be embedded within interactive e-textbooks
(but are beyond the scope of this chapter).
E-Textbooks and Changes in the Relationship
Between Teachers and Textbooks
In the previous section, we discussed ways in whi e-textbooks may
ange students’ work. Now, we will consider potential anges to the role
of the teacher, and student-teacher interactions, in class and out of class.
We adhere to the theoretical perspective of the documentational
approa (Gueudet & Troue, 2009a). is means that we focus on the
interactions between teaers and the resources that they use in/for their
teaing. Learning from Pepin & Gueudet (2013) and amending their
categories for our use, we categorize teaer e-resources in the following

way:
e-text resources: e.g. e-textbooks, online teaer curricular guidelines,
Web sites, and online student worksheets;
e-based “material” resources: e.g. interactive whiteboards, computer
software, applets;
e-based works and exanges: e.g. mail exanges with colleagues,
pupils, and parents; pupil work submied electronically (su as online
homework).
According to Adler (2000), a resource is anything likely to re-source the
work of the teaer. Teaers sear for resources, retain some resources
and discard others, modify them, associate them, set them up in class—and
as they perform this documentational work, they develop a structured
resource system (Gueudet & Trouche, 2009a).
Understanding the modiﬁcations resulting from the e-textbook means
understanding how a teaer’s integration and appropriation of the e-
textbook in the teaer’s resource system modiﬁes this system, and the
implications for the teacher’s work and professional development.
Window 4—Vera’s Use of Sésamath E-Textbook
Vera teaes mathematics at a middle sool. She uses the Sésamath e-
textbook (Window 1), amongst other textbooks, for all her classes. With the
video projector, she shows extracts of the e-textbook in class, including
lesson texts, animations with Dynamic Geometry soware, and interactive
exercises.

Figure 27.5 Solving an interactive exercise in class.
Vera also programs exercise sessions on LaboMEP (Window 1 and
Window 5), whi the students can do in class, but mostly complete as
homework. She has access to the individual and collective summary of their
activity, and uses it to plan remedial activities for selected students.
Her grade 6 students have the Sésamath paper textbook as their common
text. However, for this class Vera does not follow the curriculum plan of the
Sésamath textbook (whi is directly transferred from the oﬃcial national
curriculum). She has her own textbook, Helice (English translation: helix),
and follows its spiral progression, hence deepening pupils’ understanding by
revisiting particular topics (Gueudet et al., 2013b).
In a teaer’s resource system, e-textbooks are associated with other
resources: resources linked with the projection in class (the computer and
video projector in the classroom, the screen, sometimes an interactive
whiteboard, Dynamic Geometry soware); resources linked with the
preparation of worksheets to be handed out to students (ﬁles on the
teaer’s computer that are printed out and handed to students). Other

resources are linked with out-of-class work: speciﬁc sessions that can be
programmed for the students, and a Virtual Learning Environment.
Considering these anges in the teaer’s resource system evidences
anges in the teaer’s activity and proposes potential further anges
(which would require further investigation).
Designing worksheets for students with a summary of the main
properties, and “holes” to be ﬁlled in (in class) is certainly common practice.
is practice can be supported if the teaer has access to the textbook’s.
doc or. odt ﬁles. Similarly, the use of projection devices is frequent, whi
can also be fostered by the use of an e-textbook, whi constitutes, both for
the teaer and the students, a shared reference easy to project. e
collective solving of exercises by the whole class, and managed by the
teaer, does not require an e-textbook. However, students seem more
motivated when an interactive exercise is displayed (see Figure 27.5). In
terms of out-of-class work, e-textbooks can oﬀer possibilities, for example,
for diﬀerentiation (aending to individual pupils’ needs) and eing
work. With particular programs linked to e-textbooks, homework can be
eed by the teaer out of class (see Figure 27.6, the summary provided
for ea pupil by LaboMEP), and the results and formative assessments
communicated to individual pupils. Supplementary work can be provided
in diﬀerentiated form and diﬀerent homework can be provided to
individual students. Moreover, students seem more motivated to work on
interactive exercises, and may be more engaged in related homework—at
least in the present context of relative novelty of this kind of digital
material. Taking into account the needs of individual students, or particular
student groups can be considered an important dimension for the quality of
mathematics teaing and management of pupil/teaer work. Whilst we
do not claim here that these possibilities are actually used by many teaers
—this would require further investigation—the e-textbook certainly oﬀers
interesting possibilities in this respect. Nevertheless, in the cases we studied

(Gueudet & Troue, 2009a, Gueudet et al., 2013a), we noticed that the use
of the e-textbook was linked to the provision of diﬀerentiated tasks. In the
perspective of documentational genesis we propose that this can be
interpreted as knowledge development: using the e-textbook fosters the
development of professional knowledge about the management of tasks in
a heterogeneous class.
Figure 27.6 Following the work of a student in LaboMEP.
We also observed, in the case of an e-textbook being designed by a
group of teaers (e.g. Sésamath), that the users/teaers were able to
introduce/suggest modiﬁcations to the content, and in this way participate
in the design process of the e-textbook. Evidently, not all suggestions by
users yield modiﬁcations to the content (shared by the Sésamath authors)—
in particular because not all the suggestions are relevant, but also because
continuous modiﬁcations are time-consuming for the authors (Trgalovà &
Jahn, 2013). Considering various potential contributions and contributors to
the e-textbook, how can the quality and the coherence of an e-textbook be
examined and defined? We discuss this in the next section.

E-Textbooks and Changing Research Categories:
Towards a Reconceptualization of Textbook
Quality and Coherence
In this apter we have described the design of e-textbooks, developed a
working deﬁnition of e-textbooks, and identiﬁed three diﬀerent
types/models of e-textbooks. We have also described their use by teaers
and students. We have provided evidence that an e-textbook can be
collaboratively designed, and that its content can be coauthored, in terms of
modiﬁcations, by its users. ese developments imply major evolutions in
how textbooks operate in sools and raise questions about how (a) the
“quality”; and (b) the “coherence” of textbooks ange as textbooks
become e-textbooks. What does mathematical quality/coherence mean, if
the teaer can ange the e-textbook elements? It is clear that these
evolutions require serious consideration, and possibly a reconceptualization
of the notions of “quality” and “coherence” with respect to e-textbooks.
A Reconceptualization of Quality
Quality of Textbooks
e quality of textbooks has been the subject of many studies, not least
because they play a vital role in educational practice and curricula provide a
“crucial link between standards and accountability measures” (Confrey &
Stohl, 2004). Evaluation studies can provide information on how eﬀective a
particular curriculum is, and for whom and under what conditions. In the
United States a National Resear Council commiee (2004) examined a
large array of evaluation studies. e commiee did not evaluate the
curriculum materials directly (or indeed rank particular programs), neither
did it provide criteria for evaluating textbooks, but it identiﬁed four types

of evaluation studies: (1) content analyses (examining the content of
curriculum materials: e.g. accuracy, depth of coverage, logical sequencing of
topics, etc.); (2) comparative studies (comparing two or more curricula and
their eﬀects on student learning); (3) case studies (documenting how
programs and components of curricula of a particular curriculum play out
in classrooms); and (4) synthesis studies (summarizing several evaluation
studies across a particular curriculum). is work highlights the importance
of the quality of curriculum materials.
Concerning more speciﬁc studies for the examination of the notion of
“quality,” selected authors consider a macro level and analyze quality with
a more “global” appreciation; e.g. Charalambous, Delaney, Hsu, and Mesa
(2010) propose a “horizontal” analysis of the textbook where the textbook
“is examined as a whole, as part of tenology in the educational system”
(p. 119). Studies on this level include those that focus on general textbook
characteristics (e.g. Schmidt et al., 1997, Stevenson & Bartsch, 1992).
Other studies consider a micro level; they analyze textbooks for quality,
according to their particular aims (e.g. Oesterholm & Bergqvist, 2013).
Oen, in these studies a single mathematical concept is examined (e.g. Li,
2000, Mesa, 2010), viewing the textbook as an “environment for
construction of knowledge” (Herbst, 1995, p. 3). Charalambous and
colleagues (2010) would call this a “vertical analysis.” ey developed a
three-layered framework to analyze textbooks (from three countries) to
investigate the learning opportunities oﬀered by textbooks. In our view,
learning opportunities are closely linked to “knowledge construction” and
to “learning mathematics with understanding.” During the past decades
there has been mu concern and discussion about learning opportunities
linked to students’ conceptual understanding and with respect to students’
developing expertise in terms of mathematical thinking, reasoning, and
problem-solving (e.g. National Resear Council, 1989, Hiebert &
Carpenter, 1992, Hiebert et al., 1997).

Quality of Online Resources
Assessing the quality of online resources is a complex issue. Several
resear works have considered the issue of quality of online resources in
mathematics and in science, in particular with a focus on their potential for
investigation. e Intergeo project (Kortenkamp et al., 2009) concerns
resources using Dynamic Geometry, and the resear introduces nine
dimensions for studying the quality of su a resource for inquiry: metadata
(names of the authors, theme, date etc.), tenical aspect, mathematical
content, instrumental content, added-value of dynamic geometry, didactical
implementation (learning objectives, adaptation to diﬀerent kinds of pupils
etc.), pedagogical implementation (organization in the class, management
of diﬀerent parts etc.), integration in a teaing sequence, and ergonomic
aspects (ease of identiﬁcation of the diﬀerent texts, links etc.). Moreover,
considering the importance of a resource’s adequacy with respect to the
users’ needs, Intergeo has designed an assessment of quality by the users
themselves (Trgalovà, Jahn, & Soury-Lavergne, 2009). is assessment can
potentially lead to a further design of the resource, by and involving the
users. Drawing on this work and on other studies in science education,
Bueno-Ravel et al. (2009) propose seven dimensions for assessing the
quality of an online resource for inquiry-based science learning and
teaing: 
scientiﬁc 
aspects, 
scaﬀolding 
inquiry 
aspects, 
possible
customization, ergonomics, oice of media, possible involvement of the
users in the resource design, and possibilities offered for collective work.
In line with the move from traditional curriculum resources to online
resources, the notion of “resource evaluation” has been replaced by the
notion of “resource quality” (see Pepin et al., 2013b). Recent resear about
the quality of online resources for the teaing and learning of mathematics
(Troue et al., 2013) stresses in particular the importance of the ease of
appropriation of the resource by the user. e involvement of users in the

resource design, more generally the possibility of communication between
the designers and the users of an online resource, can thus be retained as an
important dimension for quality. is dimension can be related with the
issue of connectivity (Hoyles et al., 2010), whi encompasses in particular
the potential for creating virtual communities. We draw on this idea to
propose a reconceptualization of quality, in the case of e-textbooks.
Quality of E-Textbooks
It can be assumed that e-textbooks combine the features of textbooks and
of online resources. We thus suggest studying the quality of e-textbooks by
combining the two perspectives evoked earlier.
Connectivity is certainly an important dimension for the quality of an e-
textbook. e potential to create virtual communities, connecting users and
users (both teaers and students), as well as users and designers, can be
considered as connectivity at a macro level. Moreover, at this macro level,
the connectivity of the e-textbook can also mean that it actually interacts
with other resources via Web links, or on a platform for example (see
Window 5). More generally, this macro level for connectivity could include
the following criteria, whi we group under two headings, in order to
assess the quality of an e-textbook:

Existing Connections
Connections between resources provided by the e-textbook;
Connections to other resources outside the e-textbook (e.g. Geogebra);
Connections across grades;
Connections to the national curriculum.

Potential connections afforded by the e-textbook
Connections between e-textbook and teaer resource system (for
synergistic effects);
Connections in terms of teaer collective work, e.g. connecting
teaer resource system in a sool, or professional community (see
LaboMEP in Window 5);
Connections between teacher and students;
Connections to “larger” teaer needs/relevance (e.g. e-textbook as a
means to prepare lessons) or pupils (e.g. revision for tests)
Connections between teaers using the textbook and the authors of
the textbook.
Moreover, connectivity can also be considered at a micro level
concerning speciﬁc mathematics content. At this level, it means that the e-
textbook oﬀers diﬀerent kinds of articulated materials, and oﬀers
connections and links between diﬀerent features. We consider these at two
levels:

Existing connections
Connections between different topic areas;
Connections between diﬀerent semiotic representations (text, ﬁgures,
static and dynamic), in order to develop a ﬂexible awareness of the
different facets of the mathematical content);
Connections between diﬀerent soware for carrying out the same
task, in order to develop a flexible use of technology.

Potential connections afforded by the e-textbook
Connecting diﬀerent concepts of a same conceptual ﬁeld (Vergnaud,
1996);
Connecting different strategies for problem solving;
Connecting diﬀerent moments of appropriating a given concept (e.g.
spiral progression).
In Window 5 we show selected connections in the case of the Sésamath
textbook.
Window 5—Sésamath Textbook Connectivity
SÉSAMATH TEXTBOOKS, CONNECTIVITY AT THE MICRO LEVEL
Ea exercise in the Sésamath e-textbooks is connected with
“complements.” ese complements can include, for example, Dynamic
Geometry constructions to be done by the students, or with interactive
helps (dynamic presentations of a solving method). us, we can claim that
the Sésamath textbooks oﬀer a lot of possible connections between
representations.
At the same time, in previous works (Gueudet et al., 2013b) analyzing the
Sésamath grade 6 textbook we have observed that the primary-secondary
transition was not really taken into account, since the authors were not
familiar with primary sool curriculum—and this is an important missing
connection, a criterion to retain in assessing quality. We have also noticed
that the organization of the book, according to the oﬃcial curriculum
entries, does not favor connections between mathematical topics.
SÉSAMATH TEXTBOOK WITHIN LABOMEP, CONNECTIVITY AT THE MACRO LEVEL
e Sésamath e-textbooks are part of a wider Virtual Learning

Environment, LaboMEP (see Window 1). Once connected in LaboMEP, the
teaer has access to all Sésamath resources (le column, Figure 27.7),
including the e-textbooks. e teaer can oose extracts of the e-
textbook su as lessons or exercises and insert them into a personal session
she/he is building (central column). All his/her sessions are recorded and
saved in his/her personal space (right column). Ea session can include
extracts from the textbook and also online exercises, geometric
constructions with Dynamic Geometry soware, or even external Web
links. us the Sésamath textbooks are connected, via LaboMEP, to a very
large set of potential resources. e teaer can also share his/her sessions
with other colleagues, groups of colleagues can design a shared resources
repertoire that appears as shared resources in the le column; s/he can also
communicate with Sésamath members. But LaboMEP is above all a
communication tool between the teaer and his/her students, via the
sessions programmed by the teacher for them.
Figure 27.7 LaboMEP, teacher environment for programming sessions.

Connectivity is considered here as a feature of digital content.
Nevertheless, in particular at the micro level, it suggests the possibility of
deﬁning a new, more general notion of connectivity. Hiebert et al. (1997)
argue that “learning mathematics with understanding” is linked to “making
connections.” “Connectedness” is not a new idea in the field of education, or
indeed in mathematics education. Hiebert and Carpenter (1992), for
example, believe that it is essential to make connections in mathematics if
one intends to develop mathematical understanding. ey emphasize the
importance of learning with and for understanding. According to them,
understanding can be defined as:
[T]he way information is represented and structured. A mathematical idea or fact is understood
if its mental representation is part of a network of representations. e degree of understanding
is determined by the number and strength of the connections.
(Hiebert & Carpenter, 1992, p. 67)
e digital means can be used, within an e-textbook, to provide a network
of representations. Nevertheless, su possibilities also exist in traditional
textbooks. ese textbooks can also foster the development of connections
by the students, by oﬀering ri mathematical tasks. It is indeed important
that students have “frequent opportunities to engage in dynamic
mathematical activity that is grounded in ri, worthwhile mathematical
tasks” (Henningsen & Stein, 1997, p. 525), and it is argued that this is an
essential component for understanding in order for connections to be made
by the learner (Hiebert et al., 1997). us, we suggest that the idea of
connectivity at the micro level could be extended beyond the case of digital
textbooks, to deﬁne a kind of “mathematical connectivity,” whi could be
an essential feature for quality of any textbook. is requires nevertheless
further studies, complementing this chapter.

Coherence of the Design and Coherence for Use
Similar 
to 
our 
considerations 
earlier, 
we 
propose 
to
reconsider/conceptualize the notion of “coherence.” e coherence of a
textbook can encompass many diﬀerent aspects, as pointed out in Gueudet
et al. (2013a): correctness of the mathematical content; consistency with the
national curriculum; correctness of the sequencing of notions, of the
articulation between the course and the exercises; etc. Yerushalmy and
Chazan (2008), drawing on Tall (2002), propose that coherence involves
how the character of the objects of study is handled.
We want to emphasize here three speciﬁc dimensions of e-textbooks that
should be taken into account to evaluate their coherence.
1. Initial design coherence: In contrast to traditional textbooks that are
oen designed by a small number/team of experts (e.g. a coordinate
designer ooses a number of “acquainted” colleagues; see Gueudet et
al., 2013b), e-textbooks are commonly designed by a larger collective
(e.g. by teaers working together, or teaers and inspectors/teaer
educators working together). In the case of a small expert teams, these
typically meet on a regular basis to insure the coherence of the process
of design, whereas a large team of designers (as in the Sésamath case),
not osen but volunteered, is not likely to ever meet as a whole, but
divides the design into compartmentalized tasks for ea subteam (e.g.
division according to topic areas). Hence the strategies for “insuring
coherence” become crucial for e-textbooks with large designer teams.
In this case, coherence can also mean that “the individual
mathematical 
intentions 
of 
the 
individual 
authors, 
their
epistemological stances, are well coordinated” (Gueudet et al., 2013a,
p. 328). Assessing the coherence of su a textbook requires
identifying these intentions and stances to evaluate their coordination,

the production, during the design process, of a shared intention
shaping the choices of content.
2. Product coherence (strongly linked to quality): Yerushalmy and
Chazan (2008) show how tenological tools (e.g. graphing tools,
symbol manipulators, spreadsheets) carry with them particular
orientations toward the representations of function used in algebra
classrooms. Using the notion of “discontinuities” (Tall, 2002),
Yerushalmy and Chazan suggest that algebra curricula must negotiate
the discontinuities between these symbol systems. us, the rollout of
students’ use of tenological tools can be in conﬂict with or support
textbook expositions. is is a diﬀerent sense of “coherence”
(sequencing of topics and uses of tenology) compared to ones used
with traditional print curricula: for example, graphing tools can oﬀer
diﬀerent aﬀordances in terms of diﬀerent views of equations that may
or may not be in tension with textbook exposition. Linking to this, it
can be argued that e-textbooks (whi are supported by and designed
for particular tenological tools) can provide a particular/diﬀerent
coherence, combining diﬀerent views and practices (for a particular
topic area), diﬀerent sequencing of ideas within that topic area, and
making accessible (through tenology) to learners diﬀerent ideas,
perhaps by using diﬀerent representations and hence diﬀerent views
or notions. Perhaps the integrated design of soware and exposition in
e-textbook environments has the potential to lead to greater
coherence.
3. Coherence-in-use: In terms of implications for learning, the most
important issue linked to coherence is likely to be the “coherence” of
what teaers propose to their students, drawing on the
textbook/curriculum materials (Pepin, 2012). As several authors point
out (e.g. Shield & Dole, 2013, Lloyd, 2009) analyzing textbooks and
other curriculum materials (e.g. in professional development activities)

provide only limited support for the development of teaers’
pedagogic practice, and coherence-in-use is dependent on how
teaers actually use the resources. In many cases “teaer guides”
provide guidelines of how authors/designer teams consider the use of
the textbooks, and these guidelines link to the designers’ pedagogical
intentions.
We explain and exemplify the three dimensions in Window 6. e initial
design coherence might be studied drawing on texts actually inserted in the
book, or associated with it, whi present the authors’ stance and their
didactical objectives.
Window 6—Sésamath Textbook Coherence, the Authors Didactical Choices
e Sésamath e-textbook for grade 6 starts with a classical table of contents
complemented by the line of buons above the text, labeled by the apter
numbers, and displaying the title of the apter when the mouse is on the
buon. en two pages present oices of structure (Figure 27.8), in terms
of nature of activities proposed. Two other pages present the numerical
complement present on ea page. ree pages propose advice to the
pupils, for the use of the textbook. us, we contend that an autonomous
use of the textbook by pupils seems to be one objective of the authors.
e apters correspond to the titles of the oﬃcial curriculum (e.g.
fractions, symmetry), except for two apters dedicated to the articulation
with primary sool (N0 about integers and G0 about geometry), and one
“synthesis apter” that proposes more elaborate problems (for example
“complex tasks,” as required by the oﬃcial curriculum). ere is also a
dictionary (lexique) at the “end” of the book: pupils can refer to it, if they
meet an expression or word they do not know. is is particularly useful
for mathematical language/expressions. e organization of ea apter is

classical (except for the synthesis apter): introductory activities, course,
direct application exercises, exercises, multiple oice (self-testing) and
mathematical games. A very important oice of the authors (also aligned
with the institutional expectations) is an important use of information and
communications tenology (ICT), in the introductory activities and in
exercises (identified by a special color).
Figure 27.8 Sésamath grade 6 e-textbook, explanations about the structure of the textbook.
E-textbooks can also be analyzed by studying the design process itself
and following the oices of content and structure: see Sabra & Troue
(2011), or Gueudet, Sabra, Pepin & Troue (in press). However, su
studies would require speciﬁc design and data collection strategies. One
way to study the design of an e-textbook would be to use design-based
methods, because the e-text will be a document that is constantly anging
based on an iterative process. Further, the coherence of the design can be
studied by analyzing (a) the book’s content, searing for didactic oices

common to diﬀerent sections and diﬀerent components of the book; and (b)
the “e-traces” le by authors/author team: e.g. traces of the design process
and traces of the “design contract” (what did the designer team do to
ensure the coherence of the e-textbook?) At this macro level, assessing
coherence requires to consider a collection of tasks/text, typically a whole
textbook for a given grade. Leaning on the works of the 22nd ICMI study
on task design (Margolinas, 2013, eme C), coherence of su published
collections is related to “the overall philosophy of the collection … beliefs
about the nature of mathematics and what it means to do or learn
mathematics vary and are manifested in the nature of the texts and tasks”
(p. 13).
Product coherence and coherence-in-use are closely connected. Whilst an
analysis in terms of product coherence may show the e-textbook’s
aﬀordances, for example, to favor a particular learning path (e.g. a
hyperlink proposes another notion of the hyperlinked word), the ﬁnal use
of the e-textbook also depends on the teaers’ oices (e.g. of tasks in the
book). Coherence clearly depends on these two connected factors: the
aﬀordances of the book (e.g. the learning paths/trajectories) and the
teaer’s particular use. In the recent resear literature (e.g. Cohen,
Raudenbush, & Loewenberg Ball, 2003, Charalambous et al., 2010, Cai,
Wang, & Ding, 2014) the term coherence is oen linked to the coherence of
instruction (e.g. Hiebert et al., 2003, Stigler & Hiebert, 1999), whi was
seen more prominently in Japanese lessons, for example, than in U.S.
classroom instruction—this links to our notion of coherence-in-use.
Moreover, and linking coherence-in-use to product coherence, coherence of
curriculum resources/materials and textbooks, as we see it, is related to
sequencing of topics (for instructional purposes), for example learning
trajectory/ies (e.g. “curriculum coherence,” Smidt & Huang, 2012), to
instructional issues. Hence, in our discussion of coherence, we refer more
particularly to coherence of e-textbooks with respect to sequencing of

topics, learning trajectories, and instructional issues.
Recently, Cai et al. (2014) conducted a study in whi they investigated
Chinese and U.S. mathematics teaers’ views about instructional
coherence. ey distinguish between “surface” (e.g. designed in advance of
the lesson) and “real” coherence (aieved in the lesson) in instruction (as
would apply for traditional as well as e-textbooks). Interestingly, studying
textbooks and student thinking for lesson preparation were two of the
most-mentioned approaes by Chinese teaers in order to aieve
coherence at the lesson design stage. Whilst emerging classroom events
may disrupt this surface coherence, it is still part of the development of real
coherence. e study points to two kinds of instructional coherence:
“predesigned”; and “emerging”/”situational,” and teaers are said to need
both for real coherence. is view goes hand-in-hand with our
understandings of coherence in e-textbooks, whi is linked to instructional
issues, and it suggests to reconceptualize coherence from a “dynamic, co-
constructive and situational perspective” (Cai et al., 2014, p. 25).

Conclusion
In this apter, we worked towards a deﬁnition of e-textbooks, identiﬁed
and described three diﬀerent model types, and analyzed their design and
use. Moreover, we have argued that these new tenological artifacts have
the potential to ange traditional relationships between student and
textbook, teaer and textbook, and between students and teaers, as well
as categories used by educational researers. e e-textbooks’ aﬀordances
oﬀer new possibilities for student and teaer agency. is raises questions
about diﬀerences and similarities of student/teaer agency, and how they
play out at different levels/stages of mathematics learning. At the university
level, teaers (and perhaps students) have the ability—and in many
countries the possibility—to develop their own teaing/learning paths
through the topic area, and they are likely to beneﬁt from the collaboration
opportunities oﬀered by e-textbooks. e situation may be very diﬀerent at
the primary sool level, as primary-sool teaers are oen not
specialized in mathematics and are more likely to rely on the textbook (e.g.
to be “assured” that their teaing is in line with governmental guidance, in
order 
to 
provide 
an “accepted” 
coherence 
in 
their 
learning
paths/opportunities for pupils). We propose this ﬁrst limitation of the
potential impact of e-textbooks: exploiting their potential requires a certain
level of expertise, and the provision of speciﬁc professional development
programs to support the development of this expertise.
In his article, Friesen (2013) leans on Kuhn (1962) to consider that
textbooks, in line with their traditional pedagogic and didactic function,
tend to present accumulation of knowledge rather than shis of paradigms.
Friesen (2013) asks: “What is it that textbooks provide pedagogically and
epistemologically, besides a reminder of the past?” (p. 498). Textbooks
cannot provide access to the process of production of the scientiﬁc
knowledge/concepts they present. However, students and teaers can—

collectively or individually—work and elaborate on e-textbook contents.
is certainly anges the relationships between students, teaers, and
textbooks. But does it really aﬀect the teaing and learning processes, the
educational institution at large? Friesen (2013) sees the textbook as “an
evolving pedagogical form,” and considers that its components anged
“not so mu through tenological innovation as in synrony with larger
cultural and epistemological developments” (p. 498). With reference to e-
textbooks, this begs the question whether the e-textbook anges the user,
or the user’s intentions/epistemological beliefs ange the e-textbook. In
line with our resear results, we consider that any ange happens in
interaction between user/s and the book (see Yerushalmy & Chazan, 2002,
2008; Gueudet et al., 2012), hence our phrasing of “design-in-use” (Pepin et
al., 2013a).
At the same time we concur with Friesen (2013) that textbook features
“provide an indispensable animating didactic function,” and that textbooks
are an “evolving pedagogical form,” to point to the synergy between e-
textbooks and users. Having said that, we consider that we have
contributed to an understanding of e-textbooks by comparing “old” and
“new” designs of e-textbooks: for the moment we investigate new designs
of e-textbooks as compared to previous designs. at means that we view
the developments as stages of evolution rather than revolution. We
consider that we do not yet have suﬃcient examples of resear studies
that have examined the teaing, learning, and designs of e-textbook
communities, and hence the new ideas and concepts, including
terminologies, are still vague. However, we have aempted to provide
reconceptualizations of categories and concepts that we propose here for
researers, practitioners, and policy makers: from static quality to dynamic
quality; from design (and implementation) to design-in-use; from teaers
making connections (for their students), to e-textbooks making/providing
connections for teaers (also amongst teaers/colleagues/principals) and

students (and parents); from static coherence to coherence-in-use; from
individual design and use to collective design and use—all due to the
aﬀordances of a anging digital environment and the accompanying
(potentially) changing practices and mindsets.
If teaers become more engaged in the development of e-textbooks,
they will develop, and redevelop, their own categories for the
ange/development of the e-textbook, and more generally for the design
of their teaing. Hence, we consider that a new paradigm in terms of
teaing is accompanied by, and necessitates, the development/design of
new books, tools, and pedagogically innovative ideas.
However, the existence of new artifacts is not enough. Tenology had
always created excessive expectations in the ﬁeld of education, but
tenology alone has not yet produced sustained anges in education.
ere are, however, several examples where a material ange in object
resulted in the development of new paradigms. is is what happened to
the picture album when it was transformed into a digital folder, causing
pictures to play a completely new visual, social, semiotic role. Music (as
text), aer it was converted to digital formats, anged from a passive
market commodity into a creative, engaged process. Even if at present the
only noticeable beneﬁt of digital textbooks is the fact that the object is
eap, eﬃcient, and easy to use anywhere, the examples reviewed in this
apter (see for example the Sésamath experience) suggest that more
substantial allenges are just around the corner, opening new ways for
teacher collaboration and creativity.

References
Adler, J. (2000). Conceptualising resources as a theme for teaer education. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 3, 205–224.
Bremigan, E. G. (2005). An analysis of diagram modiﬁcation and construction in students’ solutions
to applied calculus problems. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 36(3), 248–277.
Brown, M. (2009). e teaer-tool relationship: theorising the design and use of curriculum
materials. In J. Remillard, G. Lloyd, & B. Herbel-Eisenmann (Eds.), Mathematics teaers at
work: connecting curriculum materials and classroom instruction (pp. 17–36). New York:
Routledge.
Bueno-Ravel, L., Ferrière, H., Forest, D., Gueudet, G., Laubé, S., Kuster, Y., & Sensevy, G. (2009).
Tenologies, resources, and inquiry-based science teaing. A literature review. Deliverable 5.1,
Mind the Gap FP7 project 217725 (p. 32). Retrieved from www.migaproject.eu.
Cai, J., Wang, T., & Ding, M. (2014). How do exemplary Chinese and US Mathematics teaers view
instructional coherence? Educational Studies in Mathematics, 85, 265–280.
Cartier, P., & Chemla, K. (2000). La création des noms mathématiques: l’exemple de Bourbaki. In D.
Rousseau, & M. Morvan (Eds.), La dénomination, le Temps des savoirs (Vol. 1, pp. 153–170). Paris:
IHES.
Charalambous, C. Y., Delaney, S., Hsu, H. Y., & Mesa, V. (2010). A comparative analysis of the
addition and subtraction of fractions in textbooks from three countries. Mathematical inking
and Learning, 12, 117–151.
Chazan, D., & Yerushalmy, M. (2003). On appreciating the cognitive complexity of sool algebra:
Resear on algebra learning and directions of curricular ange. In J. Kilpatri, D. Sier, &
G. Martin (Eds.), A Resear Companion to the Principles and Standards for Sool
Mathematics. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Chazan, D., & Yerushalmy, M. (2014). e future of mathematics textbooks: ramiﬁcations of
tenological ange. In M. Stoei (Ed.), Media and Education in the Digital Age: a critical
introduction. New York: Peter Lang.
Choppin, J., Carson, C., Borys, Z., Cerosalei, C., & Gillis, R. (2014). A typology for analyzing digital
curricula in mathematics education. International Journal of Education in Mathematics, Science

and Technology, 2(1), 11–25.
Cohen, D. K., Raudenbush, S. W., & Loewenberg Ball, D. (2003). Resources, instruction and resear.
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 25(2), 119–142.
Collopy, R.M.B. (2003). Curriculum materials as a professional development tool: How a
mathematics textbook aﬀected two teaers’ learning. Elementary Sool Journal, 103(3), 287–
311.
Confrey, J., & Stohl, V. (Eds.) (2004). On evaluating curricular eﬀectiveness: Judging the quality of
K–12 mathematics evaluations. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Drucker, P. (1992). The age of discontinuity: Guidelines to our changing society. New York: Harper &
Row.
Fan, L. (2013). Textbook resear as scientiﬁc resear: towards a common ground on issues and
methods of resear on mathematics textbooks. ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education, 45(5), 765–777.
Fan, L., Zhu, Y., & Miao, Z. (2013). Textbook resear in mathematics education: development status
and directions. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(5), 633–646.
Friesen, N. (2013). e past and likely future of an educational form: A textbook case. Educational
researcher, 42, 498–508.
Goldenberg, P., & Mason, J. (2008). Spreading light on and with example spaces. Educational Studies
in Mathematics, 69(2) 183–194.
Gould, P. (2011). Electronic mathematics textbooks: Old wine in new skins? Paper presented at
APEC-Tsukuba International Conference V (Tsukuba Session), Japan. Retrieved from
www.criced.tsukuba.ac.jp/math/apec/apec2011/19-20/02_PeterGould-paper.pdf.
Guedj, D. (1985). Niolas Bourbaki, collective mathematician an interview with Claude Chevalley.
The Mathematical Intelligencer, 7(2), 18–22.
Gueudet, G., Pepin, B., & Troue, L. (Eds.) (2012). From text to ‘lived’ resources: Mathematics
curriculum materials and teacher development. New York: Springer.
Gueudet, G., Pepin, B., & Troue, L. (2013a). Textbook design and digital resources. In C.
Margolinas (Ed.), Designing and using tasks for learning mathematics, 22nd ICMI Study.
Retrieved 
from http://hal.archives-
ouvertes.fr/docs/00/83/74/88/PDF/ICMI_STudy_22_proceedings_2013-FINAL_V2.pdf.

Gueudet, G., Pepin, B., & Troue, L. (2013b). Collective work with resources: an essential dimension
for teaer documentation. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (7),
1003–1016.
Gueudet, G., Sabra, H., Pepin, B., & Troue, L. (in press). Resources, task design and mathematics
teaers’ collective engagement: towards e-textbooks as shared living resources. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education.
Gueudet, G., & Troue, L. (2009a). Towards new documentation systems for mathematics teaers?
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 71(3), 199–218.
Gueudet, G., & Troue, L. (2009b). Conception et usages de ressources pour et par les professeurs:
Développement associatif et développement professionnel. Dossiers De l’Ingénierie Educative, 65,
78–82.
Haggarty, L., & Pepin, B. (2002). An investigation of mathematics textbooks and their use in English,
Fren and German Classrooms: Who gets an opportunity to learn what? British Educational
Research Journal, 28(4), 567–590.
Henningsen, M., & Stein, M. (1997). Mathematical tasks and student’s cognition: Classroom-based
factors that support and inhibit high-level mathematical thinking and reasoning. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 28, 524–94.9.
Herbst, P. (1995). e construction of the real number system in textbooks: a contribution to the
analysis of discoursive practices in mathematics. Unpublished master’s thesis, University of
Georgia, Athens.
Herbst, P. (2002). Establishing a custom of proving in American sool geometry: evolution of the
two-column proof in the early twentieth century. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 49(3),
283–312.
Hiebert, J., & Carpenter, T. (1992). Learning and teaing with understanding. In D.A. Grouws (Ed.),
Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 65–97). New York: Macmillan.
Hiebert, J., Carpenter, T., Fennema, E., Fuson, K., Wearne, D., Human, P., Murray, H., & Olivier, A.
(1997). Making sense: teaing and learning mathematics with understanding. Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Hiebert, J., Gallimore, R., Garnier, H., Giwin, K. B., Hollingsworth, H., Jacobs, J., & Stigler, J. (2003).
Teaing mathematics in seven countries: results from the TIMSS video study . Washington, DC:

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Educational Statistics.
Hoyles, C., Kalas, I., Troue, L., Hivon, L., Noss, R., & Wilensky, U. (2010). Connectivity and virtual
networks for learning. In C. Hoyles, & J.-B. Lagrange, Mathematics education and tenology-
rethinking the terrain (pp. 439–462). New York: Springer.
Kidwell, P. A., Aerberg-Hastings, A., & Roberts, D. L. (2008). Tools of American mathematics
teaching, 1800–2000. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Korea Education and Resear Information Service (KERIS). (2007). Concept map of digital textbook.
Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Concept_of_dt.PNG.
Kortenkamp, U., Blessing, A. M., Dohrmann, C., Kreis, Y., Libbret, P., & Mercat, C. (2009).
Interoperable interactive geometry for Europe: First tenological and educational results and
future allenges of the Intergeo project. In V. Durand-Guerrier, S. Soury-Lavergne, & F.
Arzarello (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Resear on Mathematics
Education (pp. 1150–1160). Lyon: INRP. Retrieved from www.inrp.fr/editions/cerme6.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images—e grammar of visual design. London:
Routledge.
Kuhn, T. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Li, Y. (2000). A comparison of problems that follow selected content presentations in American and
Chinese mathematics textbooks. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31, 234–241.
Lloyd, G. M. (2009). Sool mathematics curriculum materials for teaers’ learning: future
elementary teaers’ interactions with curriculum materials in a mathematics course in the
United States. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 41, 763–775.
Love, E., & Pimm, D. (1996). is is so: a text on texts. In A. Bishop, K. Clements, C. Keitel, J.
Kilpatri, & C. Laborde (Eds.), International handbook of mathematics education (Vol. 1, pp.
371–409). New York: Springer.
Margolinas, C. (Ed.). (2013). Task design in mathematics education. Proceedings of ICMI Study 22.
Oxford. 
Retrieved 
from http://hal.archives-
ouvertes.fr/docs/00/83/74/88/PDF/ICMI_STudy_22_proceedings_2013-FINAL_V2.pdf.
Mesa, V. (2010). Strategies for controlling the work in mathematics textbooks for introductory
calculus. Research in Collegiate Mathematics Education, 16, 235–265.
Murata, A. (2008). Mathematics teaing and learning as a mediating process: e case of tape

diagrams. Mathematical Thinking and Learning, 10(4), 374–406.
Naaliev, E., & Yerushalmy, M. (2013). Guiding explorations: Design principles and functions of
interactive diagrams. Computers in the Schools, 30(1–2), 61–75.
National Resear Council (1989). Everybody counts: A report to the nation on the future of
mathematics education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Resear Council. (2004). J. Confrey & V. Stohl (Eds.). On evaluating curricular
eﬀectiveness: Judging the quality of K–12 mathematics evaluations. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Netz, R. (1999). e shaping of deduction in Greek mathematics: A study in cognitive history.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oesterholm, M., & Bergqvist, E. (2013). What is so special about mathematical texts? Analyses of
common claims in resear literature and of properties of textbooks. ZDM—e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(5), 751–763.
Pepin, B. (2012). Working with teaers on curriculum materials to develop mathematical
knowledge in/for teaing: Task analysis as ‘catalytic tool’ for feedba and teaer learning. In
G. Gueudet, B. Pepin, & L. Troue (Eds.) From text to ‘lived’ resources: Mathematics curriculum
material and teacher development (pp. 123–142). New York: Springer.
Pepin, B., & Gueudet, G. (2013). Curricular resources and textbooks. In S. Lerman (Ed.), Encyclopedia
of mathematics education (pp 132–135). New York: Springer.
Pepin, B., Gueudet, G., & Troue, L. (2013a). Investigating textbooks as crucial interfaces between
culture, policy and teaer curricular practice: two contrasted case studies in France and
Norway. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (5), 685698.
Pepin, B., Gueudet, G., & Troue, L. (2013b). Re-sourcing teaers’ work and interactions: a
collective perspective on resources, their use and transformation. ZDM—e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(7), 929–944.
Proust, C. (2012). Masters’ writings and students’ writings: Sool material in Mesopotamia. In G.
Gueudet, B. Pepin, & L. Troue (Eds.) From text to ‘lived’ resources: Mathematics curriculum
material and teacher Development (pp. 161–180). New York: Springer.
Rezat, S. (2006). A model of textbook use. In J. Novotná, H. Moraová, M. Krátká & N. a. Stehlíko vá
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Conference of the International Group for the Psyology of

Mathematics Education (Vol. 4, pp. 409–416). Prague: Charles University, Faculty of Education.
Rezat, S. (2013). e textbook-in-use: Students’ utilization semes of mathematics textbooks related
to self-regulated practicing. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (5),
659–670.
Robitaille, D., & Travers, K. (1992). International studies of aievement in mathematics. In D.
Grouws (Ed.) Handbook of resear on mathematics education (pp. 687–709). New York:
Macmillan Publishing Company.
Sabra, H., & Troue, L. (2011). Collective design of an online math textbook: when individual and
collective documentation works meet. In M. Pytlak, T. Rowland, & E. Swoboda (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Resear on Mathematics Education (pp.
2356–2366). February 9–13, Rzesów, Poland.
Smidt, W. H. (2012). Measuring content through textbooks: e cumulative eﬀect of middle-
sool traing. In G. Gueudet, B. Pepin, & L. Troue (Eds.) From text to ‘lived’ resources:
Mathematics curriculum material and teacher development (pp. 143–160). New York: Springer.
Smidt, W. H., & Huang, R. T. (2012). Curricular coherence and the Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics. Educational Researcher, 41, 294–308.
Smidt, W. H., McKnight, C. C., Valverde, G., Houang, R. T., & Wiley, D. E. (1997). Many visions,
many aims: A cross-national investigation of curricular intentions in sool mathematics.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Subring, G. (1987). On the methodology of analysing historical textbooks: Lacroix as textbook
author. For the Learning of Mathematics, 7(3), 41–51.
Shield, M., & Dole, S. (2013). Assessing the potential of mathematics textbooks to promote deep
learning. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(5), 183–199.
Stevenson, H. W., & Barts, K. (1992). An analysis of Japanese and American textbooks in
mathematics. In R. Leetsma, & H. Walberg (Eds.) Japanese educational productivity (pp. 103–
133). Ann Arbor: Center for Japanese Studies, University of Michigan.
Stigler, J., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap. New York: Free Press.
Taizan, Y., Bhang, S., Kurokami, H., & Kwon, S. (2012). A comparison of functions and the eﬀect of
digital textbook in Japan and Korea. International Journal for Educational Media and
Technology, 6(1), 85–93.

Tall, D. (2002). Continuities and discontinuities in long-term learning semas. In D. Tall & M.
omas (Eds.), Intelligence, learning and understanding—A tribute to Riard Skemp (pp. 151–
177). Flaxton, Australia: PostPressed.
Tall, D., & Vinner, S. (1981). Concept image and concept deﬁnition in mathematics with particular
reference to limits and continuity. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 12(2), 151–169.
Trgalovà, J., & Jahn, A. P. (2013). ality issue in the design and use of resources by mathematics
teachers. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education,45(7), 973–986.
Trgalovà, J., Jahn, A. P., & Soury-Lavergne, S. (2009). ality process for dynamic geometry
resources: e Intergeo project. In V. Durand-Guerrier, S. Soury-Lavergne, & F. Arzarello (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference on Resear on Mathematics Education (pp.
1161–1170). Lyon: INRP. Retrieved from www.inrpfr/editions/cerme6.
Troue, L., Drijvers, P., Gueudet, G., & Sacristan, A. I. (2013). Tenology-driven developments and
policy implications for mathematics education. In A. J. Bishop, M. A. Clements, C. Keitel, J.
Kilpatri, & F.K.S. Leung (Eds.), ird international handbook of mathematics education (pp.
753–790). New York: Springer.
Valverde, G. A., Bianchi, L. J., Wolfe, R. G., Schmidt, W. H., & Houang, R. T. (2002). According to the
book—Using TIMSS to investigate the translation of policy into practice through the world of
textbooks. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Vergnaud, G. (1996). e theory of conceptual ﬁelds. In L. P. Steﬀe, P. Nesher, P. Cobb, G. A. Goldin,
& B. Greer (Eds.), eories of mathematical learning (pp. 219–239). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Vieillard-Baron, E. (2009). Sesamath, un modèle de mutualisation et de diﬀusion gratuite de
ressources mathématiques. In Séminaire international thématique ePrep, Institut Henri Poincaré,
Paris. 
Retrieved 
from
www.eprep.org/seminaires/seminaire09/comm_sem09/ePrep09_Sesamath_descriptif.pdf.
Watson, A., & Shipman, S. (2008). Using learner-generated examples to introduce new concepts.
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 69(2), 97–109.
Westbury, I. (1990). Textbooks, textbook publishers, and the quality of sooling. In D. Ellio & A.
Woodward (Eds.), Textbooks and sooling in the United States: 89th yearbook of the National
Society for the Study of Education (Part 1, pp. 1–22). Chicago: University of Chicago.

Yerushalmy, M. (2005). Function of interactive visual representations in interactive mathematical
textbooks. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical learning, 10(3), 217–249.
Yerushalmy, M. (2013). Designing for inquiry in sool mathematics. Educational Designer, 2(6).
Retrieved from www.educationaldesigner.org/ed/volume2/issue6/article22/.
Yerushalmy, M., & Chazan, D. (2002). Flux in sool algebra: Curricular ange, graphing
tenology, and resear on student learning and teaer knowledge. In L. English (Ed.)
Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (pp. 725–756). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Yerushalmy, M., & Chazan, D. (2008). Tenology and curriculum design: e ordering of
discontinuities in sool algebra. In L. English (Ed.) Handbook of international resear in
mathematics education (2nd ed., pp. 806–837). London: Routledge.
Yerushalmy, M., Katriel, H., & Shternberg, B. (2004). VisualMath: Function. Interactive mathematics
text. 
Ramat-Aviv: 
e 
Centre 
of 
Educational 
Tenology. 
Retrieved 
from
www.cet.ac.il/math/function/english.

28 Digital Technologies in the Early
Primary School Classroom
Nathalie Sinclair
Simone Fraser University (Canada)
Anna Baccaglini-Frank
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy)

Introduction
Papert’s (1980) work with Turtle Geometry oﬀered an early and
provocative vision of how digital tenologies could be used with young
learners. Since then, resear on digital tenology use has focused on the
middle- and high-sool levels (notable exceptions include Sarama &
Clements, 2002; Hoyles, Noss, & Adamson, 2002). Given the increasing
diversity of digital tenologies, and their varied underlying pedagogical
goals and design oices, Clements’ (2002) claim that “there is no single
eﬀect of the computer on mathematics aievement” (p. 174) is as true now
as it was a decade ago. However, many advances have been made in beer
articulating the range of design oices that are possible, their potential
eﬀect on the cognitive and aﬀective dimensions on mathematics learning,
and their varying demands on the teaer. e aim of this apter is to
summarize the resear literature on the use of digital tenologies in the
teaing and learning of mathematics at the K–2 level. In particular, we
focus on literature that contributes to our understanding of how the use of
digital tenologies aﬀects and anges the teaing and learning of
mathematics—that is, how diﬀerent aﬀordances and design oices impact
on the way teaers and learners interact and express themselves
mathematically. By digital tenologies we refer to a range of tools
including multipurpose computer-based soware programs, Web-based
applets, virtual manipulatives, programming languages, CD-ROMs, games,
calculators, tou-screen applications, and interactive whiteboards. e
distinction between these various types is not always evident1 and, indeed,
one goal of this apter is to provide useful distinguishing features of these
various tenologies in order to help educators beer evaluate and oose
amongst them.
We begin by outlining some of the major theoretical developments that
are shaping the way researchers are studying the use of digital technologies;

we hope that some of these developments, whi originate in resear
conducted for the middle and high sool grades, can inform resear at the
younger grade levels, thus building on decades-old insights and constructs.
We then present an overview of resear related ﬁrst to two content areas
of the primary sool curriculum—number sense and geometry—and then
to a mix of content areas approaed through the use of programming
languages. Where possible, we try to describe the particular aﬀordances of
the digital tenology involved—that is, the kinds of interactions that can be
performed—anowledging that intended aﬀordances may not always be
perceived as possible by users.2 We are also aware of the fact that many of
the tools we describe may quily disappear, to be replaced by new
interpretations or available on new platforms. We have thus tried to focus
aention on the design principles that may have relevance beyond speciﬁc
examples. At the end of the apter we discuss several themes that emerge
from our survey of the literature and recommend future research directions.

Historical and Theoretical Perspectives
e use of digital tenologies in the early grades has traditionally
encountered opposition by those concerned that ildren at this age need
tactile, concrete experiences. Indeed, the K–2 classroom has long featured
the use of physical manipulatives, with both researers and teaers
anowledging their importance (Sowell, 1989). is presence of a ri set
of resources in the classroom may in fact make it easier for digital
tenologies to be integrated, in comparison to the higher grades where the
tenologies of paper-and-pencil usually prevail. Indeed, over the past
decade, several researers have argued for the appropriateness and beneﬁt
of using “virtual manipulatives” (VMs) in the early grades, whi build on
the familiarity of physical ones, but whi may also provide a range of
added aﬀordances (Bolyard & Moyer-Paenham, 2012; Moyer-Paenham
& Suh, 2012; Moyer-Paenham, Salkind, Bolyard, & Suh, 2013). ese
researers have questioned the assumption that “concrete” tools are more
appropriate for young children and have argued that physical manipulatives
are limited in their ability to promote both mathematical actions and
reﬂections on these actions (Sarama & Clements, 2009). Sarama and
Clements point speciﬁcally to a VM’s potential for supporting the
development 
of integrated-concrete knowledge, whi interconnects
knowledge of physical objects, actions on these objects and symbolic
representations of these objects and actions. ey oﬀer seven hypothesized,
interrelated aﬀordances that have been ratiﬁed by an admiedly small
amount of existing resear: bringing mathematical ideas and action to
conscious awareness; encouraging and facilitating complete, precise
explanations; supporting mental “actions on objects”; anging the very
nature of the manipulative; symbolizing mathematical concepts; linking the
concrete and the symbolic with feedba; and recording and replaying
student actions. us, one way to approa the design and evaluation of

particular tools is to see whether these aﬀordances are present in the tool in
a way that is relevant to the mathematical concept under investigation and
accessible to both teaers and learners. We will use these aﬀordances as a
way of describing and contrasting the various VMs presented in the next
sections.
ese aﬀordances, of course, are not unique to VMs and oﬀer a
compelling set of macro-level goals for digital tenology design. However,
they say lile about the forms of interaction that diﬀerent digital
tenologies might oﬀer. Sedig and Sumner (2006) propose a framework
that distinguishes three forms of interaction that are “based on three
fundamental, root metaphors derived from the way in whi humans use
their bodies to interact with the external world” (p. 9): conversing,
manipulating, and navigating. Conversing interactions are ones in whi
learners issue an input action—whi can be done through, for example,
procedure-based programming languages, text-based menus, and pen-
based gestures. Conversing interactions are usually discrete in that there is a
separation between the learner’s actions and the computer-based reaction.
For example, cliing a buon on the screen that rotates a shape is an
example of a discrete conversing interaction. Manipulating interactions
involve touing, handling, or grasping element(s) on a screen through
selecting, dragging, and moving. Su interactions are usually considered
more tangible than conversing ones in that learners can “rea their hand”
into the screen to handle the objects. ey are oen continuous in contrast
t o discrete, as exempliﬁed by the interaction of a learner dragging the
vertex of a shape to rotate it, so that cause and eﬀect are observed
simultaneously.3Navigating interactions involve moving on, over, or
through the screen. e majority of digital tenologies researed at the
K–2 level focus primarily on manipulating and conversing interactions. is
may be in part due to the number-focused nature of most of these
tenologies, since navigating interactions are more associated with spatial

reasoning. All three interactions can have either a direct or indirect “focus,”
this distinction being based on whether the learner is directly interacting
with a screen object or interacting with it through an intermediary
representation. When a learner is rotating a triangle by dragging one of its
vertices, the interaction is direct, but if the learner is dragging a dial in
order to rotate the triangle, the interaction is indirect.
Goodwin 
and 
Highﬁeld 
(2013) 
oﬀer 
a 
somewhat 
diﬀerent
aracterization of digital tenologies, whi focuses more on their
constraints and underlying pedagogy: instructive, manipulable, and
constructive. Instructive digital tenologies tend to promote procedural
learning, relying on evaluative feedba and repetitive interactions with
imposed 
representations. Manipulable digital tenologies enable the
imposed representations to be manipulated so as to engage students in
discovery and experimentation. ere is mu overlap between this
category and Sedig and Sumner’s manipulating form of interaction, though
the former carries with it particular pedagogical goals that the laer does
not assume. Finally, constructive digital tenologies are ones in whi
learners create their own representations, whi are oen the goal of the
activity, thereby promoting mathematical modeling and what Noss and
Hoyles (1996) aracterize as expressive uses of tenology. Goodwin and
Highﬁeld argue that while instructive tenologies may be well-suited for
procedural learning, manipulable and constructive tenologies beer
support conceptual learning.
While some digital tenologies ﬁt neatly into one particular category (of
ea of these tripartite aracterizations), many will belong to more than
one category. However, ea aracterization provides a way of comparing
the constraints and aﬀordances of diﬀerent digital tenologies, whi may
guide the oice of a speciﬁc digital tenology for a particular topic and/or
grade level. However, educators must also make larger-scale decisions that
involve oosing appropriate digital tenologies for a wide range of topics

across several grade levels. Is it preferable to promote one category of
digital tenology or to have a mix of forms of interactions (conversing,
manipulating, and navigating) and of constraints (instructive, manipulable
and constructive)? Although the resear has lile to say about su a
question, Goldenberg (2000) has argued for the “ﬂuency principle,” whi
states that “[l]earning a few good tools well enough to use them
knowledgeably, 
intelligently, 
mathematically, 
conﬁdently, 
and
appropriately in solving otherwise diﬃcult problems makes a genuine
contribution to a student’s mathematical education” (p. 7). A “good” tool
might oﬀer a variety of forms of interactions and even enable diﬀerent
kinds of constraints, while also having a consistency that more easily
enables teaers and learners to perceive important aﬀordances.
Unfortunately, no longitudinal resear exploring the eﬀect of long-term
use of particular “good” technologies currently exists.
While Sedig and Sumner’s framework says very lile about how
mathematical learning happens, several other theories in mathematics
education have been proposed with that purpose in mind. ese include the
instrumental genesis approa, whi is primarily concerned with the
process of how a computer tool becomes for learners an instrument to learn
and do mathematics with (Artigue, 2002); it aends to the way aﬀordances
are perceived both through increased experience with the tool and through
the problems that the tool enables solving. is theory is speciﬁcally
devoted to studying technology-based interactions and does not get used by
researers working outside this domain. Very few studies at the primary
sool level draw on this theory, perhaps because of the nature of computer
tools at this age level, whi do not require a signiﬁcant instrumentation
process because of their ease of use. However, the expanded notions of
instrumental 
orestration 
(Troue, 
2004; 
Drijvers, 
2012) 
and
documentational genesis (Gueudet & Troue, 2008), both of whi focus
on the work of the teaer in a computer-based classroom, have been used

to show, for example, the speciﬁc strategies (known as orestration types)
that kindergarten teaers use to manage heterogeneity and la of reading
ability at this school level (Gueudet, Bueno-Ravel, & Poisard, 2013).
Another important theoretical approa is that of semiotic mediation
(Bartolini Bussi & Marioi, 2008), whi has its roots in Vygotsky’s work
approa and aends to the speciﬁc ways in whi tools (including digital
ones) are transformed by learners into mathematical concepts through a
process of internalization. Although focused on tool use, and developed by
researers working with digital tenologies, this theory also concerns
mathematical learning more generally. is approa enables researers
to focus on the speciﬁc actions that certain tools enable (su as dragging
and tracing), and on the types of signs they can give rise to. Similar in its
Vygotskian origins, activity theory has also been used in the context of
resear on tenology-based teaing and learning. Ladel and
Kortenkamp (2013) propose a speciﬁc version of it, whi they call artifact-
centric activity theory (ACAT), and whi they developed speciﬁcally for
the primary sool level, with tou-screen tenologies in mind. is
approa, more than the others, emphasizes how tools radically ange the
way learners act and think, thus moving away from a view that tools are
discardable crutches that merely scaffold the learning of mathematics. Ladel
and Kortenkamp also use it in the very design process of their tou-screen
digital technologies.
Another Vygotsky-inspired framework that has been used to investigate
tenology-based student learning is Sfard’s communicational approa,
whi takes thinking to be communicating and thus learning to be a ange
in one’s discourse (Sfard, 2008). Changes in discourse can involve diﬀerent
uses of particular words and gestures; they can also be based on or produce
diﬀerent visual mediators and diﬀerent “routines” for identifying shapes or
describing quantity. Due to their highly visual and oen temporal nature,
digital tenologies quite frequently oﬀer unique visual mediators, thus

inviting diﬀerent ways of describing and comparing mathematical objects
and relationships. ey also give rise to new ways of thinking that may
conﬂict with the established discourse of formal mathematics (whi tends
to be static and alphanumeric); Sfard’s approa can help draw aention to
the potential communication conﬂicts that may thus arise, especially as
teaers aempt to transition between digital and text-based resources (see
Sinclair & Yurita, 2008).
Mu of the resear on the use of digital tenologies has also been
informed by theories of embodied cognition. Papert’s notion of “body
syntonicity” can be seen as an early precursor to the now widely shared
recognition of the important role that the body plays in mathematical
meaning-making. While there are a range of assumptions about the
relationship between the body and the mind—with dualist perspectives
seeing the body as an important and sometimes necessary scaﬀolding for
the development of mathematical semas and concept and the monist
perspective seeing the body itself as doing the knowing—there is growing
consensus that particular kinds of bodily engagement can support
mathematics learning. Resear focused on the particular ways in whi
digital tenologies can enable and promote bodily engagement highlights
the precise and temporal actions that these tenologies aﬀord, whi
enable learners to move in mathematically relevant ways (Nemirovsky,
Kelton, & Rhodehamel, 2013; Robui, 2006; Sinclair, de Freitas, & Ferrara,
2013). Indeed, the three basic metaphors mentioned earlier—conversing,
manipulating, and navigating—provide ways for the speaking, hearing,
touing, and seeing body to interact with mathematical objects. is
multimodal kind of interaction seems particularly important at the primary
sool level, where ildren’s communication is mu less language based.
We return to this point in our discussion of new, touch-screen technologies.
More recently, resear focused on learning with media (su as
television or videos) suggests that joint engagement—whi involves

parental mediation—can provide powerful additional aﬀordances for
learning beyond what is found with tenology use alone (Moorthy et al.,
2013; Stevens & Penuel, 2010). is work has been extended to the context
of digital games as well, but they are oen less suitable for joint
engagements because of the demands they make in terms of aention and
rapid cognitive and physical responses. is resear may be highly
relevant to mathematics education seings, especially if teaer mediation
is taken into account. It suggests that there may be advantages to designing
environments in whi teaer-student(s) conversation can be built into the
tenology-based activities. is may be easier to accomplish with open-
ended environments in whi the teaer is involved in proposing tasks or
responding to students’ actions, in contrast to level-driven and highly
instructive environments where the parent or the teaer has lile role to
play.

Digital Technologies Focusing on Number Sense
In this section we report on studies involving digital tenologies designed
to support the teaing and learning of number sense,4 a fundamental
aspect of early mathematical learning. As mentioned earlier, a wide range
of digital tenologies have been developed and studied, including desktop
computer soware, Internet-based applets, tou-screen applications and,
of course, calculators.5 Some studies report on the “eﬀectiveness,” while
others describe design features, or particular aspects of the “usability,” that
are hypothesized to support student learning. We report ﬁrst on studies that
involved VMs, focusing speciﬁcally on the constraints imposed, and then
oﬀer that contrast with the associated physical manipulative. We next
consider a variety of digital tools used for diﬀerent aspects of number sense
while not being virtual instantiations of physical manipulatives. Finally, we
present three new tou-screen applications and discuss their unique
potential with respect to the development of children’s number sense.
From Physical to Virtual Manipulatives
Children whose learning occurs in ri environments that include (virtual)
manipulatives tend to learn beer and rea higher levels of academic
aievement (see for example, Steen, Brookes, & Lyon, 2006). However, it
is not the simple presence of the (physical or virtual) manipulatives that
makes the diﬀerence, but how these manipulatives are designed and used
(for example, Goodwin & Highﬁeld, 2013). Despite the abundant
availability of VMs for the early years, lile resear has been carried out
on their eﬀectiveness and use in the classroom. VMs are, for the most part,
manipulable digital tenologies, both in Sedig and Sumner’s sense as well
as in Goodwin and Highﬁeld’s—this is not surprising given their connection

to physical manipulatives. For the most part, the beneﬁts of virtual
manipulatives are seen as augmenting those of physical ones by providing
more precision and more feedba that is mathematically relevant, and by
demanding more mathematical forms of expression (through numbers,
symbols, or actions).
Some recent resear focuses on studying the way teaers can or could
orchestrate the use of VMs.6 As a first example, we consider the e-pascaline,
a virtual version of the mathematical maine known as the pascaline
(Masieo & Soury-Lavergne, 2013). In the studies reported by these
authors, this VM is used aer students have interacted extensively with the
physical pascaline, a mathematical maine used in many Italian primary
sool classrooms to foster the learning of place value (Bartolini Bussi,
2011), thereby leading to the notion of a “duo of artefacts” in whi both
physical and virtual manipulatives feature in a mathematics lessons. e e-
pascaline has the main constitutive elements (and even colors) as the
physical manipulative; however, its implementation involves additional
design decisions that lead to new aﬀordances (see Figure 28.1). First, all
tasks are made explicit within the VM, whereas the physical pascaline does
not include any instructions or directions. Second, the e-pascaline’s buttons
can be hidden or shown, whi aﬀords bringing mathematical ideas and
action to conscious awareness. For example, to count by 1s the 10s buon
and the 100s buon may be hidden or grayed out. ird, the wheels are
turned by cliing arrows that indicate clowise or counterclowise
rotations, thereby aﬀording a discrete, indirect interaction that diﬀers from
the direct, continuous one of the physical pascaline. e authors explain the
rationale for this decision (as opposed to, say, “cli and drag to the le or
right”) in terms of helping ildren aend to the number of moves of a
wheel—thus aﬀording Sarama and Clements’ sense of bringing
mathematical ideas and action to conscious awareness. e authors thus
make a theoretical argument that using the e-pascaline will help ildren

develop a mathematical awareness that may only be le implicit with the
physical counterpart. More resear on how ildren move from these
maines to paper-and-pencil forms of expressing place value may be
needed in order to beer understand how the pascaline and the e-pascaline
function as models or analogies in children’s thinking.
Figure 28.1 (a) A physical pascaline; (b) the e-pascaline.
A second example of a VM is base-10 blos, for whi many applets
have been designed. We highlight two speciﬁc aﬀordances of these VMs
that distinguish them from their associated physical manipulatives. e ﬁrst
involves the automatic transformation of a 10-blo into 10 individual unit
blos when moved from a 10s column into a 1s column (see Base Blos
from the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives’ [NLVM0 collection, at
http://nlvm.usu.edu/en/nav/topic_t_1.html). is conversing interaction
enables learners to see how the column location aﬀects the meaning of the
blo while also aﬀording Sarama and Clements’ mental actions on objects.
Although no empirical evidence for the eﬀect of su a design oice has
been reported, its presence in other VMs, su as Kortenkamp’s Place
Value7 (an app for the Apple iPad and iPhone), indicates some consensus
about its desirability. Second, most of these VMs also show and update the
numerical value of the tokens, blos, or ips placed in the diﬀerent areas,
thereby providing symbolic feedba and reducing the need for learners to

count and calculate. is seems to be an important aﬀordance not
speciﬁcally identiﬁed by Sarama and Clements (2009) but potentially
signiﬁcant in shiing the aention of both the learner and the teaer away
from computation.
Another example we include in this section is Numberbonds8 (also
developed for the iPad9), whi aims to strengthen continuous and
relational representations of numbers. Introducing numbers through this
kind of representation emphasizes relations between them (a form of
ordinality) as opposed to their absolute denotation of sets of objects
(cardinality). Su an approa has been adopted, for example, in a
mathematics curriculum developed by Gaegno (1970); moreover, some
neuroscientiﬁc studies suggest that a more explicit and early emphasis on
ordinality may be the key to learning early number (Lyons & Beilo,
2011). Numberbonds has a Tetris-like setup in whi a Cuisinaire-like rod
falls in an area with a set length and the player has to quily oose a rod
from the ones displayed on the right that together with the one that has
fallen completes the set base length (see Figure 28.2). At ea level the
game oﬀers diﬀerent sets of rods—until a total of 10 are displayed—to
oose from to complete the reference length. Resear from the ﬁelds of
neuroscience and cognitive psyology conducted with students showing
weak number sense highlights some advantages of this virtual adaptation of
the manipulatives (Buerworth, 2011; Buerworth & Laurillard, 2010):
timing of the falling allows for some “training” to occur; the angeability
of the rod color; and the replacement of the rod’s color by a numerical
value, whi aﬀords the symbolizing of mathematical concepts as well as
the linking of the concrete and the symbolic through feedba. Moreover,
the learning environment provides guided feedba, whi enables learners
to adjust their actions in relation to the goal, rather than rely on help from a
teaer. Unlike the previous two examples, whi replicate most of the
manipulative possibilities of the associated physical manipulatives,

Numberbonds addresses only one small component of the activities enabled
by Cuisinaire rods; it also has a more instructive design, though the
feedba from the environment may provide some of the mediation that
features in joint engagement with media.
Figure 28.2 Part-whole number sense with Numberbonds.
As a last example, we discuss some possible instantiations of the number
line in order to introduce a more general issue of feedba. Consider a
number line su as the one in Motion Math-Fractions10 for the iPad, an
instructive digital manipulative that focuses on fraction estimation. Within
this environment a number line appears on the ground together with a ball
that can bounce (completely elastically) and that can be controlled by the
gravity accelerator of the iPad. e ball contains a fraction that has to be
placed correctly on the line. Positive feedba is given for a correct
placement while a hint is oﬀered for an incorrect placement. Although this

type of feedba loop may improve fraction estimation skills (Riconscente,
2013), it does not provide opportunities for learners to manipulate or
express new mathematical meanings. Su possibility can be provided only
through an educator’s mediation (see, for example, Bartolini, Baccaglini-
Frank, & Ramploud, 2014). Indeed, in her study of ildren 5–8 years old,
Goodwin (2009) found that using manipulable digital tenologies to learn
about fractions resulted in the production of the “most developed and
advanced representations,” in comparison with those using an instructive
digital tenology (cited in Goodwin & Highﬁeld, 2013, p. 208). Further,
these researers note that ildren working with the instructive digital
tenology were more focused on receiving positive feedba than on
discussing or reﬂecting on the embedded mathematical concept—as would
be predicted by the joint engagement with media literature.
Other Digital Tools for Learning Number
We now report on studies involving digital tools that focus on diﬀerent
aspects of number sense while not being what we have referred to as VMs.
We begin with Building Blos, whi is a presool mathematics program
that includes a set of diﬀerent digital tools, ea associated with speciﬁc
concepts in the curriculum and designed to meet benmarks in a
hypothesized learning trajectories (see Clements & Sarama, 2004). For
example, the early levels of one of the on-computer activity sets, whi are
more instructive than manipulative, use a cookie-baking scenario to tea
mating collections and various counting skills; at higher levels, ildren
add. For example, a aracter may hide two, then one more ip under a
napkin, and the ild is asked to make the second cookie have the same
number of ips—thus aiming at the Non-Verbal Addition level (Clements
& Sarama, 2004, p. 183). is task could also proposed without the support

of tenology, but that tenology provides enables the teaer (or student)
to control the length of exposure of the items hidden and added; further,
the system can repeat the task a large number of times, adjusting its
diﬃculty to the input given ea time by the student and recording the
performance (speed and accuracy) ea time. Various other soware
applications have been developed to propose this kind of task, including
How Many Under the Shell?11 from the National Council of Teaers of
Mathematics (NCTM). Although Clements and Sarama do not report on the
gains or eﬀects particularly related to this computer-based activity, they
have shown that the curriculum as a whole increases ildren’s
development of number sense in comparison with other curricula.
In addition to classroom-oriented soware programs, several remedial
interventions have also been designed. For young ildren with diﬃculties
with numbers.12 studies of adaptive and instructive soware games su as
e Number Race (Wilson, Revkin, Cohen, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2006,
Wilson & Dehaene, 2007), Grapho-Game Maths (Räsänen Salminen, Wilson,
Aunio, & Dehaene, 2009), Numberbonds, and Dots2Tra13 (Buerworth &
Laurillard, 2010; Buerworth, 2011) have been undertaken. Dots2Tra,
developed within the Digital Interventions for Dyscalculia and Low
Numeracy project (Buerworth & Laurillard, 2010; see http://low-
numeracy.ning.com/ and http://number-sense.co.uk/), is based on a very
simple kind of interaction in whi a set of dots (or other objects) is shown
on the screen and ildren type the corresponding number in Arabic digits,
or in leers. e dots given are in ﬁxed arrangements (for example three
dots are in a top-le to lower-right diagonal in the stimulus area, Figure
28.3).
e soware registers the response time and immediately provides
corrective feedba. Preliminary results are reported as being encouraging.
In the near future, the authors expect neuroimaging to be part of
summative evaluation of intervention for dyscalculia. Number Race is

another adaptive soware program designed to target the inherited
approximate numerosity system in the intraparietal sulcus (Feigenson,
Dehaene, & Spelke, 2004) that may support early arithmetic, by presenting
comparison tasks of small magnitudes presented in analogical and symbolic
forms. For example, two sets of dots can appear simultaneously (and stay
on the screen until the ild answers, or disappear aer a short time) and
the child has to select the set with greater numerosity (Figure 28.4a). Wilson
and colleagues (Wilson, Dehaene, Pinel, Revkin, Cohen, & Cohen, 2006)
show how the soware is designed to create a multidimensional model of
the evolution of a learner’s “knowledge space” along three variables and
time (Figure 28.4b). Aer ﬁve weeks, experimental subjects showed greater
improvement in their number sense with respect to the control group
(Wilson & Dehaene, 2007).
Figure 28.3 Dots given are in fixed arrangements in Dots2Track.

Figure 28.4 (a) Screenshot from the Number Race; the child has chosen the set with greater
numerosity. On the right (b) a multidimensional model of the evolution of a learner’s “knowledge
space.”
Potentials of Multitouch Technology
e previous examples in this section have been designed for the mouse
and keyboard inputs available with desktop and laptop computers. e
main interaction is through cliing (rather than typing) discrete objects,
with one ild working with the soware at a time. In contrast, the
following three examples are prototypical in exploiting various potentials
of multitou tenology with respect to number sense learning. With
multitou tenology, the interaction becomes more immediate, as the
ﬁngers contact the screen directly, either through tapping or a wide variety
of gestures. Further, the screen can be toued by multiple users
simultaneously, whi invites diﬀerent types of activity structures than the
computer or laptop. We have devoted a section to these new tenologies
because of the close link between their main interaction mode (through the
ﬁngers) and the emerging neuroscientiﬁc literature pointing to the
importance of ﬁngers in the development of number sense (e.g.,
Buerworth, 1999a, 1999b; 2005; Penner-Wilger et al., 2007; Gracia-
Bafalluy, 2008; Andres, Seron, & Olivier 2007; Sato, Caaneo, Rizzolai, &

Gallese, 2007; ompson, Abbo, Wheaton, Syngeniotis, & Puce, 2004).
Basic component abilities that can be powerfully mediated through
multitou tenology are: 1) subitizing; 2) one-to-one correspondence
between numerosities in analogical form and ﬁngers placed on
screen/raised simultaneously/counting with ﬁngers, and in general ﬁnger
gnosia; 3) ﬁne motor abilities; and 4) the part-whole concept. While the
examples we discuss here may quily be replaced with newer versions,
they allow us to identify particular design decisions that will be relevant to
new applications as well.
Our ﬁrst example is an instructive, conversing digital tenology called
Fingu14 (Barendregt, Lindstrom, Rietz-Leppanen, Holgersson, & Oosson,
2012), an iPad application in whi the stimuli are given as ﬁxed
arrangements of ﬂoating objects (see Figure 28.5a). Users must place the
corresponding number of ﬁngers on the screen simultaneously. Ea tou
produces a ﬁngerprint, thus providing visual feedba and rapid closure to
the conversation (see Figure 28.5b), whi ends with an additional yes/no
feedba (auditory signal as well as visual cues: happy animations for
correct responses and sad animations for incorrect ones). e game is
timed. At ea of the seven levels the number of objects that appear
increases while the time to respond decreases. Very lile opportunity for
joint engagement is offered.
e necessity for simultaneous rather than sequential input further
encourages subitizing. e oice of ﬂoating groups of objects (where the
disposition of ea group remains invariant) diﬀers from the ﬁxed arrays
typically oﬀered in other environments, providing a diﬀerent type of
stimulus for the solver’s object traing system (Fayol & Seron, 2005; van
Herwegen, Ansari, Xu, & Karmiloﬀ-Smith, 2008; Cantlon Saﬀord &
Brannon, 2010), a system upon whi the ability to subitize supposedly
relies (Piazza, 2010). In an exploratory micro-longitudinal pilot study with
5–6-year-old students, researers found that ildren playing the game for

a three-week period (with guidance from the teaer) would score
signiﬁcantly lower in higher levels of the game, but overall would increase
their percentage of right answers (Barendregt et al., 2012). e researers
also identiﬁed some indicators (counting all, counting from smallest,
counting from largest, counting ﬁngers to ﬁve, counting ﬁngers over ﬁve,
manipulating ﬁngers with other hand, problem pressing down) that could
contribute to understanding different learning trajectories in Fingu that may
lead to improvement of ildren’s mathematical abilities. is is claimed as
one of the goals of an ongoing study (Barendregt et al., 2012, p. 4).
Figure 28.5 (a) Different sets of fruit have appeared on the screen until (b) the player places the
corresponding number of fingers, simultaneously, on the screen.
Ladel and Kortenkamp (2011) report on an open-ended, manipulable,
constructive multitou environment developed to foster ildren’s
development of the part-whole concept15 (as proposed, for example, by
Resni, Bill, Lesgold, & Leer, 1991) and of ﬁnger symbols sets. ese are
thought to foster ﬂexible calculation strategies, su as composing and
decomposing numbers with respect to 5 and 10 (Brissiaud, 1992). e
environment consists of a table connected to a computer that recognizes
multitou inputs. Children can create and move tokens simultaneously
(through multitou but also multiuser). Tokens can also be “fused

together” (for example, 3 and 5 to make 8) and the environment will give
symbolic feedba (3 + 5 = 8) on the action. It is also possible to give tasks
in symbolic form (e.g. “3 + 4 = _” or “3 + _ = 7”), whi the ildren are
asked to express with tokens. Ladel and Kortenkamp (2013) report on a
diﬀerent task in this environment designed for ildren aged 5–7, in whi
a certain number of virtual tokens must be placed on the table “all at once,”
thus focusing on the shi from sequential, ordinal counting to holistic
cardinal count.16 e researers describe the diﬀerent ways in whi the
ildren aempted to solve the task, stressing how the environment
enabled the ildren to exteriorize their thinking about number, and noting
the important role of the teaer in interpreting and responding to the
children’s actions.
TouCounts (Sinclair & Jaiw, 2011) is made up of two constructive
microworlds involving manipulable, constructive interactions: (“1, 2, 3,…”)
and (“1 + 2 + 3 +…”). Audio feedba can be given in English, Italian, or
Fren. In the “1, 2, 3,…” microworld, the mode “with gravity” presents a
“shelf” on the screen (Figure 28.6a). As a ﬁnger is placed on the screen, a
colored circle containing an Arabic numeral appears on the screen and the
number is also spoken orally. When the ﬁnger is lied from the screen the
numbered object falls, unless it is dragged so that it “sits” on the shelf (see
Figure 28.6b). When more ﬁngers are placed on the screen, the counting
continues on from the last number reaed with the previous tou. If the
ild interacts through successive toues using a single ﬁnger, or diﬀerent
ﬁngers placed on the screen sequentially, TouCounts will end up
“counting” for the ild, so it may strengthen her or his recollection of the
number words (in sequence) and possibly ﬁne motor abilities. If multiple
ﬁngers tou the screen, the same number of numbered objects appears but
only the last number is given orally—this enables, for example, counting by
twos. In the “no gravity” mode, the numbered objects do not fall, so that
placing ﬁve ﬁngers on the screen (sequentially or simultaneously) will

produce something similar to Figure 28.6c.
Figure 28.6 (a) Counting (initial state); (b) after four taps below the shelf and a fifth tap above the
shelf (arrows indicate falling numbered shapes); (c) the effect of five fingers placed on the screen
simultaneously.
is type of interaction involves various number sense component
abilities su as subitizing and ﬁne motor skills (simultaneous tou to
generate the proper enumeration and dragging of a selected ﬁnger to place
the circle on the line), but the environment may also help lay foundations
for counting principles and for the transition from ordinal to cardinal
counting. is is because it can foster the development of awareness of the
one-to-one correspondence between ﬁngers and numerosities, or between
numbers and successive tou-actions on the screen (one-to-one
correspondence principle); it may foster memorization of the sequence of
number-words to recite when counting (stable order principle); in the
modality without gravity, the last word heard through the audio feedba
corresponds to the total number of circles on the screen (cardinality
principle); and ﬁnally in the gravity mode the possibility of marking certain
numbers by dragging them on the line may favor a process of reiﬁcation

(Sfard, 2008) of the number, necessary for operating on numbers.
In the “1 + 2 + 3…” microworld, touing the screen with several ﬁngers
simultaneously generates sets of circles, of a same random color, enclosed
in a numbered circle indicating its magnitude (Figure 28.7a, b). rough the
“pin” gesture (Figure 28.7c) it is possible to act on the cardinal numbers,
in this case, adding them together. is gesture constitutes a fundamental
metaphor of addition, that of “grouping together” (Lakoﬀ & Núñez, 2000).
e gesture can be performed prior to any formal instruction about
addition, of course, but may help ildren develop a metaphoric meaning
for addition, as well as a sense of the symmetry of this operation (and thus
the commutative property). e result of pining two groups together is a
larger group in whi the colors of the addend circles have been preserved
in order to leave a trace of the action (Figure 28.7d).
Pilot studies indicate that with the use of certain tasks, ildren 5–6 years
old can learn to shi from thinking of number in terms of the process of
counting to thinking of them as reiﬁed objects (Sinclair & Heyd-
Metzuyanim, 2014). Further, with even younger ildren (3–4 years old),
pilot resear has shown that the task of placing ﬁngers all-at-once on the
screen can help develop their “gestural subitizing” (Sinclair, 2013). ese
studies show how a rich manipulative and constructive environment can be
also be instructive, thus fostering the development of both procedures and
associated concepts.
Figure 28.7 (a) Creating a herd of digital counters; (b) the rearranged herd; (c) pinching two herds
together; (d) the sum of two herds.

Table 28.1 Summary of the basic features of multitouch technology that can be used to foster the
development of number-based concepts and abilities.
Concepts and abilities
Technology features
Subitizing
• Numerosities can be shown on the screen for very brief
amounts of time;
• immediate feedback;
• the objects to be considered may appear still and
randomly placed on the screen or in given arrangements
(for example like dots on dice), they can move all
together or one with respect to the other;
• input is accepted in the form of a touch gesture (e.g.
“lasso/capture”).
One-to-one correspondence
between numerosities in
analogical form and numbers of
fingers, and in general finger
gnosia
• Input is accepted in the form of a number of fingers
placed simultaneously on the screen, of a number of
sequential taps (possibly on items in the stimulus);
• accurate timing of the user’s performance;
• possible manipulation of virtual hands.
Fine-motor abilities
• Detecting and differentiating rapid sequences of inputs
from different areas of the screen;
• keeping sequential track of areas of the screen touched
(trace mark);
• recording of different gestures as separate inputs (swipe
with 1 finger, swipe with two fingers, lasso, pinch, un-
pinch/enlarge…).
Part-whole concept
• Detecting as different inputs the simultaneous presence
at a given time (or small interval of time) of two or
more fingers;
• possible manipulation of virtual objects through
gestures.
While research is in its early phases with respect to new touch-screen and
multitou environments, we propose the following summary of the basic
features of multitou tenology that can be used to foster the
development of number-based concepts and abilities.
As has been the case with other signiﬁcantly new digital tenologies,
we also expect to see some anges in the way number sense concepts
themselves may develop—along with the order and pace by whi these
concepts are learned—as ildren interact not only through alphanumeric
means but through tou, sound, and image as well. While the aﬀordances

seem to be clearly geared to supporting young ildren’s learning, more
resear is needed into how these tou-screen devices might aﬀect
ildren’s interactions with physical tasks involving number sense,
including the still pervasive pencil-and-paper media of the mathematics
classroom.

Digital Technologies Focused on Geometry
e goals of geometry learning at the K–2 level are to develop a beer
understanding of objects in relation to their shape and position, and to
aend to the geometric properties (parallelism, congruence, symmetry) and
behaviors (invariance, sameness) of these objects. Since similar goals
pertain also to higher elementary and middle sool geometry, some of the
resear already conducted at these later grades using digital tenologies
is relevant to this apter.17 Dynamic geometry environments (DGEs) have
been the most widely researed geometry tenologies. Researers have
shown how they help foster conjecturing, enable learners to interact with a
larger number of examples, and help learners aend to invariances (see
Baccaglini-Frank & Marioi, 2010; Laborde, Kynigos, Hollebrands, &
Sträßer, 2006; Marioi, 2006; Sinclair & Robui, 2013) in a wide range of
geometry-related topics. Many of these ﬁndings relate to the dragging tool
available in DGEs, whi enables direct, continuous manipulation (and this
form of interaction is now also available in some Web-based applets and
VMs aimed at young ildren). For example, Baista (2007) has shown that
the dragging tool, used to transform constructed quadrilaterals enabled
ildren in grades 4 and 5 to aend to the invariant properties of the
diﬀerent quadrilaterals and even identify certain quadrilaterals (rectangles)
as subclasses of others (parallelograms). At the high-sool level,
Hollebrands (2003) has shown that the use of dragging can help students
develop a functional understanding of transformations (reﬂections and
rotations) since dragging one object continuously on the screen anges the
position of another associated object.
Example From the Building Blocks Curriculum

In addition to the Building Blo VMs mentioned earlier, Sarama and
Clements (2002) describe a geometric manipulable and constructive digital
tenology called Piece Puzzler. It was intentionally designed to contain
screen versions of paern blos and tangram shapes, whi ildren can
manipulate to create or duplicate larger composite shapes. e authors
report resear results on the eﬀect of the curriculum as a whole (Clements
& Sarama, 2007), but not on the speciﬁc use of the virtual manipulative.
However, the principles used for its design are of interest for several
reasons. One su principle stipulates that the virtual manipulative, along
with the speciﬁc tasks, be designed in terms of a hypothetical learning
trajectory. In this case, the authors propose seven levels along this
trajectory, ea of whi is accompanied by a speciﬁc task aimed at
aieving the particular level, with the ﬁnal level aiming at having ildren
be able to iteratively compose composite shapes to tile the plane. For
example, the goal of Level 4 (Shape Composer) is for ildren to oose
and manipulate, through turning and ﬂipping, given shapes to completely
ﬁll a region. e given regions are multiply cornered so that ildren have
to aend to angles in the shapes as well as in the region.18 In Level 6, the
ildren can use shapes to create a composite objects in the shape of a toy
(like a roet ship), whi they can then duplicate by pressing the “do it
again” tools, thus creating iteratively composite units. In the ﬁnal Level 7,
ildren create superordinate units of tetrominoes and use them to tile the
plane.
In their early reporting on the use of the Building Blos program,
Sarama and Clements (2002) report that the “use of the tools encourages
ildren to become explicitly aware of the actions they perform on the
shapes” (p. 103) since, unlike physical paern blos and tangram shapes,
ildren cannot just pi up and move the pieces with their hands. Further,
the ildren are able to create designs that are more precisely assembled
than if they were working with physical objects since, as Moyer, Niezgoda,

and Stanley (2005) have also pointed out in their study of the NLVM
Pattern Block, the shapes can be “snapped” into position and stay fixed. This
description of the soware hides many design oices that are central in
determining how ildren use it and what they learn as they use it. Sarama
and Clements (2002) anowledge that their pilot testing raised questions
about whether unexpected outcomes should lead to anges in the soware
design or anges in the learning trajectory. is should not be surprising if
one anowledges how tools mediate learning, whi is in keeping with
Clements and Sarama’s general Vygotskian approach.
In terms of design, Clements and Sarama brieﬂy discuss decisions made
around how turning would be handled by the soware. ey tested four
possible oices (tool, buon, direct manipulation with continuous motion,
and direct manipulation with discrete units). eir ultimate oice of a tool
interface that is discrete and direct was motivated by the fact that 3–4-year-
old ildren found this interface easier to learn and to use. However, it
requires the designer to oose a default turn angle, whi means that
ildren’s turn actions are actually “turn-by-30-degrees” actions (for the
paern blos, and 15 degrees for the tangrams), thereby highly
constraining the example space of turn (not to mention the fact that the
center of rotation is always in the middle of the shape). Similarly, for the
flip tool the designers decided that the line of reflection would be horizontal
and immediately under the shape being ﬂipped. Given the intended
learning trajectory, these constraints on reﬂecting and rotating may not be
too problematic. However, they are the kinds of constraints that may no
longer be needed with tou-screen interfaces, where ildren can act on
objects with their ﬁngers instead of through the intermediary of a mouse.
Indeed, in the next section, we describe a learning environment in whi
the turn interface osen is that of direct manipulation with continuous
motion.
An example that focuses on very similar mathematical ideas, but that

differs both in the design of the interface and the accompanying task, comes
from a project involving the use of Cabri Elem, whi is a multipurpose
dynamic geometry environment that can be used to design microworlds
suitable for primary sool learners. e “Tiling” microworld, whi is both
manipulable and constructive, involves the composition of shapes into tiling
paerns. Children can manipulate eight diﬀerent shapes directly by sliding,
turning, or ﬂipping. Laborde and Mareteau (2009) report on a study
conducted with grade 3 ildren who were asked to work in pairs to create
tilings involving at least two diﬀerent shapes. ey then described their
paern to another pair who would try to recreate the paern. While all 14
pairs successfully created tilings, only three were able to describe these
tilings in terms of a repeating unit. Given the success of Clements and
Sarama’s Piece Puzzler, as well as the NLVM Paern Blo used by both
Moyer et al. (2005) and Highﬁeld and Mulligan (2007) with younger
ildren, the “cloning” aﬀordance through whi a user can duplicate an
existing set of shapes seems instrumental in promoting thinking in terms of
repeating units.
Example of Whole Classroom Dynamic Geometry
In the third example, we oﬀer a cluster of examples that focus on diﬀerent
aspects of geometry at the K–2 level, and that involve a plenary mode of
interaction in the classroom with a DGE being projected on a wall or an
interactive whiteboard. e ﬁrst example concerns Sinclair and Moss’s
(2012) study involving kindergarten ildren (4–5 years old) and triangle
identiﬁcation in whi Sketpad is used as a conversing and manipulable
as well as a constructive tenology. In this study—whi used Sfard’s
communicational approa in whi learning is conceptualized as a ange
in discourse—ildren moved relatively quily from a ﬁrst van Hiele level

(in communicational terms, a discourse about the physical reality around us
where shapes are identiﬁed as the same if they mat) to a second one (in
communicational terms, a discourse that treats level one things as objects
and where shapes are identiﬁed as the same if they can be transformed one
into the other), with some even moving to a third van Hiele level (in
communicational terms, a reiﬁed one, where shapes are identiﬁed as the
same by comparing verbal descriptions of the shape). In particular, the
ildren initially used the word triangle mu like a proper name
corresponding to an equilateral triangle and identiﬁed shapes as triangles if
they looked like an equilateral triangle. When these ildren were shown a
triangle with its vertex pointing down, whi was constructed using the
segment tool in Sketpad, they either said that it was an “upside down
triangle” or that they could see it as a triangle if they turned themselves
upside down. Aer the teaer dragged one of the vertices of the triangle
on the screen, all but one ild began to speak of triangle as a family name
that describes a larger set of triangles than just equilateral ones. ey
identiﬁed these nonequilateral triangles using a routine of transformation in
whi a shape was a triangle because you could “stret it out.” A few
ildren even began describing the triangles on the screen in deﬁnitional
ways, stating that “[e]very triangle could be, um, a diﬀerent shape but it
just has three corners” (Sinclair & Moss, 2012, p. 36). e ildren were
given the opportunity to create their own triangles using the teaer’s
computer and made a variety of triangle shapes, including long and pointy
ones and upside-down ones. When the teaer shied to squares instead of
triangles, some of the ildren immediately used a discourse of
transformation when talking about a square that was siing on its vertex,
while others insisted that this shape was a diamond. is suggests that the
ildren had not all succeeded in shiing discourse, but this is not surprising
given the short intervention (30 minutes).
A more extended intervention described in Sinclair and Kaur (2011)

involves introducing young ildren (kindergarten and grade 1) to the
concept of angle, this time using Sketpad in a manipulative/manipulable
manner. While angle is typically not formally included in the curriculum at
this age, the researers deemed it both possible and desirable to introduce
it in a visual and dynamic way rather than a measurement-based one
(whi involves learning about degrees and using relatively large numbers
like 180 degrees). e goal of the study was to determine whether focusing
on the metaphor angle-as-turn might enable young ildren to develop
understandings about angle and help address common errors that students
make (as identiﬁed in the literature), su as assuming that an angle with
longer arms is bigger than an angle with shorter arms. The initial task in the
intervention focuses on developing benmark angles. is is done by
oﬀering ildren clowise and counterclowise turning options of ¼, ½,
¾, and 1: when one of these buons are pressed, the arrow turns
dynamically and leaves a trace of the swept-out angle (see Figure 28.8). e
teaer prompts the ildren to arrive at a given destination using a smaller
or bigger angle so that the word angle comes to be associated with the
turning motion. Then, children are invited to use the sketch shown in Figure
28.8 with the task of geing the car to the gas station. By dragging the
angle labeled “dial,” ildren determine the amount by whi the car will
turn. is requires ildren to coordinate the turning of the dial with the
turning of the car, whi is allenging when the car is not facing up, like
the vertical arm of the angle dial. e disassociation of the car form the
angle dial is thus crucial to the design of the sketch.
e researers found that the ildren had no diﬃculty using
benmark angles to describe the position of objects in the screen. Further,
although the ildren initially struggled with the angle dial, they were
eventually able to use it to get the car to the gas station as well as to solve
more complicated, multistep trips. Follow-up computer-based as well as
paper-and-pencil based tasks showed that the ildren, when asked to

compare angles (with distracting features su as diﬀerently sized arms and
diﬀerent orientations), focused on the amount of turn rather than the size of
the arms. Further, when working on tasks involving triangles, the ildren
were as likely to focus on the number and size of the angles than on the
sides. e dynamic nature of the soware, along with the immediate,
nonevaluative feedba, enables ildren to see the turning action and
experiment with the eﬀect of diﬀerent sizes of turns, while the teaer’s
questions and interactions help the ildren associate the word angle to this
turning action. is resear oﬀers initial evidence to support the claim that
angles could be eﬀectively introduced earlier in the geometry curriculum,
which would have implications for the way other topics are taught.
e ﬁnal example involves reﬂectional symmetry. Ng and Sinclair (2015)
describe a three-lesson intervention involving both computer-based and
paper-and-pencil based activities aimed at helping ildren aend to the
geometric properties of reﬂectional symmetry. In the ﬁrst lesson, the
ildren 
explore 
the manipulative/manipulable “symmetry maine”
through direct, discrete interaction by dragging one of the squares on the
screen and observing the resulting motion of the associated square (see
Figure 29.9a, b). e discrete motion of the square is meant to draw
students’ aention to how the movement of the square and its image are
related. After initial exploration, the children are shown various designs and
asked whether they could be created using the symmetry maine. If so,
the students recreate the design, with the environment providing self-
eing feedba; and if cannot, they are invited to explain why. e
ildren can also interact through direct, continuous dragging with the line
of symmetry in order to reproduce designs that have horizontal or oblique,
as well as vertical symmetry (see Figure 29.9c). In the second lesson,
ildren are shown a broken symmetry maine containing squares only on
one side of the line of symmetry and they are asked to ﬁx the other side to
make it symmetric. On the third lesson, the ildren use the continuous

symmetry maine, whi involves direct, continuous dragging of a traced
point, as does a symmetric point. e ildren are asked to create certain
shapes using this continuous symmetry maine (buerﬂy, a square, a
house, etc.).
Figure 28.8 (a) Focusing on benchmark angles; (b) using angle-as-turn to navigate the screen.
e researers found that the ildren developed new and embodied
ways of thinking about symmetry and its properties. Further, the ildren
moved from a static conception of symmetry to a functional and dynamic
one, focusing on the symmetric relation between a shape and its image
rather than on the static property of being symmetric. is shi was
occasioned by the processes of semiotic mediation in whi the dragging
and tracing tool, as well as the language and gestures of the teaer,
became signs that enabled communication about central features of
reﬂectional symmetry including the way in whi one side of a symmetric
design is the same as the other, the way in whi one component of a
symmetric design is the same distance away from the line of symmetry as
its corresponding image, the way in whi a pre-imagine component and
its image have to be on the same line relative to the line of symmetry, and,
the way in which a pre-image and an image gives rise to parity.


Figure 28.9 (a) The discrete symmetry machine; (b) after dragging one block away from the line; (c)
after rotating the line of symmetry.

Learning Mathematics Through Programming
Programming is an important topic that some countries, su as Italy and
the UK,19 even included explicitly in the curriculum indications for
presool or primary sool.20 However, aer the resear on Logo, lile
resear has been published on the teaing and learning of mathematics
through computer programming. Currently, a variety of programmable
toys (su as Bee-bot, Probot, and Lego NXT) are being used in classrooms
around the world, as may be seen by the number of activities available
(especially for Bee-Bot) on Web sites from diﬀerent countries. In addition,
the use of su toys is proposed in textbooks for college courses for Italian
preservice teaers (see Baccaglini-Frank, Ramploud, & Bartolini Bussi,
2012) or in special documents for Australian in-service teaers.21 However
as reported by Highﬁeld and Mulligan (2008), “e consequence of young
ildren’s immersion in these tenologies has not been adequately
investigated and the potential advantages and disadvantages for
mathematics education need to be examined” (p. 1). In a study aimed at
comparing mathematical processes that presool ildren might encounter
whilst “playing” with diﬀerent forms of tenology, including the Bee-Bot,
the researers report that it remains “unclear how mathematical processes
are explored, understood or assimilated by young learners” (Highﬁeld &
Mulligan, 2008, p. 6), and teaer assistance and guidance are heavily
needed. A similar ﬁnding is reported by Pekárová (2008), who notes that
“some ildren clearly demonstrated deep comprehension of principles of
Bee-Bot’s control” (p. 120). ese ﬁndings resonate with what is reported in
theses of graduate students at the Department of Education and Human
Sciences at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy) who have
carried out a number of presool and early elementary sool
interventions using the Bee-Bot (e.g. Bartolini Bussi & Baccaglini-Frank,
2015). Other studies propose the use of robotic toys to foster problem

solving, mapping, and measurement activities (Highﬁeld, 2010; Highﬁeld,
2009; Highfield & Mulligan, 2009).
One of the few published studies involving the use of a programming
environment at the K–2 level is that of Yelland (2002), who developed a
microworld based on the use of Geo Logo, whi encouraged young
ildren (with a mean age of 7 years and 4 months) to explore concepts of
length measurement. e microworld enabled the ildren to move
diﬀerent turtles, ea of whi took a diﬀerent length of step. e ildren
worked in pairs and had to decide how to coordinate the length of ea
step with the number of steps in order to rea a destination. Yelland (2002)
found that the computer-based environment was more conducive to
interactions between the pairs of ildren “whi forced them to use
number and compare numbers in new and dynamic ways” (p. 86). She
further opined that the environment “facilitated playing with units of
measurement in ways that were not possible without the tenology” (p.
91). ese ﬁndings are consistent with resear conducted at the higher
grade levels (see, for example, Clements & Baista, 1989). It also suggests
that ildren at this age are capable of more sophisticated reasoning with
measurement—in terms of covarying the length of the step and the number
of steps—than current curricula assume (also see Goodwin & Highﬁeld,
2013; English & Mulligan, 2013).

Discussion
e rate of proliferation of new digital media far outpaces the amount of
resear that can be conducted. is is in part due to the ever-anging
developments in hardware and soware, and also to the gap between the
kinds of environments valued by researers and those produced by
soware design companies. Indeed, several of the examples we have
analyzed have been designed by the researers themselves, who generally
favor more open-ended environments that support both conceptual and
procedural aspects of concept development. However, funding for su
soware development can be scarce, and support for ongoing maintenance
even more so. Soware is not like textbooks—it needs continuous
debugging, upgrading, and adaptation to new operating systems and
hardware aﬀordances. Although it is likely that many of the environments
discussed here will be superseded in the years to come, our analyses should
be understood from a broader perspective, and a reader should appreciate
how they will remain the same regardless of the “game” or “interface.” To
that end, we have highlighted some of the diﬀerent design decisions that
are relevant to mathematics learning at the K–2 grades.
Multitou devices seem to have particularly strong potential in
ildren’s development of number sense, in large part because of the
important role that ﬁngers play in this development and also because of the
direct mediation enabled by this tenology. Other computer-based
programs, including VMs, have also been shown to be eﬀective, especially
when the feedba—either from the computer or a teaer—can help
ildren reﬂect on the mathematically relevant aspects of their actions. We
expect that many of these VMs will soon be available on multitou
platforms as well. e speciﬁc ways in whi they are implemented—in
terms of the kinds of interactions that are made possible—will be important
in determining their eﬀectiveness. In terms of geometry, a large portion of

the studies have focused on microworlds that have been built within
dynamic geometry environments. e ease with whi young ildren can
see and explore a wide variety of continuously anging shapes, as well as
relationships between shapes, seems to make them highly suitable for the
K–2 level, particularly with appropriate teaer mediation. We expect to
see more stand-alone microworlds developed for multitou platforms,
whi will lead to interesting resear questions about the diﬀerent activity
structures that would enable several ildren at once to interact with
shapes, perhaps working together to compose a set of polygons.
Clearly, mu more resear on the eﬀects of digital tenologies on K–
2 teaing and learning is needed. Although there exists an abundance of
digital tools for researers and teaers to oose from, especially in terms
of Internet applets and tou-screens apps, we know very lile about how
particular design oices might aﬀect ildren’s learning—as well as
ildren’s use of physical materials in the classroom. We would like to draw
aention to speciﬁc themes that we think are and will become signiﬁcant in
this area of resear, including oosing between discrete and continuous
ﬂow of interaction, accounting for the aﬀective dimension of learning,
anowledging the impact of diﬀerent types of feedba, and aending to
constraints.
While earlier soware programs oen ose more discrete modes of
interaction (as in Clements and Sarama’s discrete angle interface and the
NVLM’s discrete number line applets), there may be a move toward more
continuous models both because of the new forms of interactions aﬀorded
by dynamic and tou-screen tenologies and because of anges in our
assumptions about what mathematical objects ildren should be exposed
to. In terms of the laer, if prior tenologies privileged whole numbers
(Cuisinaire rods, base-10 blos, and even discrete number lines), new
tenologies enable and sometimes require ildren to work with real
numbers (Sinclair & Crespo, 2006), whi presents interesting allenges for

VMs as well as, more generally, for orestrations of digital and physical
classroom resources. We are reminded of Papert’s promotion of the
Mathland learning environment: mu like living in a foreign country,
Mathland does not limit forms of participation and interaction to the
novice’s basic vocabulary.
Many of the resear studies we read, as well as reports in professional
journals, highlight the higher level of engagement that ildren seem to
experience when working with digital tenologies. Although we assume
this is not universally true, it is also part of the anecdotal evidence
surrounding digital tenology use at the high grades. Cognizant of the
negative eﬀects that too mu “screen time” can have on young ildren
(see Public Health England, 2013), more resear on the nature and function
of that engagement is warranted. It is not always clear from resear
reports whether the enjoyment stems from a simple ange in
environment, from the tighter feedba loop that the digital tool provides,
or from the kind of curiosity, pride, and intellectual engagement that is
typically associated with self-directed and deep mathematical learning. is
would require theoretical and methodological tools that enable analyses
that do not diotomize the cognitive, aﬀect, and aesthetic dimensions of
learning.
One of the frequently mentioned strengths of digital tenologies is their
ability to provide instantaneous, customized feedba, whi is very
allenging for a classroom teaer to do. However, as we have signaled
throughout the apter, there are a wide variety of forms of feedba, ea
potentially functioning very diﬀerently both cognitively and aﬀectively for
ildren. More work is needed to understand how young ildren process
and use these diﬀerent forms of feedba.22 For example, given the
extensive resear showing that evaluative, corrective teaer feedba (of
the yes/no form) in the classroom has negative eﬀects on student learning,
developing and using digital tenologies that only have this kind of

feedba must have a strong counterrationale. At the same time, for
teaers and resear opting for more guided forms of feedba
(responding through hints, for example), resear that studies the way that
ildren use—and what they learn from—this feedba would be very
helpful. In addition, the exteriorization of thinking oﬀered by digital
tenologies (whi Noss & Hoyles, 1996 refer to as a “window on
mathematical meanings”) can be extremely helpful to teaers. is implies
that more resear is needed on how teaers make sense of and use
feedback in working with and assessing their students.
We oﬀered two diﬀerent frameworks for distinguishing various digital
tenologies, both of whi provided comparative power, but neither of
whi helps designers, researers, and teaers aend to the way
particular constraints can aﬀect the development of mathematical
meanings. Some constraints are determined by the tenology (as in
Clements and Sarama’s oice of a discrete interaction) while others are the
result of didactic goals. Constraints can be used purposefully to restrict and
focus a learner’s interactions, as discussed by Ladel and Kortenkamp (2011,
2013) and by Manes, O’Malley, and Benford (2010). For example, a
constraint in TouCounts is that numbered objects cannot be moved once
they are placed on the screen; this constraint aims to restrict the ildren’s
externalizing actions in order to the internalization of the one-to-one-to-
one correspondence between tou, objects, and number. In order to fully
understand the potential of digital tenologies, and their impact on student
learning, the nature and consequence of these constraints needs to be taken
into account. is will require beer communication between designers,
researers and teaers in future resear. Further, methodological oices
for resear need to reﬂect the way in whi the learning environment as a
whole, including the teaer and the tasks used in concert with the digital
tenology, functions to aﬀect mathematical learning. To this end, we ﬁnd
persuasive Stylianides and Stylianides’ (2013) argument in favor of teaing

experiment (or classroom-based interventions) methodologies, whi can
increase the likelihood that the results of resear are applicable while also
shedding light on how and why certain situations work.

Notes
1. For example, dynamic geometry environments (su as e Geometer’s Sketpad and Cabri-
Elem) can be used to create microworlds that may function as virtual manipulatives or used on
interactive whiteboards (with Sketchpad also available for the Apple iPad).
2. Sedig & Sumner (2006) distinguish between “real” and “perceived” aﬀordances as a way of
underscoring the fact that users do not always use digital tenologies in the ways intended by
their designers. is fact is central to the theory of instrumental genesis, whi is discussed in
the next section.
3. Sedig and Sumner (2006) point out that su interactions are oen seen as reducing the
cognitive load on learners, especially if they do not have to plan their actions in advance, whi
they might be more inclined to do in discrete, conversing interactions. e oice of a
manipulating interaction over a conversing one will depend on the goal of the tool/task/concept.
4. We anowledge that there are some major diﬀerences between the ways in whi number sense
is deﬁned in the mathematical cognition literature and its deﬁnition in the literature in
mathematics education (see, for example, Ber, 2005). Here we will refer to the literature in
both ﬁelds, assuming that the more speciﬁc meaning within the former ﬁeld is a necessary
stepping stone towards its vaster, mu more complex and multifaceted connotation proposed in
the latter.
5. ere is extensive literature showing the value of using calculators in the early years (Groves &
Stacey, 1998) However, there seems to be mu less enthusiasm for them amongst teaers and
researers, perhaps in part because they do not oﬀer the visual forms of interaction that other
digital technologies at this early age now do.
6. Resear on the use of digital tenologies with younger learners seems to have coincided with a
new focus on the role of the teaer in tenology-based classroom environments—this focus
having been prompted by the realization that despite high levels of accessibility and institutional
support, as well as supporting resear, the use of digital tenologies in the mathematics
classroom remains relatively low (see Laborde, 2008).
7. Available on iTunes at https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/place-value-chart/id568750442?mt=8.
8. To play the game, visit http://number-sense.co.uk/numberbonds/.

9. Available on iTunes at https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/number-bonds-by-thinkout/id494521339?
mt=8.
10. Available on the Apple App store at www.appstore.com/motionmathhd.
11. To play the game, visit http://illuminations.nctm.org/Activity.aspx?id=3566.
12. ese ildren may be referred to in the literature as being aﬀected by dyscalculia (Buerworth,
2005).
13. To play the game, visit http://number-sense.co.uk/dots2track/.
14. Available on iTunes at https://itunes.apple.com/it/app/fingu/id449815506?mt=8.
15. Something analogous to the part-whole concept is present in the Chinese mathematics education
tradition in its presentation of “variation problems” (Sun, 2011).
16. Indeed, they are also relevant for topics other than geometry. However, it would seem that
geometric environments su as DGEs have been more amenable to streted across the grade
levels.
17. Indeed, they are also relevant for topics other than geometry. However, it would seem that
geometric environments su as dynamic geometry environments (DGEs) have been more
amenable to stretched across the grade levels.
18. In a study focused more speciﬁcally on ildren’s paerning, Moyer et al. (2005) also studied the
use of a Paern Blo VM with kindergarten ildren and found that the paerns they created
were more creative, complex and proliﬁc when using the VM than when using concrete
materials. Similarly, Highﬁeld and Mulligan (2007) report that presool ildren using a
Paern Blo VM as well as a drawing tool called Kidpix experimented with more paerns,
created more precise paerns and made more use of transformations than ildren who worked
only with physical materials. e authors do caution that the ildren found the use of the
mouse allenging—again, this is a hardware limitation that tou-screen tenology can
mitigate—and the additional affordances of Kidpix sometimes distracting.
19. For example, in Italy, the national curriculum stipulates that by grade three, when possible,
students should be introduced to some programming languages that are simple and versatile in

order to develop a taste for the planning and realization of projects and in order to understand
the relation between coding language and its visual output. In the UK national curriculum,
ildren are expected to develop competence in two or more programming languages by the age
of eleven.
20. We highlight several new programming languages are speciﬁcally been developed for young
ildren, su as Squeak, ToonTalk  and Giorgi & Baccaglini-Frank’s (2011) Mak-Trace app for
the iPad.
21. S
e
e http://elresources.skola.edu.mt/wp-
content/uploads/2010/06/doc_669_2468_beebotguideA4v2.pdf.
22. It seems like not all children do this in the same way. See Goodwin and Highfield (2013, p. 214).

References
Andres, M., Seron, X., & Oliver, E. (2007). Contribution of hand motor circuits to counting. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 563–576.
Artigue, M. (2002). Learning mathematics in a CAS environment: e genesis of a reﬂection about
instrumentation and the dialectics between technical and conceptual work. International Journal
of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 7(3), 245–274.
Baccaglini-Frank, A., & Marioi, M. A. (2010) Generating conjectures in dynamic geometry: e
maintaining dragging model. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning,
15(3), 225–253.
Baccaglini-Frank, A., Ramploud, A., & Bartolini Bussi, M. G. (2012). Informatica Zero: Un percorso
formativo per insegnanti di scuola dell’infanzia e primaria.
Fano, Italy: EduTouch.
Bafalluy, M. G. & Noël, M. P. (2008). Does ﬁnger training increase young ildren’s numerical
p e r f o r m a n c e ? Cortex, 
44(4), 
368–375. 
Retrieved 
from
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010945207000780.
Barendregt, W., Lindstrom, B., Rietz-Leppanen, E., Holgersson, I., & Oosson, T. (2012). Development
and evaluation of Fingu: A mathematics iPad game using multitou interaction. IDC 2012 (pp.
1–4). June 12–15, Bremen, Germany.
Bartolini Bussi, M. G. (2011). Artefacts and utilization semes in mathematics teaer education:
place value in early ildhood education. Journal of Mathematics Teaer Education , 14(2), 93–
112.
Bartolini Bussi, M. G. & Baccaglini-Frank, A. (2015). Geometry in early years: sowing the seeds
towards a mathematical deﬁnition of squares and rectangles. ZDM—e International Journal
on Mathematics Education. doi:10.1007/s11858-014-0636-5
Bartolini, M. G., Baccaglini-Frank, A., & Ramploud, A. (2014). Intercultural dialogue and the
geography and history of thought. For the Learning of Mathematics, 34(1), 31–33.
Bartolini Bussi, M. G., & Marioi, M. A. (2008). Semiotic mediation in the mathematics classroom:
Artifacts and signs aer a Vygotskian perspective. In L. English, M. Bartolini Bussi, G. Jones, R.
Lesh, & D. Tirosh (Eds.), Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (2nd ed.).

Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baista, M. T. (2007). e development of geometric and spatial thinking. In F. Lester (Ed.), Second
handbook of resear on mathematics teaing and learning (pp. 843–908). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Ber, D. B. (2005). Making sense of number sense: Implications for ildren with mathematical
disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 38(4), 333–339.
Bolyard, J., & Moyer-Paenham, P. S. (2012). Making sense of integer arithmetic: e eﬀect of
using virtual manipulatives on students’ representational ﬂuency. Journal of Computers in
Mathematics and Science Teaching, 31(2), 93–113.
Brissiaud, R. (1992). A toll for number construction: Finger symbol sets. In J. Bidaud, C. Meljac & J.-
P. Fiser (eds.). Pathways to number. Children’s Developing Numerical Abilities. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Buerworth, B. (1999a). What counts—how every brain is hardwired for math. New York: e Free
Press.
Butterworth, B. (1999b). The mathematical brain. London: Macmillan.
Buerworth, B. (2005). e development of arithmetical abilities. Journal of Child Psyology and
Psychiatry, 46, 3–18.
Butterworth, B. (2011). Dyscalculia: From brain to education. Science, 332, 1049–1053.
Buerworth, B., & Laurillard, D. (2010). Low numeracy and dyscaclulia: Identiﬁcation and
intervention. ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 42, 527–539.
Cantlon, J., Saﬀord, K., & Brannon, E. (2010). Spontaneous analog number representations in 3-year-
old children. Developmental Science, 13, 289–297.
Clements, D. H. (2002). Computers in Early Childhood Mathematics. Contemporary Issues in Early
Childhood, 3(2), 160–181.
Clements, D. H., & Baista, M. T. (1989). Learning of geometric concepts in a Logo environment.
Journal of Research in Mathematics Education, 20, 450–467.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2004). Building Blos for early ildhood mathematics. Early
Childhood Research Quarterly, 19, 181–189.
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2007). Eﬀects of a presool mathematics curriculum: Summary
research on the building blocks project. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education, 38, 136–

163.
Drijvers, P. (2012). Teaers transforming resources into orestrations. In Gueudet, G., Pepin, B., &
Troue, L. From textbooks to ‘lived’ resources: Mathematics curriculum materials and teaer
documentation (pp. 265–281), New York: Springer.
English L. D., & Mulligan J. (2013). Advances in Mathematics Education: Vol. 8. Reconceptualizing
early mathematics learning. New York: Springer.
Fayol, M., & Seron, X. (2005). About numerical representations: Insights from neuropsyological,
experimental, and developmental studies. In J.I.D. Campbell (Ed.), Handbook of mathematical
cognition. New York: Psychology Press.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E., (2004). Core systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Science,
8(7), 307–314.
Gattegno, C. (1970). Gattegno mathematics textbook 1. New York: Educational Solution Worldwide.
Giorgi, G., & Baccaglini-Frank, A. (2011). Mak-Trace. Free application downloadable from Apple
iTunes: http://itunes.apple.com/it/app/maktrace/id467939313?m t=8.
Goldenberg, P. (2000). inking (and talking) about tenology in math classrooms. Educational
Development Center. Retrieved from www2.edc.org/mcc/pdf/iss_tech.pdf.
Goodwin, K. (2009). Impact and aﬀordances of interactive multimedia. Unpublished PhD thesis.
Macquarie University, Sydney.
Goodwin, K., & Highﬁeld, K. (2013). A framework for examining tenologies and early
mathematics learning. In L. D. English and J. T. Mulligan (Eds.), Reconceptualizing early
mathematics learning (pp 205–226). New York: Springer.
Gracia-Bafalluy, M., & Noel, M. (2008). Does ﬁnger training increase young ildren’s numerical
performance? Cortex, 44(4), 368–375.
Groves, S., & Stacey, K. (1998). Calculators in primary mathematics: Exploring number before
teaing algorithms. e Teaing and Learning of Algorithms in Sool Mathematics: 1998
Yearbook of the National Council of Teaers of Mathematics  (pp. 120–129, Reston, VA:
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Gueudet, G., Bueno-Ravel, L., & Poisard, C. (2013). Teaing mathematics with tenology at the
kindergarten level: Resources and orestrations. In A. Clark-Wilson, O. Robui, & N. Sinclair
(Eds.), e mathematics teaer in the digital era: An international perspective on tenology

focused professional development. Dordrecht: Springer.
Gueudet, G., & Troue, L. (2008). Towards new documentation systems for mathematics teaers?
Educational Studies in Mathematics, 71(3), 199–218.
Highﬁeld, K. (2009). Mapping, measurement and robotics. Reﬂections, Journal of the Mathematical
Association of New South Wales, 34(1), 52–55.
Highﬁeld, K. (2010). Robotic toys as a catalyst for mathematical problem solving. Australian
Primary Mathematics Classroom, 15, 22–27.
Highﬁeld, K., & Mulligan, J. (2007). e role of dynamic interactive tenological tools in
presoolers’ mathematical paerning. In J. Watson & K. Beswi (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th
annual conference of the Mathematics Education Resear Group of Australasia (pp. 372–381).
MERGA. Adelaide, Australia.
Highﬁeld, K., & Mulligan, J. T. (2008). Young ildren’s engagement with tenological tools: e
impact on mathematics education. Paper presented to the International Congress of
Mathematical Education (ICME 11). Discussion Group 27: How is tenology allenging us to
re-think 
the 
fundamentals 
of 
mathematics 
education? 
Retrieved 
from
http://dg.icme11.org/tsg/show/28.
Highﬁeld, K., & Mulligan, J. T. (2009). Young ildren’s embodied action in problem-solving tasks
using robotic toys. In M. Tzekaki, M. Kaldrimidou, & H. Sakonidis (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd
conference of the International Group for the Psyology of Mathematics Education (Vol. 2, pp.
273–280). Thessaloniki, Greece: PME.
Hollebrands, K. (2003). High sool students’ understandings of geometric transformations in the
context of a technological environment. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 22, 55–72.
Hoyles, C., Noss, R., & Adamson, R. (2002). Rethinking the microworld idea. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 27(1–2), 29–53.
Laborde, C. (2008). Tenology as an instrument for teaers. In Proceedings of the international
commission for mathematics instruction centennial symposium. Rome, Italy. Retrieved from
www.unige.ch/math/EnsMath/ Rome2008/partWG4.html.
Laborde, C., Kynigos, C., Hollebrands, K., & Sträßer, R. (2006). Teaing and learning geometry with
tenology. In A. Gutiérrez & P. Boero (Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of
mathematics education: Past, present and future (pp. 275–304). Roerdam, e Netherlands:

Sense Publishers.
Laborde, C., & Mareteau, A. (2009). L’incontro tra reale e virtuale in Cabri Elem per aività
matematiche nella scuola primaria, La matematica e la sua didattica, 23(1), 19–34.
Ladel, S., & Kortenkamp, U. (2011). Implementation of a multitou-environment supporting ﬁnger
symbol sets. In Proceedings of the Seventh Congress of the European Society for Resear in
Mathematics Education. Rzeszow, Poland: CERME.
Ladel, S., & Kortenkamp, U. (2013). An activity-theoretic approa to multi-tou tools in early
maths learning. The International Journal for Technology in Mathematics Education, 20(1), 3–8.
Lakoﬀ, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where mathematics comes from: How the embodied mind brings
mathematics into being. New York: Basic Books.
Lyons, I., & Beilo, S. (2011). Numerical ordering ability mediates the relation between number-
sense and arithmetic competence. Cognition, 121, 256–261.
Manes, A., O’Malley, C., & Benford, S. (2010). e role of physical representations in solving
number problems: A comparison of young ildren’s use of physical and virtual materials.
Computers & Education, 54(3), 622–640.
Marioi, M. A. (2006). Proof and proving in mathematics education. In A. Guiérrez & P. Boero
(Eds.), Handbook of resear on the psyology of mathematics education: Past, present and
future (pp. 173–204). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: Sense Publishing.
Masieo, M., & Soury-Lavergne, S. (2013). e beginning of the adventure with pascaline and e-
pascaline. In E. Faggiano & A. Montone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 11th international conference
on tenology in mathematics teaing (ICTMT 11; pp. 195–199). Bari: Università degli Studi di
Bari.
Moorthy, S., Dominguez, X., Llorente, C., Pinkerton, L., Christiano, E., & Lesk, H. (2013). Joint
engagement with media that supports early science learning. Paper presented at the Annual
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (AERA). San Francisco, CA.
Moyer, P., Niezgoda, D., & Stanley, J. (2005). Young children’s use of virtual manipulatives and other
forms of mathematical representations. In W. Masalski & P. C. Ellio (Eds.), Technology-
supported mathematics learning environments: 67th yearbook (pp. 17–34). Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Moyer-Paenham, P., Salkind, G. W., Bolyard, J., & Suh, J. M. (2013). Eﬀective oices and

practices: Knowledgeable and experienced teaers’ uses of manipulatives to tea mathematics.
Online 
Journal 
of 
Education 
Resear, 
2(2), 
18–33. 
Retrieved 
from
www.onlineresearchjournals.org/IJER/cont/2013/apr.htm.
Moyer-Paenham, P. S., & Suh, J. M. (2012). Learning mathematics with tenology: e inﬂuence
of virtual manipulatives on diﬀerent aievement groups. Journal of Computers in Mathematics
and Science Teaching, 31(1), 39–59.
Nemirovksy, R., Kelton, M. & Rhodehamel, B. (2013). Playing mathematical instruments: Emerging
perceptuomotor integration with an interactive mathematics exhibit. Journal for Resear in
Mathematics Education, 44(2), 372–415.
Ng, O., & Sinclair, N. (2015). “ey are geing married!” Towards a dynamic, functional
understanding of symmetry in primary sool. ZDM—e International Journal on
Mathematics Education.
Noss, R., & Hoyles, C. (1996). Windows on mathematical meanings. Dordret, e Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms: Children, computers and powerful ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Pekárová, J. (2008). Using a programmable toy at presool age: Why and how? In Proceedings of
the international conference on simulation, modeling and programming for autonomous robots
(pp. 112–121). Heidelberg: Springer.
Penner-Wilger, M., Fast, L., LeFevre, J. A., Smith-Chant, B. L., Skwaruk, S. L, Kamawar, D., &
Bisanz, J. (2007). e foundations of numeracy: Subitizing, ﬁnger gnosia, and ﬁne motor ability.
In D. S. McNamara & J. G. Traon (Eds.), Proceedings of the 29th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 1385–1390). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Piazza, M. (2010). Neurocognitive start-up tools for symbolic number representations. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 14(12), 542–551.
Public Health England. (2013). How healthy behaviour supports ildren’s well-being. PHE
Publications 
gateway 
number: 
2013146. 
Retrieved 
from
www.gov.uk/government/publications/how-healthy-behaviour-supports-childrens-wellbeing.
Räsänen, P., Salminen, J., Wilson, A. J., Aunio, P., & Dehaene, S. (2009). Computer-assisted
intervention for children with low numeracy skills. Cognitive Development 24(4), 450–472.
Riconscente, M. (2013). Mobile learning game improves 5th graders’ knowledge and aitudes. Los

Angeles: GameDesk Institute. Retrieved from www.gamedesk.org/projects/motion-math-in-class/.
Robui, O. (2006). Motion, tenology, gesture in interpreting graphs. e International Journal for
Technology In Mathematics Education, 13(3), 117–126.
Resni, L. B., Bill, V., Lesgold, S., & Leer, M. (1991). inking in arithmetic class. In B. Means, C.
Chelemer, & M. S. Knapp (ed.). Teaing advanced skills to at-risk students: Views from resear
and practice (pp. 27–53). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2002). Building blos for young ildren’s mathematical
development. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 27(1–2), 93–110.
Sarama, J., & Clements, D. H. (2009). “Concrete” computer manipulatives in mathematics education.
Child Development Perspectives, 3(3), 145–150.
Sato, M., Caaneo L., Rizzolai, G., & Gallese, V. (2007). Numbers within our hands: Modulation of
corticospinal excitability of hand muscles during numerical judgment. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 19(4), 684–693.
Sedig, K., & Sumner, M. (2006). Characterizing interaction with visual mathematical representations.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 11(1), 1–55.
Sfard, A. (2008). inking as communicating: Human development, the growth of discourses, and
mathematizing. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sinclair, N. (2013). TouCounts: An embodied, digital approa to learning number. Proceedings of
the International Conference of Tenology in Mathematics Teaing 11 . Bari, Italy: Università
degli Studi di Bari.
Sinclair, N., & Crespo, S. (2006). Learning mathematics with dynamic computer environments.
Teaching Children Mathematics 12(9), 436–444.
Sinclair, N., de Freitas, E., & Ferrara, F. (2013). Virtual encounters: e murky and furtive world of
mathematical inventiveness. ZDM—e International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45 (2),
239–252.
Sinclair, N., & Heyd-Metzayunim, E. (2014). Learning number with TouCounts: e role of
emotions and the body in mathematical communication. Technology, Knowledge and Learning.
Sinclair, N., & Jaiw, N. (2011). TouCounts. Free application downloadable on the App Store,
https://itunes.apple.com/ca/app/touchcounts/id897302197?mt=8.
Sinclair, N., & Kaur, H. (2011). Young children’s understanding of reflection symmetry in a dynamic

geometry environment. Proceedings of the 35th conference of the international group for the
psychology of mathematics education. Ankara, Turkey: PME.
Sinclair, N. & Moss, J. (2012). e more it anges, the more it becomes the same: e development
of the routine of shape identiﬁcation in dynamic geometry environments. International Journal
of Education Research, 51&52(3), 28–44.
Sinclair, N., & Robui, O. (2013). Tenology and the role of proof: e case of dynamic geometry.
In A. J. Bishop, M. A. Clements, C. Keitel, & F. Leung (Eds.), ird international handbook of
mathematics education. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Sinclair, N., & Yurita, V. (2008). To be or to become: How dynamic geometry anges discourse.
Research in Mathematics Education, 10(2), 135–150.
Sowell, E. J. (1989). Eﬀects of manipulative materials in mathematics instruction. Journal of
Research in Mathematics Education, 20(5), 498–505.
Steen, K., Brookes, D., & Lyon, T. (2006). e impact of virtual manipulatives on ﬁrst grade
geometry instruction and learning. Journal of Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaing,
25(4), 373–391.
Stevens, R., & Penuel, W. R. (2010, October). Studying and fostering learning through joint media
engagement. Paper presented at the Principal Investigators Meeting of the National Science
Foundation’s Science of Learning Centers, Arlington, VA.
Stylianides, A. J., & Stylianides, G. J. (2013). Seeking resear-grounded solutions to problems of
practice: Classroom-based interventions in mathematics education. ZDM—e International
Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(3), 333–340.
Sun, X. (2011). “Variation problems” and their roles in the topic of fraction division in Chinese
mathematics textbook examples. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 76(1), 65–85.
ompson J. C., Abbo, D. F., Wheaton, K. J., Syngeniotis, A., & Puce. A. (2004). Digit representation
is more than just hand waving. Cognitive Brain Research, 21, 412–17.
Troue, L. (2004). Managing complexity of human/maine interactions in computerized learning
environments: Guiding students’ command process through instrumental orestrations.
International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 9, 281–307.
Yelland, N. (2002). Creating microworlds for exploring mathematical understandings in the early
years of school. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 27(1–2), 77–92.

van Herwegen, J., Ansari, D., Xu, F., & Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (2008). Small and large number
processing in infants and toddlers with Williams syndrome. Developmental Science, 11, 637–643.
Wilson, A., Revkin, S., Cohen, D., Cohen, L., & Dehaene, S. (2006). An open trial assessment of “e
Number Race,” an adaptive computer game for remediation of dyscalculia. Behavioral and Brain
Functions, 2(20).
Wilson, A. J., Dehaene, S., Pinel, P., Revkin, S. K., Cohen, L., & Cohen, D. (2006). Principles
underlying the design of “e Number Race,” an adaptive computer game for remediation of
dyscalculia. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 2(19). doi:10.1186/1744-9081-2-19
Wilson, A., & Dehaene, S. (2007). Number sense and developmental dyscalculia. In D. Co, G.
Dawson, & K. Fiser (Eds.), Human behavior, learning, and the developing brain: Atypical
development (pp. 212–238). New York: Guilford Press.

Final Comment

29 Mathematics Education Research
A Strategic View
Hugh Burkhardt
Shell Centre, University of Nottingham and the University of California, Berkeley

Introduction
e previous apters in this handbook have brought together a huge
amount of resear by the community of solars in mathematics
education, integrated and summarized in ea apter by some of the
leaders in the ﬁeld. Here I am going to look at resear in mathematics
education from a strategic point of view1—as a collective enterprise that
aims to serve various communities. In doing so I respect the solars who
assert their traditional academic right to plough their own furrow,
wherever it may lead; this apter is not for them. However, I believe that
most researers in education are motivated by the thought that their work
will beneﬁt others, notably but not exclusively students at various stages in
their education.
Yet, the inﬂuence of our work on what happens in classrooms at large
usually travels a long path where any causal eﬀect is far from clear
(Burkhardt & Soenfeld, 2003). What are the reasons that underlie this
limited impact? It is certainly not that the research is irrelevant—far from it.
is question is reﬂected in many of the earlier apters. While impact
“at scale” is not their main focus, its absence is recognized as a concern. I’ll
mention just two examples. Cobb, Jason, and Dunlap ( Chapter 20), at the
end of their luminous chapter on design research, put it thus:
A third major weakness concerns the frequent failure of researers conducting classroom and
PD design studies to design for scale when preparing for studies, thereby limiting the potential
pragmatic payoff and relevance of their work beyond the research community.
(p. 498)
is points to a neglect of teacher variables in the study of teaching. e
aitude of Charalambous and Pia-Pantazi (Chapter 2) is perhaps more
typical. They end their review of the impact of teaching on learning:
In this respect, working on unpaing and understanding this complex relationship creates an

arena for forging fruitful and productive collaborations between researers, policy makers, and
practitioners—which comprises a still unfulfilled demand.
(p. 44)
From this perspective, the role of resear is to provide insights; how the
“unfulfilled demand” is to be met is left for others to work out.
Accordingly, this apter addresses the speciﬁc questions: Can the
resear community do beer in turning insights into impact on policy and
practice—and how?
Levels of Research and Development
I ﬁnd it useful to distinguish four levels, focused respectively on learning,
teaing, teaers and their professional development, and sool system
ange. Resear gets more diﬃcult as one moves up the size scale in a
way summarized in Table 29.1 (Burkhardt, 2001, 2013). Ea level embraces
those above. Successful large-scale high-quality improvement requires
coherent alignment throughout the levels, whi is itself a system-level
challenge.
Table 29.1 Four levels of R&D
Focal
variables
Typical Research and Development Foci
Learning
(L)
Student
Task
R: Concepts, skills, strategies, metacognition, beliefs
D: Learning situations, probes, data capture
Teaching
(T)
Instruction
Student
Task
R: Teaching strategies and tactics, nature of student learning
D: Classroom materials that are OK for some teachers
Typical
Teachers
(RT)
Teacher
Instruction
Student
Task
R: Performance of representative teachers with realistic support.
Basic studies of teacher knowledge and competency.
D: Classroom materials that “work” for most teachers
System
School

System
Change
(SC)
Teacher
Instruction
Student
Task
R: System change
D: Tools for change—i.e., materials for classrooms, assessment,
professional development, community relations
e great majority of resear in mathematics education reﬂected in this
Handbook has studied learning and/or teaing. is preponderance is
particularly true of solution-focused resear that goes beyond “diagnosis”
in the direction of developing more eﬀective “treatments.” is is not only
understandable but, in some ways, right. What happens in the classroom is
what sool systems are all about. City, Elmore, Fiarman, and Teitel (2009)
have emphasized that any initiative is only successful insofar as it supports
improvement in this “zone of instruction.” However, marvelous things that
emerge in classrooms working closely with a resear project may not be
directly accessible to representative teaers. In any skilled activity—and
mathematics teaing is surely that—there will be a wide range of
expertise.2 But instead of extending the resear to this third level in the
table, by addressing teaer variables, there is a tendency simply to end a
resear paper with a call for more and beer professional development—a
highly desirable goal, but one that inevitably needs R&D at the fourth
system level. ough the resear in this Handbook looks at mathematics
education from a variety of perspectives, there are no apters (other than
this one) that focus on the third or fourth level in Table 29.1—for example,
on the processes of professional development of representative teaers,
various ways in whi that has been supported, and the outcomes, or on the
dynamics of ange at system level. is is a reﬂection of the balance of
current effort across the research community.
It is worth noting that the standards of evaluation are diﬀerent at ea
level in Table 29.1, reﬂecting the number of variables and the diﬃculty in
controlling them. Whereas learning studies can reliably report speciﬁc
phenomena, system studies must inevitably work with distributions.

However, they need to focus on what is important, notably what happens
in classrooms with teaers and students at various stages of development
throughout the processes of systemic change.
The Research Community
I will take the viewpoint, implicit in any handbook like this, that resear is
a community enterprise. e resear community itself is a system, where
our inﬂuence on others is evidenced by the references in their papers—
sometimes with comments and responses in the text. Teaers who are
active in action resear in their own classrooms build on the work of
others and spread the insights they have gained. But how well does the
design of this collective enterprise help the communities it aims to serve?
Of course, I am adopting a contrary perspective: the paern of work in
the resear community is not designed. Individual researers, mostly
university staﬀ and their graduate students, make autonomous decisions as
to what to work on next. But these decisions are inﬂuenced by a variety of
pressures and opportunities. A graduate student’s oice of dissertation
topic is usually guided by his or her supervisor—and rightly so, since
oosing a topic with the right balance of allenge and feasibility requires
insight and experience. is inﬂuence continues: some fresh PhDs who
follow an academic career go on working on extensions of their
dissertation, sometimes for many years. e availability of resear grants
may give a researer the opportunity to build a team so that more ground
can be covered, but su resear leverage comes at a price: ﬁing your
proposal to the priorities of the funding agency. Finally, there is “fashion.”
Some types of research are more in vogue than others.
Fashions, of course, ange with time—otherwise they would not be
fashions. For example, over the last 30 years the balance of highly regarded

resear in mathematics education has swung from quantitative methods
that yield statistically reliable answers to (inevitably) simple questions
towards qualitative studies that look in depth at (inevitably) small samples.
Design resear—a term ﬁrst coined by Anne Brown (1992) though the
style of resear is mu older (see e.g. Swan, 1980; Swan et al., 1984; Birks,
1987)—has moved from being seen as “not really resear” to aieving
some academic respectability. Engineering resear in education
(Burkhardt, 2006), where improved products and processes for use in
practice are as important as the insights underlying them, still hovers on the
edge—though it is well-supported by those funding agencies whose priority
is impact on what happens in classrooms.
Three Different Traditions
ere are profound variations in the view of resear and solarship that
coexist in the education community. ey arise from very diﬀerent
traditions, reﬂecting respectively the humanities, science, and engineering
(Burkhardt, 2001, 2006).
e humanities tradition, widely used across the social sciences, is based
on rily informed observation and analysis, distilled into commentary. It
does not demand empirical testing of assertions, but places emphasis on the
plausibility of the arguments and the quality of the writing. ese priorities
help to make this the approa that has most inﬂuence with policy makers,
partly at least because it is an implicit invitation for anyone to play—an
invitation that politicians are oen happy to accept. eir “common sense” 3
thinking is plausible, to them and some of their constituents at least, and
they are oen skilled with language—their sto in trade. As well as the
la of empirical testing, a key weakness of this approa is that so many
plausible ideas in education turn out not to work well in practice. For

example, “no social promotion”—a favorite in the United States that makes
students repeat a year they did not “pass”—is superﬁcially plausible and
politically attractive as showing a determination to “raise standards.”
Next, there is the science tradition. It is based on empirical investigation:
the study of phenomena and the creation and careful testing of hypotheses.
Not surprisingly, as the other apters in this Handbook show, it dominates
within the resear communities in science education and, mostly,4 in
mathematics education. More surprisingly, most of it has lile impact on
policy makers or, directly, on practice. For example, the evidence on
repeating a year shows that few students do beer the second time and
many drop out of mathematics, or leave sool altogether. Why is the large
body of resear evidence like this not taken more seriously 5 and what
could be done about it? That is the theme of this chapter.
An exception is survey work. Trends in Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS), the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), the
U.S. National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), and a host of
smaller-scale surveys can provide useful diagnostic information. ey are
oen taken seriously by policy makers—perhaps too seriously, because they
rarely oﬀer reliable formative evidence on what to do about the allenges
they reveal. Cultural bagrounds, reviewed here by Appelbaum and
Stathopoulou (Chapter 13), are critically important. Frederi Leung (2001,
2006), for example, has argued that East Asian culture (whi is not readily
transferred to “Western” countries) plays a central role in the high
performance of East Asian countries in mathematics tests.6
Last, and least in number of researers, there is the engineering
approa to resear in education (Burkhardt, 2006). Its priority is impact
on practice. It uses insights from prior resear, design skills, and resear
methods of development to create improved products and processes, as
well as deeper insights into design principles.7 It goes beyond most design
resear, as described here by Cobb, Jason, and Dunlap (Chapter 20), in

carrying the development process through iterative trialing and revision
until intentions and outcomes converge—i.e. the products are made widely
available and work well in the hands of speciﬁed target groups of teaers
and students.
ese distinctions are symbiotically linked to variations in the academic
value system, the set of criteria by whi the quality of resear in
education is judged—both driven by it and reinforcing it. I’ll look at this
critical issue in more detail next.

Research for Whom?
In this section, I will look at the way resear currently serves three
diﬀerent communities: graduate students as aspiring members of the
resear community, the resear community itself, and education systems
as a whole with a particular focus on their students. ese are issues of
strategic design (Burkhardt, 2009). In describing this concept, whi
addresses those aspects of design that relate to the system that the design
aims to serve, I noted that, while excellence in an educational product or
process depends on the quality of its structural and tenical design,
including the details, the failure of an educational initiative to have impact
oen arises from inadequate strategic design—insuﬃcient design aention
to its interface with the system.
I found no shortage of examples of initiatives with unintended
consequences that were entirely predictable—and oen predicted. In a
nutshell, these initiatives had “doom wrien all over them” as to their
intended purpose. A familiar example is the introduction of new learning
goals baed by high-stakes tests without the proven support that would
enable teaers to meet the new allenges. More generally, the fact that a
successful initiative depends on having a well-engineered balance of
pressure and support mated to a digestible pace of ange, has not been
widely taken on board—perhaps because pressure is relatively eap, while
effective support for long-term professional and system development is not.
Sometimes, though initiatives failed to come close to their declared goals,
there were beneﬁcial side eﬀects. For example, some curriculum projects
that had none of the hoped-for large-scale impact have provided invaluable
professional growth for those involved in and with the project. Oen, they
have also created high-quality exemplars for others to use or to build on.
Equally, discontent with aempts to improve teaing through crude
evaluations dominated by narrow tests (pressure without support again)

have led to deeper resear on what is good mathematics teaing (e.g.
Soenfeld, 2014) and how it might be evaluated in real classrooms, for
formative guidance in professional development and/or summative
evaluation for accountability.
Serving the Graduate Student
Universities see the resear training of graduate students as one of their
main responsibilities. What this means in practice, indeed the very meaning
of the term graduate student, varies from country to country. In some the
graduate student is in the anteroom of an academic career; in others, the
PhD is also an entry qualiﬁcation for a variety of professions within
education, including assessment and various leadership or administrative
roles in the public or private sectors. is aﬀects the kind of support that is
provided—for example, the balance of knowledge transmission and
resear experience. In this handbook on resear, I shall focus on the
support for aspiring researers—those who hope to pursue an academic
career.
ough few graduate sools have all the qualities set out here by
Kilpatrick and Spangler (Chapter 11), the story is basically one of success, at
least in the Anglophone countries I know best. ere is a steady demand
for access to graduate study. Students move through their courses, whether
for masters or doctoral degrees, and most graduate within the expected
time. Indeed, signs of slow progress lead to criticisms of the institution that
are taken seriously. e PhD gives access to academic or other high-level
careers, with the most prestigious universities recruiting those who do best,
as judged by peer review of their dissertations and publications, and their
supervisor’s recommendation and reputation. ose who don’t pursue
academic careers can usually ﬁnd interesting and well-paid jobs in

education or other fields.
ere are ideas for developing graduate education further. For example,
should resear training become part of every teaer’s trajectory of
professional development, in order to promote reﬂective practice in the
classroom and help bridge the gap between resear and practice? Should
more teaers become active partners in design resear and engineering
resear projects? One su approa, through the dialogic interaction
between the teaers and researers described here by Ruthven and
Goodild (Chapter 22), seems enormously ri as professional
development. However, it and other resear-based models of teaing
place design loads on the teaer-partners that may not work well on a
large-scale, in just the way that Cobb, Jason, and Dunlap ( Chapter 20)
noted. But ideas like this are another sign of a healthy, lively graduate
education scene.
ere are some concerns: for example, the issue of “market demand.” In
a steady state, where the average faculty member holds on to a tenured job
for 25 years, s/he should produce only one or two PhDs for “replacement
purposes.” Is graduate training paying enough aention to preparing
graduate students for other professional roles? Would a broader education
in research methods from across the social sciences help?
Serving the Research Community
At ﬁrst sight, and not surprisingly, we seem to do rather well in serving our
own community. Worldwide, there are tens of thousands of people working
in educational resear. In the United States alone, around 20,000 ﬁnd
resources to aend the annual conferences of the American Educational
Resear Association, whi has thriving special interest groups in
mathematics education and other specialties. e salaries of the academics

involved represent a huge investment in resear, currently larger than all
other sources combined.
e processes within our resear community work smoothly. Papers get
wrien and published in journals with wide circulation and impeccable
systems of peer review. Major results are brought together in handbooks
su as this. Professors get appointed, are given tenure, and promoted on
criteria that emphasize resear quality in a way that satisﬁes the
community. Resear grants are awarded on similar criteria, enabling
researers to expand their contribution, yielding more papers and reports
that meet the funder’s accountability needs. All this provides grounds for
pride. What, if any, are the grounds for concern?
Academic posts have other major demands, notably for teaing and
administration. While that diversity of roles is within the tradition of
academic resear in all ﬁelds, resear time in education is oen
particularly squeezed by these other, more immediate demands. Resear is
also constrained by other pressures, notably time scale and resources—a
ﬂow of journal papers must be sustained year-by-year, ea produced
within the research time available in practice.
It is notable how few people are employed in full-time resear in
education, within universities and outside, when compared with established
resear-based ﬁelds, whether “pure” or “applied.” is reﬂects the scale of
direct outside funding of resear. In the UK, for example, the Economic
and Social Resear Council, whi covers all the social sciences8 including
education, receives only about 5% of the total resear council budget—and
education gets a small fraction of this. is certainly does not reﬂect the
relative importance of education in policy makers’ eyes; it does reﬂect the
lowly position of educational resear in the public eye and on the
academic totem pole. Is there a missed opportunity here?
What can be learned from other ﬁelds? At the “pure” end, physics in
wealthy countries is funded through resear-funding structures that

support the many postdoctoral researers who form a large proportion of
the resear manpower needed to tale major allenges. International
consortia are formed in order to mat human capital to the scale of ea
problem. e two main experimental groups at CERN’s Large Hadron
Collider ea involve thousands of postdoctoral scientists, full- and part-
time, many of whom have been working on the project for half an
academic lifetime. is is an extreme example, and many physicists do not
want to work this way, preferring small-scale studies on smaller problems
amenable to that approa; its relevance here is that taling big problems
of real importance eﬀectively may require big team eﬀorts, and that
resear communities can, over time, organize themselves in this way to
meet su allenges. How has this scale of resear funding become
established? Highly visible past aievements of physicists (radar,
operations resear, the bomb and nuclear power, the World Wide Web,
and so on) have led the public to believe that physics resear has long-
term payoffs for them, and so deserves respect and substantial funding.9
Society sees education as an “applied” ﬁeld, with ildren’s learning the
prime measure of success. Are there useful comparisons there? At the
applied end of well-established resear-based ﬁelds, engineering has a
centuries-old history of systematic resear and development, so that it
now rests on a solid theoretical foundation. As a resear community, it has
a base of full-time researers in universities, supported by funding
agencies, and others working in industry. Together they gather insights into
engineering problems, oen involving physics and other fundamental
sciences. ese insights help them to invent new devices and develop them
into prototypes, oen in collaboration with companies. ese will do the
later systematic development and reﬁnement that turns prototypes into
robust products and processes that work well in the hands of the intended
users. e relevance of this example is that it highlights the near absence of
a resear-based industry in education; currently, if a resear group wants

its ideas to become robust products that work well in practice, it has to
carry through the development and testing itself—hence the nature of
engineering resear in education. I will argue that a key factor behind the
la of a resear-based industry is the la of serious evaluation in depth
of educational products—not only “What works?” but “What happens, to
whom, under what circumstances, and how can we make it better?”
Medicine is probably the ﬁeld from whi education can learn most. A
century ago medicine was largely a “cra-based” ﬁeld in whi the main
source of wisdom was experienced practitioners, sharing their insights in
person and through writing. ough mu was known about human
anatomy, and something about physiology, most resear was regarded as
“academic” and had lile impact on the work of doctors and surgeons.10
Since then, triggered in the United States by the Flexner (1910) report, the
situation has been gradually transformed. e human body and its
pathologies still contain many basic mysteries, presenting important
unsolved problems. But systematic empirical work has gone hand-in-hand
with theoretical analysis of the results and subsequent development of
products and processes in collaboration with industry, yielding a gradual
transformation of the ﬁeld. Medical practice is now heavily theory-based,
with empirical R&D used mainly for reﬁning treatments at the many points
where theory is insuﬃcient. In the UK for example, the National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) produces evidence-based
evaluations of treatments, using the best resear evidence available along
with speciﬁc criteria for both eﬀectiveness and, more controversially, cost
effectiveness.11 Internationally, the Corane Collaboration is a large group
of researers who work together to distil and integrate the results of the
many separate studies in important areas. ough progress has happened
on nearly all fronts,12 I shall mention just two signiﬁcant examples that
have diﬀerent, but equally important, lessons for us, if education is to move
forward to becoming a more research-based field of practice.

e discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming led to an explosion of
resear and development on antibiotics that necessarily involved
academic-industry collaboration and the major impact on health care we all
know. Its main signiﬁcance here is the eﬀect on public perceptions of
resear. As with the high-impact developments in physics, this was
something that the public could see and value for themselves, ensuring
support for the subsequent major increases in funding for medical research.
e second example is the discovery in 1952 of the structure of DNA by
Cri and Watson. is fundamental discovery, though it has led to useful
inventions like “DNA ﬁngerprinting,” has yet to have an impact on large-
scale health care comparable with antibiotics. Yet its perceived potential is
such that a huge effort, both collaborative and competitive, has gone into its
development. e ﬁrst sequencing of a human genome took an
international collaboration a decade and cost about $3 billion. Twenty years
later, reﬁnement and automation have reduced the cost to a few thousand
dollars, oﬀering the prospect of treatments that are tailored to an
individual’s DNA. is shows how large-scale collaborative enterprises that
oﬀer convincing prospects for societal good, even decades later, can aract
major support.
ese “proof of concept” examples show how resear communities can
organize themselves to become more respected, beer supported, and more
inﬂuential within society.13 ey show how either highly visible impact on
society or perceived potential can lead to major support. Next I outline how
research in mathematics education can move in these directions.
Serving Students in Schools
ere is general agreement across the world that the education of most
students in mathematics needs to improve, substantially and in many

dimensions. e broad goals set out by PISA, TIMSS, the U.S. National
Council of Teaers of Mathematics (NCTM) Standards, the recent
Common Core State Standards in the United States, and briefer
speciﬁcations from other countries have mu in common with ea other
and reﬂect a broad consensus across the international mathematics
education community, at least on performance goals. So does the
dissatisfaction with the status quo. Summarizing this for an international
review of mathematics curricula, I wrote:
Around the world people seem to have mu the same goals for the outcomes of a mathematics
education. Students should emerge with a reliable command of a wide range of mathematical
skills, a deep understanding of the concepts that underlie them, and an ability to use them,
ﬂexibly and eﬀectively, to tale problems that arise—within mathematics and in life and work
beyond the classroom. Students should, as far as possible, ﬁnd learning and using mathematics
interesting and enjoyable.
(Burkhardt, 2014, p. 14)
But I also described groups of people with diﬀerent priorities and diﬀerent
beliefs about how to rea these goals. e eﬀect is usually to narrow the
goals from the broad set that I outlined. So “basic skills people” believe that
taling nonroutine problems, though important, should wait until students
have “a solid foundation in skills”—a stage that is, in practice, never reaed
by most students. ey discount the ability of young ildren to think
through real-world problems using (inevitably) simple mathematics as
“trivial.” In contrast, “mathematical literacy people” see this last activity as
central; they give lower priority to students’ acquiring knowledge of more
advanced mathematics that they can only reproduce in imitative exercises,
if at all—the position of most adults for all the mathematics they were ﬁrst
taught in secondary school.
However, the focus of this apter is largely independent of the
performance goals that are osen. Rather, it is on how resear could
beer help sool systems to enable students to aieve these goals. It is

oen true that narrower goals may be easier to aieve, but here I will stay
with the broad widely accepted goals that I outlined—goals that have been
aieved in many classrooms but not, as far as I know, across most of the
classrooms in any sool system worldwide. Elsewhere, I’ve analyzed why
this is so (Burkhardt, 2014); here I focus on the roles (actual and potential)
of the resear community in enabling sool systems to rise to this well-
recognized challenge.
Given the relatively healthy picture of research in mathematics education
outlined in this Handbook, why is the resear community not the ﬁrst port
of call when policy makers seek improvement? It is not for want of advice
—but that advice, even when sought, is oen treated as merely opinion, of
no greater validity than the politicians’ own “views.” Why is this so, when it
is very diﬀerent in the well-established resear-based applied ﬁelds
discussed earlier?
Among the factors behind this impotence are the apparent conﬂicts of
opinion among “the experts” (basic skills vs. problem solving; “phonics” vs.
mixed reading; tenology throughout vs. light and late, and so on) that are
oen really maers of emphasis and of strategic design. But I believe it
goes deeper, lying in an academic value system that meets the internal
needs and constraints of the resear community in ways that, incidentally
but inevitably, limit its impact on policy and practice.
Theory: For Whom and for What?
Here I want to take a somewhat deeper look at the relationships in the
value system that drives and constrains resear in education: between the
analytic and the creative aspects of resear, including theory,
exempliﬁcation, and design. e academy has traditionally stu to the
analytic. In the humanities tradition insights are expressed in critical

commentary, with internal and external plausibility and originality among
the key criteria of quality. Professors’ novels or plays, however good, were
“small ange” academically. In academic music departments, playing and
even composing were slightly beside the central point: analysis in the form
of music theory and history. Academic engineering, too, was usually about
theory rather than design in both resear and teaing. Over recent
decades this has begun to ange. Painters and musicians are appointed as
professors, as are engineers with original design aievements. Design
resear (Brown, 1992) and engineering resear in education (Burkhardt,
2006) are increasingly recognized as academically legitimate, though su
resear is still oen judged more on the journal papers than on the
influence of the products on practice.
What about science, the ultimate insight-focused academic pursuit? As I
have noted, its paradigms dominate resear in mathematics education,
though not in education more widely. Science is all about theory building,
so a closer comparison with education is worthwhile. First, the ultimate
prize in both ﬁelds is a grand theory, concisely explained, that describes a
huge range of phenomena—the wider the beer. Newton’s laws of motion
and gravitation epitomize this: a towering ediﬁce of simple mathematical
rules that accurately describe and predict a huge range of phenomena, from
motion in the solar system to roller coasters—a range with well-understood
limits at very small and very large distances. ough some theoretical
physicists spend their whole careers as Newtons-manqué, most scientists do
not work in this way. e overwhelming majority of theory building in
scientiﬁc resear is mu more modest, phenomenological, and collective.
In the aritectural metaphor, people add bris to a growing building of
theory or—occasionally if they are very good and luy—begin a new wing.
Always the value of their contribution to the whole structure is the key
criterion, guided and judged by agreement of theoretical predictions with
experiment. e design of an airplane, for example, depends on combining

a global theory—Newton’s laws of motion—with a massive amount of
experimentally based local phenomenological theory on the properties of
materials, from metals to air. For example, it is crucial to know not only
how mu a metal stretes when stressed, but when it will break—and to
know it reliably. Even there, where theory is strong enough to design on a
computer a prototype that will ﬂy, careful development with ri and
detailed feedba from testing is an essential part of aeronautical
engineering.
Where do theories in education stand from this perspective? David
Kirshner (Chapter 4) brings out the enormous variety of ways in whi
researers look at teaing and learning. ere are grand theories:
behaviorism and the various ﬂavors of constructivism are obvious
examples. From a scientiﬁc viewpoint these are not theories but effects:
true but incomplete and, oen, with no well-established boundaries of
validity (Burkhardt, 1988). When they are used in the design of products
and processes, their too-enthusiastic proponents oen cause harm to
students’ education by ignoring the limitations of the theory in relation to
broader learning goals: mathematics curricula designed entirely on
behaviorist lines are a well-recognized example. Other theoretical
contributions provide valuable insights into speciﬁc phenomena; however,
they oen seem to overlap, diﬀering in nuance and language rather than
fundamentals—ﬁne as commentary but perhaps unhelpful for building
coherent theory.
ere are well-founded phenomenological theories in education but
they, too, tend to be oversold, gaining local success by ignoring the bigger
picture of the global goals. For example, practice alone can enable students
to “master” the procedures of arithmetic and algebra. However, retaining
these skills requires either conceptual understanding of why they work or
continual further practice—and life is too short and the diﬀerent skills of
mathematics too many for that. Nonetheless that approa is still widely

used in classrooms around the world. Equally, the eﬀectiveness of phonics
teaing in enabling ildren to decode text into sounds is well established,
but phonics-dominated reading semes can delay reading for
comprehension and enjoyment—the global goals.
Complementing these theories, global and more local, there are very
many small-scale empirical studies in depth of learning and teaing that
provide intriguing insights but with no warrants for their wider validity
beyond their plausibility. As Alan Soenfeld put it in a previous
Handbook:
A very large percentage of educational studies are of the type, “here is a perspective,
phenomenon, or interpretation worth aending to,” and that their ultimate value is both
heuristic (“one should pay aention to this aspect of reality”) and as catalysts for further
investigation.
(Schoenfeld, 2002, Section 4, p. 470)
Soenfeld traces this remarkably—and deservedly—modest level of
conﬁdence in the products of the resear enterprise to three dimensions of
efficacy:
Trustworthiness:
How well substantiated are the claims?
Generalizability:
How wide a range of phenomena does the evidence
cover?
Importance:
How much should we care?
(Schoenfeld, 2002, Section 4, pp. 466–467)
Within given resources of time and eﬀort, there is a trade-oﬀ between
these. A study has to score high on perceived trustworthiness to get
published. us there is oen insuﬃcient time and resources to get
empirical evidence of generalizability, whi requires studying an adequate
variety of circumstances that spans a well-deﬁned range in ea of the

important variables. Issues of importance are oen irreducible to the scale
of a study that fits a researcher’s constraints of time and resources.14
This multiplicity of overlapping theories, though each may provide useful
insights, is a weakness; theoretical power comes from a small amount of
theory, preferably simply expressed, that describes the essential features of
a speciﬁc range of phenomena. “Reductive” is a pejorative term in
education, and rightly so for both phenomena and analytical commentary
on them. However, powerful theory is essentially reductive. e allenge
is not to throw out the baby with the bathwater, keeping all the essentials
for the phenomena concerned, but only those. us Newton’s analysis of
planetary motion treats ea planet as a point mass—ﬁne for this purpose
but not for, say, weather forecasting.
e use of terms is equally proﬂigate. Lyn English and Julie Gainsburg
begin Chapter 12 by pointing to the diversity of meanings of “problem
solving,” noted decades ago by Jeremy Kilpatri (1981), that are still in use.
ey remark that “traditionally, problems have been deﬁned as tasks in
whi the solver does not know how to arrive at an answer” (p. 314), then
examine the multiplicity of other ways “problems and problem solving”
have been and are used, before going on to the important issues of
substance: relating problem solving to the demands of the 21st-century
world. ere has been occasional modest progress in reaing general
agreement on terms. e 1989 NCTM Standards used evaluation in its
many possible meanings. I and others pushed for a more reﬁned lexicon:
assessment in relation to student performance; appraisal for the
performance of teachers and other professionals; and evaluation for projects
and programs of various sorts—only the first has been widely adopted.15
is proﬂigacy of terms and theories does not help the development of a
ﬁrm foundation on whi to move forward and build a coherent structure
that could be commended to designers as reliable, or to policy makers as
sound. ough every student, teaer, and classroom is unique, there is a

great deal of commonality across the phenomena observed in mathematics
classrooms. Even a very perceptive observer might hope for some
consolidation of the body of theory and the use of terms. is can only be
done as a community enterprise—one for whi there currently seems
neither mechanism nor appetite.
The Academic Value System
Where does this paern of resear come from? I have noted that the
educational resear community reﬂects traditions with very diﬀerent
views of resear and solarship—roughly those of the humanities,
sciences, and engineering—and, particularly, the constraints of time and
resources under whi most researers operate. Emerging from this has
been a set of values as to what is “good resear” that might be
summarized in a list of academic priorities, which favor:
new investigations over replication and extension
new ideas over results that can be relied on
disputation over consensus building
trustworthiness over generalizability
first author over team member
personal research over team research
small studies over major programs
journal papers over products and processes
ese priorities are the reverse of what is needed to provide a reliable basis
for the design of tools and processes that will improve policy and practice.
ese values encourage the reworking, remarked on earlier, of familiar
concepts in diﬀerent terms, leading to the multiplicity of closely related
theoretical viewpoints. ey reward new perspectives over the

consolidation of theory.
ese conventions in educational resear reﬂect and perpetuate a
priority for small-scale work. Other ﬁelds show that it doesn’t have to be
this way. ey recognize that “personal resear” usually means either
small problems or lile testing of evidence. Giving priority to “ﬁrst author”
in genuine team resear is usually invidious—if the others have not made
essential contributions they should not be authors. In physics, where papers
may have many authors, the convention is to list the names of the team
alphabetically; those who need to ﬁnd out who did what in the collective
enterprise can inquire.
e payoﬀ from disputation inhibits the consolidation of theory.
Researers, particularly those from the diﬀerent traditions, oen disagree
in their judgments of quality. In a recent aempt to agree on common
standards for resear quality across a large sool of education, a group of
senior professors ea rank-ordered six well-regarded papers of diﬀerent
kinds. ere was no agreement; indeed some of the rank orders were the
reverse of others, reﬂecting the diﬀerent priorities referred to above—
between quality of imagination and writing versus empirical evidence, for
example.
In this light it is little wonder that the collective impact of the educational
resear communities on practice is limited, indeed mu less than the sum
of its parts, with contradictory perspectives at the global level along with
less data-driven ﬁne-grained phenomenological work that addresses high-
level learning goals. In the next section, I will look at ways in whi some
of the great skills in the resear community might be redirected to ange
this, and the huge total effort made more influential.
However, there is a growing body of resear that moves beyond these
stereotypes, at once less and more ambitious. It exempliﬁes what can be
done—and could be done more widely in developing solid phenomenology
and good engineering within a global vision and a broad set of goals for

learning. at work provides the basis for the more constructive sections
that follow.

How Might We Serve Students Better?
I now want to outline ways in whi the resear community in
mathematics education can move to increase the impact of its work on
practice—ultimately, in the improvement of the learning experiences of
students in classrooms, and the lives of the adults they become. I believe
that, largely as the result of the last 40 years’ work across the ﬁeld of
mathematics education, we know how to enable typical teaers to guide
their students to learn mu beer mathematics mu beer—but that it
won’t happen unless the kind of things outlined in this section are in place.
A decade ago, Alan Soenfeld and I (Burkhardt & Soenfeld, 2003)
described six features that aracterize ﬁelds where practice is
symbiotically informed and improved by research:
1. Robust meanisms for taking ideas from laboratory scale to widely
used practice.
2. Norms for resear methods and reporting that are rigorous and
consistent, resulting in a set of insights and/or prototype tools on
which designers can rely.
3. A reasonably stable theoretical base, with a minimum of faddishness
and a clear view of the reliable range of each aspect of the theory.
4. Teams of adequate size to grapple with large tasks, over the relatively
long timescales required for sound work of major importance in both
research and development.
5. Sustained funding to support the resear-practice process on realistic
timescales.
6. Individual and group accountability for ideas and products. Do they
work as claimed, in the range of circumstances claimed?
Some limited progress has been made in education in some of these areas.

Here I want to look at speciﬁc ways in whi we can move forward more
rapidly in the future. e common theme is collaboration: building a
community of researers in education that constructs programs that mat
the scale of major allenges they identify as worth the eﬀort, and building
and consolidating theory that is a reliable basis for design and development.
Mathematics education is well placed to take the lead for education.
I shall discuss meanisms that can advance the overall enterprise.
Central to this is building high-power collaborative resear and
development programs that can gradually come to guide policy and
practice—“Big Education” learning from “Big Science.”
Build a Body of Accepted Knowledge
All resear ﬁelds have areas of controversy. Usually these are conﬁned to
the leading edge of current resear. At the core of ea ﬁeld is a body of
results that are accepted as true, ea based on evidence accumulated from
a range of complementary studies that also serve to deﬁne the boundaries
of their validity.
In education things are complicated by some la of agreement on the
various phenomena of interest, compounded by the many overlapping
theoretical perspectives. Focusing on performance goals—the main concern
of society at large—reduces the problem but does not eliminate it. For
example, I noted that the goals summarized in the quote in the last section
are not universally accepted. e “body of accepted knowledge” is thus
conditional on a well-deﬁned range of phenomena and goals. Two linked
elements are needed: agreement on what counts, and a body of facts that
are important in that context.
In science, for the most part, phenomena of interest in ea area are
agreed upon, aer whi one can build a body of knowledge. Across

mathematics education, there is still controversy over the deﬁnition of
mathematical proﬁciency: the various “standards” aren’t fully accepted;
indeed, mu of the inﬁghting over recent decades has been because people
have diﬀering views of proﬁciency. So work has to be conditional. If you
stipulate that mathematical understanding includes problem solving,
reasoning, and modeling, then you can work to build a body of related
knowledge. If, in contrast, you view proﬁciency only as being able to
reproduce procedures that you’ve been shown, then a diﬀerent, narrower
body of knowledge is relevant. Similarly, there are issues of grain size: you
may believe that teaing can be studied by focusing on the teaer’s
moves or that it must necessarily involve studying the students as well.
However, the central points remain: building su knowledge requires a
coherent body of work, including replication and systematic investigation
of the boundaries of validity; su work is not encouraged by the academic
value system sketched earlier.
Su a body of results is a social construct of the resear community,
built through the familiar processes of hypothesis generation and testing,
replication, and peer review. Without su a solid foundation, resear
results on important issues will continue to be seen as opinion—more or less
plausible, but still just opinion.
Climate ange is a vivid current example of resear in a complex area
of phenomena. ere are some unquestioned basic facts, su as the
warming eﬀect of CO2 in the atmosphere, and a wide range of intensely-
tested models that bring together the complex amalgam of factors that
aﬀect the climate. Everything has been questioned, replicated, and
reanalyzed in various ways. A host of alternative explanations were sought,
modeled, and similarly confronted with the data. e community
conclusion is that human causes of global warming are almost certainly
important, and the consequences potentially dire. is was a resear
community enterprise.

Building su a body of accepted results in mathematics education has, to
put it mildly, not been a priority. For the reasons set out earlier, the
academic value system does not encourage or reward it. My guess is that
most of us could write down our own modest list—though few of us do. But
that is not the point: only as a resear community consensus, built on a
coherent body of well-tested evidence, would such a list have power.
Recently, the National Centre for Excellence in the Teaing of
Mathematics in the UK brought together a group of researers and
practitioners to distil and set of design principles for eﬀective teaing
(NCETM, 2012). Table 29.2 is the summary that the NCETM produced. e
point is not that this list is “correct,” let alone unique. But it does have the
following essential properties from a scientific research perspective:
Table 29.2 Principles for effective mathematics teaching. Source: NCETM (2012).
Teaching is more effective when it:
• Builds on the knowledge
learners already have
 This means developing formative
assessment techniques and
adapting our teaching to
accommodate individual learning
needs.
• Exposes and discusses common
misconceptions and other
surprising phenomena
 Learning activities should expose
current thinking, create “tensions”
by confronting learners with
inconsistencies and surprises, and
allow opportunities for resolution
through discussion.
• Uses higher-order questions
 Questioning is more effective when
it promotes explanation,
application, and synthesis rather
than mere recall.
• Makes appropriate use of whole
class interactive teaching,
• Uses resources, including technology, in creative
and appropriate ways
 Information and communications technology (ICT)
offers new ways to engage with mathematics. At its
best it is dynamic and visual: relationships become
more tangible. ICT can provide feedback on actions
and enhance interactivity and learner autonomy.
Through its connectivity, ICT offers the means to
access and share resources and—even more powerfully
—the means by which learners can share their ideas
within and across classrooms.
• Confronts difficulties rather than seeks to avoid or
preempt them
 Effective teaching challenges learners and has high
expectations of them. It does not seek to “smooth the
path” but creates realistic obstacles to be overcome.
Confidence, persistence, and learning are not attained
through repeating successes, but by struggling with
difficulties.

individual work and cooperative
small group work.
 Collaborative group work is more
effective after learners have been
given an opportunity for
individual reflection. Activities are
more effective when they
encourage critical, constructive
discussion, rather than
argumentation or uncritical
acceptance. Shared goals and
group accountability are
important.
• Encourages reasoning rather
than “answer getting”
 Often, learners are more concerned
with what they have “done” than
with what they have learned. It is
better to aim for depth than for
superficial “coverage.”
• Uses rich, collaborative tasks
 The tasks we use should be
accessible, extendable, encourage
decision making, promote
discussion, encourage creativity,
encourage “what if” and “what if
not?” questions.
• Develops mathematical language through
communicative activities
 Mathematics is a language that enables us to describe
and model situations, think logically, frame and
sustain arguments and communicate ideas with
precision. Learners do not know mathematics until
they can “speak” it. Effective teaching therefore
focuses on the communicative aspects of mathematics
by developing oral and written mathematical
language.
• Recognizes both what has been learned and also
how it has been learned
 What is to be learned cannot always be stated prior to
the learning experience. After a learning event,
however, it is important to reflect on the learning
that has taken place, making this as explicit and
memorable as possible. Effective teachers will also
reflect on the ways in which learning has taken place,
so that learners develop their own capacity to learn.
• Creates connections between
topics both within and beyond
mathematics and with the real
world
 Learners often find it difficult to
generalize and transfer their
learning to other topics and
contexts. Relate concepts remain
unconnected. Effective teachers
build bridges between ideas.
It is reasonably speciﬁc, in this case eﬀectively embodying a set of
design principles.
Ea statement is testable16 —further resear and development can
establish its range of validity, if any.

Since this way of teaing is qualitatively diﬀerent from that in the great
majority of mathematics classrooms around the world, where the “3X
model” (explanation, worked examples, practice exercises) predominates, it
is societally important to establish its range of validity, and to reﬁne it,
while embarking on the massive eﬀort that will be needed to equip and
empower teachers to work in this way.17
ere have been some other eﬀorts of this kind. A European group, the
Commiee of Education of the European Mathematical Society, has begun
to tale this problem, producing a series of reports on “solid ﬁndings in
mathematics 
education”(EMS, 
2011–13), 
intended 
for 
the 
broad
mathematical community.
Testing Theoretical Models
Testing su propositions can be done eﬀectively only through building
substantial coherent collaborations within the resear community, ea
studying speciﬁc questions across a well-planned range of the important
variables: students, teaers, topics, etc. I shall describe one example, one
among not too many. Over the last 35 years Alan Bell, Malcolm Swan, and
members of the Shell Centre team have undertaken a coherent sequence of
studies of “diagnostic teaching,” which embodies many of the principles18 in
Table 29.2. ey ﬁrst explored in small scale studies the validity across
three key variables: students, mathematical topics, and diﬀerent designers
of the experimental teaing materials (see e.g. Swan 1980; Birks 1987; Bell
1993). Later teaer variables were included in a broader sequence of
studies, described with extensive references in Swan (2006).
is “diagnostic teaing” program, when compared with the standard
direct instruction approa of the time, showed a common paern of mu
improved long-term learning illustrated by Figure 29.1.

Figure 29.1 Mean scores on pre-, post-, and delayed post-tests (Birks, 1987).
e key point: Only su common paerns, emerging from exploring a
hypothesis over the range of relevant variables in a coherent program, can
test and establish a principle. Separate small-scale studies without this
coherence, however trustworthy they may be individually, do not establish
any warrants for generalizability. They are studies of specific treatments not
design principles.
Note in the right-hand graph the subsequent loss, so familiar to teaers,
of most of the gains made during the teaing of the unit; this does not
occur with the diagnostic teaing approa. is key result was stable
across the various “parallel” studies.
ere is no suggestion, of course, that su a program will establish a
unique set of principles—in this case for the design of teaing—but simply

one that is soundly based in both resear and practice, with well-
researed outcomes and boundaries of established validity. Similar studies
based on other sets of principles can then give a sound basis for
comparisons.
ere are other examples of su coherent sequences of resear and
development studies, usually spread over several decades, that led to
phenomenological theories, expressed as design principles. They include:
e 
Freudenthal 
Institute 
team’s 
development 
of “realistic
mathematics education,” building concept development on students
looking at concrete situations in increasingly abstract ways. (See e.g.
van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, 1998.)
e work of Glenda Lappan, Elizabeth Phillips, and others on middle-
grade mathematics through their Middle Grade Mathematics Program
and, ultimately, Connected Mathematics. (See e.g. Lappan & Phillips,
2009.)
CGI: Cognitively Guided Instruction, a resear-based approa to
improving teaing through a speciﬁc style of professional
development, was developed through a program of resear at the
University of Wisconsin. (See e.g., Carpenter, Fennema, Peterson,
Chiang, & Loef, 1989.)
e resear linking curriculum ange, assessment, teaing and
systematic professional development by Kaye Stacey and colleagues in
and around the University of Melbourne is assisting the state
mathematics curriculum and high stakes examinations to embrace the
capabilities oﬀered by mathematically able calculators and computers.
(See Pierce & Stacey, 2010; Pierce, Stacey, Wander, & Ball, 2011.)
However, in all these cases the work has largely been carried through by a
single team. Independent probing through replication and critique are as

rare as they are important in establishing a body of knowledge that is
generally accepted across the research community.
Su a collective enterprise requires agreed goals, focus, and
methodology. e diagnostic teaing studies are, in truth, a pitifully small-
scale example of what is needed, limited by the familiar constraints of the
academic environment discussed earlier.
Make Evaluation-in-Depth Central
“If you’re so smart, how come you ain’t ri?” as the old saying goes. Why
have su well-engineered materials, though they have had signiﬁcant
impact, not become the norm in most classrooms? “Evaluation by
inspection,” though far from the only factor, is a sufficient explanation.
Evaluative evidence, even when it is available, is neither sought nor
valued in oosing materials, or in policy making more widely. e
opinion-based humanities approa still dominates. New teaing materials
are reviewed in educational publications like novels or plays. “Will 500
words be OK? Can you let us have it in three weeks?” How diﬀerent from
trials of new medicines. Equally, in the United States, for example, the
coverage of textbooks is mandated by commiees that, in practice, require
so many “good things” (ﬂuent skills, problem solving, real-world
applications, and so on) that the total is far too mu19 to be teaable in
the time allocated—many times the number of pages in the corresponding
Japanese textbooks. So teaers oose the things they are most
comfortable with, taking into account other pressures they face: any
professional development they may encounter, district plans, and,
particularly, the tasks in any high-stakes tests on whi they and their
students will be judged. Clearly, solid information on what happens in
classrooms when the materials are used is not expected. Acquiring that

would cost money and take time. Yet large amounts of money are spent by
sool systems on materials osen on the basis of su “reviews by
inspection.”
How can we do beer? I see four avenues for improvement. First, the
fundamental responsibility for evaluation lies with those who design and
develop new products and processes. It is, or should be, an integral part of
the development process, providing formative feedba to guide revisions.
Innovations that do not come with this information should be labeled as
untested. Second, since people are rightly suspicious of “seller’s
reassurances,” the design and collection of su information should be
independently monitored, paid for by the funders of the development; too
oen, evaluation is peripheral to the main enterprise, satisfying a need for
funder accountability but coming too late and without enough detail to help
improve the product. ird, we need larger, longer-term evaluative studies
of products and processes that are societally important—either because they
are widely used or potentially very powerful. Finally, we need the resear
community to build a consensus around the importance and validity of
these processes, and the results they produce.
e skills of evaluation needed for parallel studies or for summative
evaluation have developed mu greater depth over recent years, and this
expertise is now widely available in the mathematics education resear
community. Yet it is not used in so many areas where it could and should
be central. Most evaluations should be fundamentally formative. is body
of resear should guide the next round of design and development,
building reﬁnements of both the design principles and the design tactics
that turn the principles into eﬀective and absorbing tools and processes for
teaching and learning, professional development, or system improvement.
Use a Common Set of Instruments

For the results of collective resear to be of value, they need to look at
similar things in similar, or at least overlapping, ways. Equally important,
the instruments need to cover all the elements that are considered
signiﬁcant by members of the collaboration and/or the designers of the
treatment. If you have a unit that is focused on teaing nonroutine
problem solving, or critiquing reasoned arguments, there is no point in
relying on a short-item test where only answers count.20
e negotiation of the instruments is a key set of decisions for a
collaboration. Cost-eﬀectiveness is important. Does this feedba give us
something important in terms of the goals? is negotiation should include
the designers of the treatments, since they know what they are aiming for
in more detail, and perhaps more depth, than the evaluative researers. Of
course, once the studies get going, the designers should remain at a
distance, as (very) interested friends.
As results begin to emerge, it makes sense to discuss them with the
design team—particularly if there seem to be important implications for
design. In any case, the designers will have questions that will be worth
thinking about.
As always NIH—the “not invented here” syndrome—will appear. None of
the candidate instruments will be “quite what we want.” e development
of new instruments is a worthy contribution, but only if they become
widely used. Common, and commonly understood, instruments are key to
communication and convincing the resear community. Unless the
collaboration is large, it may be wise to regard a new instrument as an
extra design and development element, rather than an established
instrument.
Use Focal Exemplars

e central strategic design allenge for su a collective program of
focused resear is to control the degree of variation between the parallel
studies. On the one hand, it is essential to explore the space of important
variables including mathematical focus, students, teaers, teaer
preparation and support, and the treatments that are being investigated—
both their design principles and the detailed realizations. (In design, the
details maer.) On the other hand, to be useful, comparison demands a
substantial degree of commonality between parallel studies.
is starts with straight replication—a core phase in scientiﬁc resear
where the goal is to e out any study on whi interesting claims are
based. For this to work, we need to know what was actually done; in
education the la of su information in enough detail oen prevents
replication.21 For example, how oen could another researer replicate a
treatment in the resear referenced in other apters here? Is the
description speciﬁc enough, and available? Does it pass “the gold card
test”?22
This problem can be mitigated by identifying and using specific exemplar
treatments. ey should be based on well-speciﬁed design principles,
imaginatively designed and carefully developed across a well-deﬁned range
of circumstances, and published. ese tools are then readily available to
researers for further study in depth—the variations in their use and
outcomes being important issues for the resear—and for informing the
next phase of design. Sets of a few su focal exemplars of ea kind,
variations on a theme, would allow a community of researers gradually
to build an understanding of what is general and what is variable, even
idiosyncratic, in the outcomes observed with students and teaers of
various levels of experience and support.
What kinds of exemplar do I have in mind? In the 1990s the NSF spent
around $100 million funding the development of teaing materials for 13
multiyear curricula, all based on a broad set of principles that were

informed by resear and set out in the NCTM Curriculum and Evaluation
Standards (1989). e ﬁve middle grades curricula, for example, spanned a
variety of approaes within this common framework. A coherent program
of collective research in depth on sample units from some of these curricula,
and traditional alternatives, would inform the next round of design and
development, spinning oﬀ not just resear papers but variants of the units
concerned. To do this well needed funding comparable to the original
investment—a common ratio in product development. It has not been
forthcoming.
A more recent example on a smaller scale is the set of 100 formative
assessment lessons for sixth grade and up developed by the Shell Centre
team as part of the Gates Foundation’s College and Career Readiness
program.23 is Mathematics Assessment Project is, eﬀectively, the latest
phase of the “diagnostic teaing” program described earlier. ese
“Classroom Challenges” are based on design principles (Swan & Burkhardt,
2014), similar to those in Table 29.2. Designed in Noingham, ea
“classroom allenge” went through two rounds of trials in a few U.S.
classrooms, closely observed and reported on by skilled observers using a
well-deﬁned protocol. is resear base was focused on improving the
materials, but new insights also emerged.
ere is mu more to be learned about learning and teaing of this
kind from further study in depth of su focal exemplars, across a wider
range of variables. For example, one su study (Evans & Swan, 2014) has
looked at the eﬀects of various ways of selecting and using “sample student
work” on the subsequent group and class discussions.
e space of focal exemplars that could underpin useful resear is, of
course, mu wider than design principles for teaing materials. For
example, on one hand, Alan Soenfeld’s classic studies of the key
dimensions in problem solving (Soenfeld, 1985) have been followed and
largely conﬁrmed by others’ resear and development, including resear-

based teaing materials (e.g., Swan et al., 1984, 1985). ese conﬁrm and
extend his ﬁndings—for example, that Polya’s strategies are insuﬃciently
speciﬁc to be mu help to novice problem solvers. e laer need to learn
tactical instantiations of these strategies for specific types of problem as part
of developing a pervasive culture of doing mathematics whi has problem
solving at its heart.
On the other hand, his team’s sequence of studies of teaer behavior
(Soenfeld, 2010) led him to claim that to understand a teaer’s “moves”
in the classroom, you need to understand in detail only three things: the
teaer’s knowledge, goals, and beliefs (or orientations). is work was
based on an intense study of just three very diﬀerent lessons, taught by
three diﬀerent teaers. To reduce mathematics teaing to three essential
dimensions is an important, even startling, claim—and an impressive
example of a consolidation of theory. It has practical implications for
teaing and professional development. It deserves to be tested mu more
fully.
e oice of focal exemplars for study is, along with the instruments to
be used, a key decision for any collaboration. To summarize, to justify the
effort needed for such research, treatments to be studied in depth should be:
innovative,
make important claims,
well-specified,
available.

What Effort Is Needed Where?
What is the balance of eﬀort that seems to be needed to aieve maximum
impact in this vision of a resear community that serves teaers and their
students more effectively?
Classroom Level
Resear on the “zone of instruction,” whi includes both Learning and
Teaing levels in Table 29.1, is all-important. However, from the strategic
perspective of this apter, this is the least problematic level. Perhaps this is
not surprising, given the huge preponderance of R&D eﬀort that has gone
into learning and teaing, described in the other apters of this
Handbook. Again, I think it fair to say that:
We know how to tea mu beer mathematics mu beer than is
current in most classrooms.
We have a variety of well-engineered tools that have been shown to
enable typical teachers to make this a reality in their classrooms.
e uses of calculators and computers in mathematics education provide
a vivid illustration of the allenges of turning knowledge at classroom
level into large-scale practice. First, the mismat between the way
mathematics is done in most sool classrooms and in the world outside is
qualitative—and scandalous. A huge amount of resear over the last 35
years has shown that students can learn traditional mathematics, along with
many ri new things, more easily and more deeply with appropriate uses
of tenology. In this Handbook, Hegedus and Tall ( Chapter 23) review the
potential of multimodal tenologies whereas, looking more broadly,
Moreno-Armella and Santos-Trigo ( Chapter 25) stress the need to develop

the 
critical 
capabilities 
to 
translate 
scientiﬁc 
and 
tenological
developments into educational realities. Why do so many sool systems
still keep tenology out of mathematics classrooms or, when it is let in,
exploit its potential so poorly—oen, for example, just replacing drill and
practice exercises on pencil and paper with computer game versions? e
answers all involve the third and fourth levels of R&D. Tenology gives
teaers and students huge ﬂexibility in structuring ri learning activities—
but most mathematics teaers are used to teaing with detailed guidance
from a published seme of work. Why then are there no comprehensive
semes that exploit tenology? Because it is a moving target—the decade
timescale of developing ri robust curriculum materials is mismated
with the few-year timescale of ange in the tenology. For whi
platform should we design, when it will inevitably be out of date before we
ﬁnish? e situation may be stabilizing now with “tablets for all” but, when
you try to go beyond the existing pool of ﬁne enriment materials
towards a comprehensive tenology-aware curriculum, the design and
development challenge remains formidable.24
Since the problems at other levels are mu more allenging, I shall
leave it at that.
Teacher Level
e path of professional development that teaers follow has received less
aention. Various stages are well recognized: survival in the classroom;
delivering the curriculum that is set out in the osen teaing materials;
enriing the curriculum with stimulating activities that the teaer
ooses; acquiring “adaptive expertise” (Hatano & Inagaki, 1986), in whi
the teaer continually modiﬁes ea lesson to make use of feedba from
the students on their thinking.

e allenge of reaing this last stage is oen underestimated: it
represents a qualitative ange in the pedagogical and mathematical skills
that a teaer needs, in the roles played by the teaer and the students,
and in the classroom culture—the set of mutual expectations that Brousseau
(1997) called the “didactic contract.” Yet higher-level mathematical
practices, su as nonroutine problem solving or constructing and critiquing
mathematical reasoning, can be developed only in su classrooms.
Unfortunately, but unsurprisingly, they remain relatively rare.
What approaes have been developed that eﬀectively help teaers
climb the steep slope to adaptive expertise? Some teaing materials,
including those referred to earlier, are supportive, structuring lessons to
promote “productive struggle,” the resolution of conceptual conﬂicts
through discussion, and student reﬂection and explanation. is reduces the
design load on the teaer and, as the developmental resear shows,
enables typical teaers to make the style shis that are essential. Still
unclear is how mu well-supported experience of this kind is needed for
teachers to begin constructively to generalize the principles involved, and to
incorporate these style elements into all their teaching.
is is an established area of resear that, ironically, still seems at a
relatively early stage. ere are serious methodological issues. Professional
development programs have traditionally been evaluated through the
participants’ reactions, essentially: Did you ﬁnd this valuable? is reﬂects
an aitude that sees teaers as fellow professionals whose judgments are
not to be questioned. However, if the aim is to modify teaers’ behavior in
the classroom, adding to their repertoire of strategies and skills, direct
evidence is surely important; yet professional development studies that are
built around structured before-aer observation of teaers at work in their
classrooms are still rare. (Observation is, of course, mu more expensive
than using questionnaires.25)
One of the allenges that this area of R&D has to sort out is what

constitutes “a good lesson.” In the context of materials development, this is
deﬁned by the principles behind the design, embodied in the lesson plan;
the core focus of observation is how well the lesson reﬂects this, in
particular avoiding what Anne Brown called “lethal mutations.” However,
a more general framework is needed su as that provided by the Teaing
for Robust Understanding seme and its various tools (Soenfeld, 2014).
is claims that the essential quality of a mathematics lesson can be
understood in just ﬁve dimensions: the mathematics, cognitive demand,
access, agency and authority, and formative assessment elements. Like any
such claim, this needs to be tested and probed independently.
Any su seme needs to incorporate a coherent set of tools for use at
diﬀerent levels: by teaers and students in the classroom, in professional
development activities, and at system level for deﬁning and monitoring
improvement objectives.
System Level: The Case for “Big Education”
I shall argue that our most intractable allenges lie at system level so, in
the spirit of focusing on the most important problems, mu more eﬀort is
needed there. is apter has reviewed many of the factors that have
limited the impact of resear on practice and, particularly, on the policy
decisions within which any improvement effort has to operate. In summary,
these limiting factors include:
e absence of any solid body of resear ﬁndings accepted across the
mathematics education resear community and publicly articulated
by its leaders. is lowers the prestige of educational resear—and
eﬀectively legitimizes politicians’ own opinions in the eyes of the
public.
e scale of resear programs needed to remedy this situation,

reﬂecting the many variables involved in a classroom—and the many
more in a school system.
e timescale mismat between the few years between elections in
politics and the decade timescale of educational improvement.
In order to make progress with these allenges, I see no credible
alternative to large-scale resear collaborations, conducted in the kind of
collegial spirit that is reﬂected in this Handbook but not yet in the work of
the research community at large.
Building and Funding Collaborative Research
How do we get there from here? How can those researers who would
like their work to have impact on improving practice across the education
system work together to make it happen? How can they, together, counter
the values that are currently prevalent—be it single-author papers or
evaluations based on inspection alone? ere are no established answers
but many hopeful signs.
First, it can be done and has been done in other ﬁelds. As we have seen,
big problems in science, engineering, and medicine have led to big teams
with big programs. Big Science arose from researers seeing the need to
join the big teams needed to make real progress with big problems. For the
same reasons, we need some Big Education programs.
ere are already some modest examples of collaboration in
mathematics education, and signs of more. e Strategic Education
Resear Partnership (SERP; http://serpinstitute.org/) partners with U.S.
sool districts and researers to address long-term problems over
sustained periods of partnership. However, SERP is not consistently funded
and has to be entrepreneurial to obtain ongoing funding. In 2014 the Core

Practice Consortium (see, e.g., McDonald, Kazemi, & Kavanagh, 2013), a
multi-university U.S. collaboration, presented a live-streamed session on
enriing resear and innovation through the speciﬁcation of professional
practice in various subjects. ese are hopeful signs, still on a small scale;
we await evidence of impact.
Speciﬁc funding will be needed but a major resource is in place: the
resear time of the university staﬀ and graduate students, funded through
their academic salaries. Further, Big Education will cost mu less than Big
Science because it does not need equipment on the same scale—facilities
like the space telescopes and the Large Hadron Collider cost billions. e
major costs in large-scale impact-focused education research are:
the time of skilled people, academics working with full-time
researchers;
a reasonable amount of computing power and information handling
support;
the costs of collaboration: planning and reporting meetings, and
leadership support.
ese things are within the budgets of resear funders, particularly in the
United States where the National Science Foundation (NSF) and various
private foundations fund substantial programs. e NSF, in particular, has
moved away from further direct support of materials development to
support projects with a resear focus that have the prospect of payoﬀ.
us I believe a case along the lines outlined in this apter has a good
chance of significant support.
e potential prize is enormous. I wrote earlier of the highly visible
resear breakthroughs in the last century that led to the current high levels
of public respect and ﬁnancial support for resear in science and medicine.
We know how to aieve the necessary qualitative improvements in the

performance and aitude of students in mathematics, but it needs to be
realized “at scale” in typical classrooms and supported by a solid body of
evaluative evidence. A resear and development eﬀort that led to this has
the potential to unlo a similar ange in respect and ﬁnancial support—
and to protect students from the “common sense” of our political masters.
e real allenge is to the resear community. Do enough of us give
impact on policy and practice enough priority to annel our resear
efforts in this way? Who will come forward to lead such enterprises?

Notes
1. In developing this approa to resear design, I have beneﬁted enormously from discussions
over the years with friends and colleagues, notably Phil Daro, Mark St John, Alan Soenfeld,
and Kaye Stacey.
2. On one hand, though some professions adopt the posture that being qualiﬁed is all that maers,
no one likes to think that their doctor or lawyer (or teaer) is “borderline”—though some
inevitably are. On the other, everyone recognizes that there is a qualitative diﬀerence in skill
between Yo Yo Ma and the average conservatory graduate cellist.
3. “Common sense” provides a cornucopia of contradictions. You may, for example, oose “A
stitch in time saves nine” or “Haste makes waste” according to your view of the specific case.
4. ere are still plausible speculators who have inﬂuence, many of them resear mathematicians.
ey come from a ﬁeld where logic alone is enough. Most know that learning is not that simple
but think that how they (think they) learned mathematics is empirical evidence enough.
5. Burkhardt and Soenfeld (2003) give examples of the long trail of indirect inﬂuence that
sometimes occurs.
6. One should also not overlook the learning of a non-phonetic form of writing as early experience
in abstract representations.
7. This has links to a fourth, more recent approach—the fine arts tradition.
8. A former minister of education insisted on removing the word “science” from the title of the
then Social Science Research Council, leading to ESRC.
9. In the 1930s, the famous Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge, led by the nuclear science pioneer
Ernest Rutherford, is said to have had a resear budget of about £3,500—about $6,000—a year,
equivalent to about $200,000 today, when the budget is two orders of magnitude larger.
10. Asepsis is a notable earlier exception, the work of Pasteur and others gradually anging hospital
practice, with surgeons washing their hands before as well as after surgery.
11. In the United States su bodies have sometimes been described as “death panels,” a role
traditionally filled there by insurance companies.
12. The organization of health-care systems often being, at least until recently, an exception.

13. Battista and Clements (2000) have made related arguments.
14. João Pedro da Ponte and Olive Chapman give a similar analysis in the context of teaing in
Chapter 10.
15. ere is an interesting contrast between mathematics and physics in oosing formal tenical
deﬁnitions. e mathematics community tends to coin new words: describing “essentially the
same” as isomorphic, for example (though catastrophe theory and fiber bundles are among recent
counterexamples). Physics tends to use familiar words in a tenical sense: Work = Force ×
Distance, so however hard you push against a solid wall, you are tenically doing no Work—
though clearly working hard. (My proposal that words used tenically should always have a
capital leer has, of course, got nowhere. For those who may be tempted to take up this cause,
“May the Force be with you.”)
16. e great physicist Wolfgang Pauli, never the kindest of critics, was asked to comment on a
research paper: “It’s not even wrong.” We have too much of that in education.
17. In an ideal world this would be done prior to large-scale implementation—but education is too
impatient to “sacriﬁce a generation of students” in this way. Regard it as using drugs that are
not fully tested in lethal epidemics.
18. Not coincidentally, these principles are similar to those of formative assessment for learning, as
set out by Paul Black and Dylan Wiliam (1998).
19. Informed rough estimates suggest it would take about three years to tea the whole content of
a typical grade’s state-approved U.S. textbook.
20. A lot of eﬀort in the evaluation of the NSF curricula was of this kind, using state tests—perhaps
necessary for political purposes but uninformative on key goals of the NCTM Standards (NCTM
1989) that the curricula were funded and designed to support.
21. Alan Soenfeld (1980, 1994) has made a particular point of researers ensuring that the raw
material and detailed analysis in their studies are available for others to investigate—a trend
now becoming common in scientiﬁc resear. e Web now oﬀers essentially free and unlimited
space for researchers to make available the treatments they used and the subsequent analysis.

22. Di Fleter coined this phrase for long-promised soware that continued to be elusive. It
means: “Can I go into a shop and buy it yet?” (Private communication.)
23. They may be downloaded from http://map.mathshell.org/materials, free for noncommercial use.
24. ere is a movement away from comprehensive published semes of work towards “curriculum
curation”: a process of informed selection of high-quality resources from the large pool available
on the Web. It will not be easy to do this well!
25. Malcolm Swan developed an approa (Swan. 2006) that gives the teaer and the students
parallel questionnaires. He collected evidence that the inferences correlate well with direct
observation.

References
Baista, M. T., & Clements, D. H. (2000). Mathematics curriculum development as a scientiﬁc
endeavor. In A. Kelly & R. Lesh (Eds.), Handbook of resear design in mathematics and science
education (pp. 737–760). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bell, A. (1993). Some experiments in diagnostic teaing. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 24(1),
115–137.
Birks, D. (1987). Reﬂections: A diagnostic teaing experiment. Noingham, UK: University of
Nottingham.
Bla, P. J., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5, 7–
74.
Brousseau, G. (1997). Theory of didactical situations in mathematics: Didactique des mathematiques,
1970–1990. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: eoretical and methodological allenges in creating
complex interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141–178.
Burkhardt, H. (1988). e roles of theory in a “systems” approa to mathematical education, article
in honor of prof. Hans-Georg Steiner’s 60th birthday. International Reviews on Mathematical
Education, ZDM—The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 5, 174–177.
Burkhardt, H. (2001). Where next? Some comments on implementation. Concluding remarks at the
ICMI Algebra Study Conference, University of Melbourne.
Burkhardt, H. (2006). From design resear to large-scale impact: Engineering resear in education.
In J. Van den Akker, K. Gravemeijer, S. McKenney, & N. Nieveen (Eds.), Educational design
research. London: Routledge.
Burkhardt, 
H. 
(2009). 
On 
strategic 
design. Educational Designer, 1(3). Retrieved from
http://www.educationaldesigner.org/ed/volume1/issue3/article9.
Burkhardt, H. (2013). Methodological issues in resear and development. In Y. Li & J. N.
Moskovi (Eds.), Proﬁciency and beliefs in learning and teaing mathematics—Learning
from Alan Schoenfeld and Günter Törner. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.
Burkhardt, H. (2014). Curriculum design and systemic ange. In Y. Li & G. Lappan (Eds.),
Mathematics curriculum in school education. Heidelberg: Springer.

Burkhardt, H., & Soenfeld, A. H. (2003). Improving educational resear: Towards a more useful,
more influential and better funded enterprise. Educational Researcher, 32, 3–14.
Carpenter, T. P., Fennema, E., Peterson, P. L., Chiang, C. P., & Loef, M. (1989). Using knowledge of
ildren’s mathematics thinking in classroom teaing: An experimental study American
Educational Research Journal, 26, 499–531.
City, E. A., Elmore, R. F. Fiarman, S. E., & Teitel, L. (2009). Instructional rounds in education: A
network approach. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.
EMS (2011–13). EMS Commiee of Education (Eds.) “Solid Findings” in mathematics education.
EMS Newsletter Vol. 81, 46–49, Vol. 82, 46–50, Vol. 83, 46–50, Vol. 84, 53–55, Vol. 87, 42–44.
Evans, S., & Swan, M. (2014). Developing students’ strategies for problem solving: e role of pre-
designed 
“Sample 
Student 
Work,” Educational 
Designer, 
2(7). 
Retrieved 
from
http://www.educationaldesigner.org/ed/volume2/issue7/article25.
Flexner, A. (1910). Medical education in the United States and Canada: A report to the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaing  (Bulletin No. 4). New York: Carnegie Foundation
for the Advancement of Teaching.
Hatano, G., & Inagaki, K. (1986). Two courses of expertise. In H. W. Stevenson, H. Azuma, & K.
Hakuta (Eds.), Child development and education in Japan (pp. 262–272). New York: W H
Freeman/Times Books/ Henry Holt & Co.
Kilpatrick, J. (1981). One point of view: Stop the bandwagon I want off. Arithmetic Teacher, 28(8), 2.
Lappan, G., & Phillips, E. (2009). A designer speaks. Educational Designer, 1(3). Retrieved from
http://www.educationaldesigner.org/ed/volume1/issue3/article11.
Leung, F.K.S. (2001). In sear of an East Asian identity in mathematics education. Educational
Studies in Mathematics, 47, 35–52.
Leung, F.K.S. (2006). Mathematics education in East Asia and the West: Does culture maer? In
F.K.S. Leung, K-D. Graf, & F. J. Lopez-Real (Eds.), Mathematics education in diﬀerent cultural
traditions: A comparative study of East Asia and the West, the 13th ICMI study  (pp. 21–46).
New York: Springer.
McDonald, M., Kazemi, E. Kavanagh, S. S. (2013). Core Practices and Pedagogies of Teaer
Education: A Call for a Common Language and Collective Activity, Journal of Teaer
Education, 64 (5).

NCETM. (2012). Mathematics maers. Sheﬃeld: National Centre for Excellence in Teaing
Mathematics. 
Retrieved 
from
https://www.ncetm.org.uk/public/files/309231/Mathematics+Matters+Final+Report.pdf.
NCTM. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards for sool mathematics. Reston, VA: National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Pierce, R. & Stacey, K. (2010). Mapping pedagogical opportunities provided by mathematics analysis
soware. International Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 15(1) 1–20.
doi:10.1007/s10758–010–9158–6.
Pierce, R., Stacey, K., Wander, R., & Ball, L. (2011). Principles for design of lessons that use multiple
representations in mathematically able integrated document systems. Technology, Pedagogy and
Education, 20(1), 95–112.
Soenfeld, A. H. (1980). On useful resear reports. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
11(5), 34–57.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical problem solving. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Soenfeld, A. H. (1994). A discourse on methods. Journal for Resear in Mathematics Education,
25, 697–710.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2002). Resear methods in (mathematics) education. In L. English (Ed.),
Handbook of international resear in mathematics education (pp. 435–488). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2010). How we think: A theory of goal-oriented decision making and its
educational applications. London: Routledge.
Soenfeld, A. H. (2014). What makes for powerful classrooms, and how can we support teaers in
creating them? A story of resear and practice, productively intertwined. Educational
Researcher, 43(8), 404–412.
Swan, M. (1980). The language of graphs. Nottingham: Shell Centre for Mathematical Education.
Swan, M. (2006). Collaborative learning in mathematics: A allenge to our beliefs and practices.
London: National Institute for Advanced and Continuing Education (NIACE) for the National
Research and Development Centre for Adult Literacy and Numeracy (NRDC).
Swan, M., & Burkhardt, H. (2014). Lesson design for formative assessment. Educational Designer,
2(7). Retrieved from http://www.educationaldesigner.org/ed/volume2/issue7/article24/.

Swan, M., Pis, J., Fraser, R., & Burkhardt, H., and the Shell Centre Team. (1984). Problems with
paerns and numbers. Manester, UK: Joint Matriculation Board and Shell Centre for
Mathematical 
Education. 
Retrieved 
from
http://www.nationalstemcentre.org.uk/elibrary/maths/resource/349/problems-with-patterns-and-
numbers.
Swan, M., Pis, J., Fraser, R., Burkhardt, H, and the Shell Centre Team. (1985). e Language of
Functions and Graphs, Manester, UK: Joint Matriculation Board and Shell Centre for
Mathematical 
Education. 
Retrieved 
from
http://www.nationalstemcentre.org.uk/elibrary/maths/resource/350/language-of-functions-and-
graphs.
van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, M. (1998). Realistic mathematics education. Retrieved from
http://www.fi.uu.nl/en/rme/.

Index
Note: Page number in italics followed by f indicate ﬁgures and by t indicate
tables
abstraction in context 627–8
ACAT see artifact-centric activity theory
accepted knowledge 700–703
accommodation 116
acculturation 123–4, 341, 342
action/participatory research 261–2
activity theory 627, 665
acts of knowing 435
additive, multiplicative, and linear structures 191–4; see also elementary school mathematics
additive relations 197–207; see also elementary school mathematics
Advanced Mathematical Thinking/structure 239–56; background/defining 239–40; definitions and
conceptualization 249–52; on proof 246–9; structure discussed in the literature 242–6; structure
in mathematics 240–2; summary/epilogue 252–3
affordances 563–4; see also TinkerPlots; Dynamic Data Exploration
agendas (changing) in international research in mathematics education 3–18; actions needed to
affect positive change 6; developments in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education 4–5; linking research with practice 5–7; overview of Handbook (this volume)
sections and chapters 7–16
The Age of Discontinuity: Guidelines to Our Changing Society (Drucker) 636
age problem 227–8
AiC framework 628–33; see also computerized environments in classrooms
algebra: Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) 595, 598; an example in an Introduction to Algebra course

629–30; expressions as diagrams 193; studies on early algebra 191; VisualMath e-textbook 642–4,
644f; see also elementary school mathematics; middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS);
semiotics
algebraic read-writing (sense production in math learning) 225–8; see also middle and junior
secondary schools (MJSS)
Algebra I credentialing 381–2
algebraic structures 194–5, 243–4; see also elementary school mathematics; structure in mathematics
Algebra Project (Moses) 364
American Educational Research Association 693
analysis of one’s own practice phase 512–14, 513f, 515t, 516; see also intertwining of theory and
practice
anticipating thought 509
aporetic condition 360–2
applicability 23–4
apprenticeships 303
argumentative grammar 489–90, 496–7
Aristotle 359
arithmetic: basic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) 192, 192t; see also
elementary school mathematics
articulation 510, 512
artifact-centric activity theory (ACAT) 665
artifacts 597–9; see also digital technology in mathematical practices
The Art of Problem Posing (Brown & Walter) 345
arts and performance theory, embodiment and 78–81
assessments, of mathematical meanings 456–8
assimilation 116, 443
autonomous learners 632–3
autopoietic systems (biology) 417
awareness-in-action, -in-discipline, and -in-counsel 506–7
Awareness of Mathematical Pattern and Structure (AMPS) construct 159

Babel Effect 98
Balkanization of educational thought 99
Barrier Game for grade 1, 170–2, 170f–2f
Base Blocks from the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives 667
best practices 462
bias 467
Big Education 707–8
Big Math for Little Kids (Greenes et al.) 160, 176
Big Science 708
body syntonicity (Papert) 665
boundary objects 467
Bourbaki group 60, 63–4
“Build-A-Book Geometry” course (Healy) 134–6
Building Blocks—Foundations for Mathematics Thinking Program (Clements and Sarama) 157–8,
176
Building Blocks program 674–5
Cabri-Geometre 545
calculus 239–40
calculus exemplars 606–11, 607f–11f
California Department of Education, STEM Task Force Report (2014) 4–5
Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (Schumpeter) 359
Cartesian plane (graphs) 193, 226, 247
CAS see Computer Algebra Systems
Census and American Community Survey 382
CGI see Cognitively Guided Instruction; Cognitively Guided Instruction
child assessments 178
ClassroomAid 639
classroom connectivity 546–7
classroom design studies 484–91; argumentative grammar 489–90; conducting retrospective analysis

489–91; current limitations of 497–9; data collection 488; delineating an envisioned learning
trajectory 486–7; documenting instructional starting points 486; experimenting to support
learning 488–9; interpretive framework 484–5; iterative cycles of design and analysis 488–9;
placing the study in theoretical context 487; preparing for 485–7; specifying goals for students’
mathematical learning 485–6; trustworthiness 490–1; see also design research/studies;
professional development (PD) design studies
classroom-embedded professional learning programs 177
classroom observations 32–3
coaching 177
cogito ergo sum (Descartes) 63
Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) 119, 703; scholarly knowledge and 526–8; see also knowledge
from teaching and researching
cognitive psychology 105
cognitive science, embodiment and 70–2
coherence, e-textbooks and 653–6
CoI see Communities of Inquiry
collaborative research 708
common content knowledge 279
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics 695; research reform and 265–6, 270; STEM
disciplines and 4
communication, reform in educational research and 263–6
Communities of Inquiry (CoI) 532–7
communities of learners 130
competencies required by 21st-century and work 321–4
complex adaptive systems (physics) 417
complexity research or complexity 419; see also complex systems
complexity science 419
complexity theory 418, 419; see also complex systems
complex systems 416–32; closing remarks 428–30; complexity as a disciplinary discourse 419–22;
complexity as an historical discourse 417–19, 418f; complexity as a pragmatic discourse 425–8;

complexity as a theoretical discourse 423–5, 425f; defining complex 416–17; Finite and Infinite
Games (Carse) and 428–9; learner characteristics 423; massive open online courses (MOOCs) 428;
nested systems, entangled dynamics, and decentralized networks 418–19, 418f, 425f; simplexity
and complicity 429–30; terms for in different fields 417
complicity 429
CompuMath project 617–33; see also computerized environments in classrooms
Computer Algebra Systems (CAS) 595, 598
computerized environments in classrooms/ CompuMath project 617–35; the AiC framework and the
RBC+C model 628–33; CompuMath project background 617–19; curriculum development
defined 617; discussion 631–3; encouraging students to become autonomous learners 632–3; an
example 629–30; generalizations and explanations 632; isolated activities 619–23, 620f; linear
equations example 623–4; meaningful mathematics 617; multirepresentational approach to
function 624–5, 625f; Overseas activity 620–3; pedagogical standards 619; processes of learning
627–31; raising the question of why 632; role of proof and proving in geometry 626–7, 625f;
stages of curriculum development project 618; theoretical underpinnings of abstraction in context
627–8; use of representations in 631–2
concept definition 249
concept image 249
concepts, vs. skills 114
conceptual frames 509
conceptualization, Advanced Mathematical Thinking/structure and 249–53
Connected Mathematics (Lappan & Phillips) 703
connections 21, 470
consequential validity 471
constructions 110, 115–20, 127, 129, 253; see also Advanced Mathematical Thinking
constructivist teaching experiment (Steffe et al.) 483–4
constructs: hierarchical prospective teacher educational 278; Model of Awareness and Effective
Attitudes and Behaviors construct 509–18
construct validity 470
content knowledge of secondary mathematics teachers 278, 281–2

content learning 379
context: qualitative and quantitative studies in 466–9; see also measurement challenges
contingency 21, 470
continuous variation and covariation 445–51, 445t, 446f–9f, 447t, 449t–51t; see also Mathematical
Meanings for Teaching Secondary Mathematics (MMTsm)
conveyance technologies 597
Core Practice Consortium 708
Core Practices 28
course graduation requirements (CGRs) 382
craft knowledge: defining 523–4; expert direct instruction 524–6; see also knowledge from teaching
and researching
creative thinking 248
credentialing 381–6
critical mathematics education 345–6
critical pedagogies 133
critical thinking 248
crossdisciplinary framework of learning theory 111–12, 112t, 125–6
cross-institutional programs 298
CSMS see English Concepts in Secondary School Mathematics and Science
culturally responsive mathematics education 362
cultural mathematics 467
cultural mediation of mathematical thinking and learning 400–402; different tools in different
practices 400–401; unique appropriation of cultural tools 401; use of tools in transitions between
practices 401–2; see also culture issues in mathematics learning; learning in and out of school
cultural psychology, mathematical cognition and 397–9
cultural studies, embodiment and 73–5
culture issues in mathematics learning 336–58, 338t–9t; background 336–40; complex interactions of
mathematics, education, and culture 338t–9t; critical mathematics education 345–6; culture of
mathematics 340–3; enculturation and acculturation 341, 342; ethnomathematics,
multiculturalism, and diversity education 347–9; funds of knowledge and critical mathematics

education 343–6; implications 341–3; learning mathematics 351–2; public pedagogy 350–1;
sociopolitical turn 349–50; see also learning in and out of school
Curious Minds (van Nes & de Lange) 176
Curriculum and Evaluation Standards (NCTM) 705
curriculum development: defining 617–19; see also computerized environments in classrooms
data see design research/studies; measurement challenges; research/studies
data tables 193
decentering 117
decentralized networks 418f, 419
decimals number study 473
Decision Research 318, 320
Deep Blue (IBM supercomputer) 614
definitions, Advanced Mathematical Thinking/structure and 249–53
“demathematization” 400
Democracy and Education (Dewey) 360
democratic access: defining 219–20, 359; see also chapters under section II of this volume;
mathematics education and democracy
derivatives, visual 610–11, 610f–11f
Descartes, Rene/ 62, 63
design research/studies 481–503; classroom design studies 481–2, 484–91; constructivist teaching
experiment 483–4; current limitations of 497–99; defining/elements/descriptions 481–2, 491–7;
five crosscutting features of 482; historical overview 483–4; professional development design
studies 481–2; Realistic Mathematics Education (Freudenthal Institute in The Netherlands) 43,
484; settings (one-on-one and organizational) 481; the term design research 483; see also
classroom design studies; professional development (PD) design studies
design science 108, 137
Dewey, John 98, 107, 133
Dewey harmony 360
DGEs see dynamic geometry environments

DGS see Dynamic Geometry Software
diagnostics teaching, vs. direct instruction 702, 702f
diagrams, algebraic expressions as 193
dialectical relations 108–9
dialogic cycles 528–32, 528f, 530f; see also knowledge from teaching and researching
dialogic interaction between teaching and researching see knowledge from teaching and researching
didactical choices, Sésamath e-textbook coherence and 654–6
didacticians 535
didactics of mathematics (multidisciplinary mathematical science programs) 297
didactic transposition 596
Digital Interventions for Dyscalculia 669
digital technologies in middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS) 220, 230–6; Dynamic Geometry
software programs 230–1, 231f; eXpresser software 232–3, 233f; Intelligent Dialogue interactive
units 232–4, 234f; summary of lifelong learning, digital technologies, and signification in
mathematics 234–6; technological innovation and classroom practices 232–4, 233f–4f;
technological innovation and curricula of MJSS 230–2; see also middle and junior secondary
schools (MJSS)
digital technologies in primary school 662–86; Building Blocks program 674–5; discussion/strengths
and weaknesses 679; Dots2Track 669, 669f; dynamic geometry environments (DGEs) 673–4;
example of whole classroom dynamic geometry 675–9, 676f–8f; for geometry 673–9, 676f–8f;
historical and theoretical perspectives 662–5; learning mathematics through programming 678;
Motion Math-Fractions 668; multitouch technology 670–3, 671f–2f, 673t; Numberbonds 667; The
Number Race 669, 670f; other digital tools for learning numbers 668–9, 669f–70f; physical
(pascaline) to Virtual Manipulatives (e-pascaline) for number learning 666–8, 666f, 668f; remedial
interventions for number learning 669, 669f–70f; Turtle Geometry 662; virtual manipulatives
(VMs) 663
digital technology in mathematical practices 595–616; background 595–7; calculus exemplars
606–11, 607f–11f; conclusion 614–15; focus on mathematical tasks 597; guide and being guided
by an artifact 597–9; parabolas 602–6, 603f–6f; perpendicular bisector (geography) exemplar
600–606, 601f–6f; simulation and modeling exemplar 611–14, 612f–14f; symbolic mode of

existence 599–600
direct instruction, vs. diagnostics teaching 702, 702f
disciplined noticing (Mason) 463
discourse analysis 61
dispositions, vs. skills 114–15
dissertations 305
dissipative structures (chemistry) 417
diversity education 347–49
doctoral programs in mathematics education 297–309; background 297–9; didactics of mathematics
297; Elementarmathematik vom höheren Standpunkte aus (Elementary Mathematics from a
Higher Standpoint by Klein) 300; field experience teaching mathematics 303; field experience
teaching mathematics education 303–4; international programs 297–8; knowledge about
mathematics (KAM) 301; knowledge of features of learning mathematics (KFLM) 301, 302;
knowledge of mathematics learning standards (KMLS) 301, 302; knowledge of mathematics
teaching (KMT) 301, 302; knowledge of the structure of mathematics (KSM) 301; knowledge of
topics (KOT) 301; knowledge, skills, and abilities 299–301; mathematical knowledge for teaching
(MKT) 300–301; mathematics teachers’ specialized knowledge (MTSK) 301; Mode 2 educational
model for doctoral education 305; One Field, Many Paths (1999 U.S. national conference on
doctoral programs in mathematics education) 307–8; pedagogical knowledge, skills, and abilities
301–2; professional identity 306–7; research experience/dissertations/theses 305–6; serving
graduate students through research 692–3; Teachers College, Columbia University doctoral
programs 297–8
domain-specific instructional theory 487
Dots2Tracks 669, 669f
dynamic expositions 647
dynamic geometry environments (DGEs) 673–4; example of 675–9, 676f–8f
Dynamic Geometry software programs 230–1, 231f, 598, 647–8
dynamic interactive mathematics 545–6
dynamic triangles 557f

early algebra research 191
early childhood educators (ECEs) 179; see also young children’s/kindergarten/preschool mathematics
programs
ECEs see early childhood educators
educating mathematics professors see doctoral programs in mathematics education
education, psychology and 106–7
Elementarmathematik vom höheren Standpunkte aus (Elementary Mathematics from a Higher
Standpoint by Klein) 300
elementary school mathematics 191–218; addition and subtraction as functions 198–200; additive,
multiplicative, and linear structures 193–4; algebraic structures 194–5; background of functions
and relations/bodies of work used for analysis 191–2; discussion/conclusions 212–14; equations
and inequalities 192t, 193; equations and inequalities as the comparison of functions 210–12,
211f; functions defined 191–3, 192t; learning about additive relations 197–207; learning about
multiplicative and linear relations among quantities 207–10; the N Number line and differences
between heights 204–6, 204f–6f; powerful ideas 192–7, 192t, 214–15; relations and additive
structures 198; relations and functional relations (functions) 195–7; representing additive
functions on a number line 200–201; representing unknown amounts 201–6, 202f, 204f–6f;
separated and joined dinner tables problem 207–10, 209f–10f; solving multistep additive
problems using the N Number line 201–6, 201f–2f, 204f–6f; variables defined (variable
magnitudes and quantities) 197; viewing multiplicative structures as relations 207; wallet
problem 211–12, 211f
Elements (Euclid) 638
embodied compression 550
embodied learning 60–97; abstraction, mathematics, and mind/body 61–4; from a sociopolitical
viewpoint 60–1; background 60–1; competing philosophies of mathematics 60; contemporary
interpretation of McLuhan 64–7; Earth as art form 66; Graphs & Gestures Project 61, 82–91;
high-modernist Bourgaki group 60, 63–4; metaphor and language 68–70; old technologies
turning to art forms in our era 66–7; Plato and Descartes as markers of disembodied
mathematics 62–3; Postmodern standpoint 60, 64–7; summary of 81–2; in terms of the history of
ideas 60; theoretical/definitional level 60, 61; through cognitive science 70–2; through cultural

studies 73–5; through gesture theory/studies 76–8; through semiotics 72–3; through the arts and
performance theory 78–81; through the new materialism 75–6; touching and 77; see also Graphs
& Gestures Project
embodiments 550–1
empirical abstraction 116
Enabling Aspects of Software (Fitzallen & Brown) 567
enculturation 110, 120–5, 127–8, 341, 342
engineering tradition 692
English Concepts in Secondary School Mathematics and Science (CSMS) 222
Enlightenment/Modernist movement 61–2, 64–5, 360
entangled dynamics 418, 418f
entity 245
environmental context (qualitative studies) 466–7, 468–9
e-pascaline 666, 666f
epistemic actions 628–9
equations and inequalities as the comparison of functions 210–12, 211f; see also elementary school
mathematics
equity agenda 182
ERASMUS Program (European Union) 298
Etchasketch 550f, 550t
e-textbooks 636–1; background 636–8; changes in the relationship between teachers and textbooks
647–9, 648f; changes in the relationship between students and textbooks 645–7; changing
interfaces 637–8; coherence of design and use 653–6; conclusion 656–7; design of 639–40;
dynamic expositions 647; evolving or “living” 640; existing connections 651; ICMI Study 22 637,
638; integrative 640, 641f; interactions 637–8; interactive 640; LaboMEP 648–9, 649f, 652, 652f;
Mathenpoche (mathematics in the pocket) 641–2; potential connections 651, 652; quality of e-
textbooks 651; quality of online resources 650–1; quality of textbooks 649–50; Sésamath 641–2,
647–9, 652–5, 652f, 655f; textbook conferences 637; textbooks as artifacts of compulsory
schooling 638–9; VisualMath (algebra) 642–4, 644f, 645–7, 645f
ethics 124

ethnomathematics 347–9, 467
Eurocentric nature of school mathematics 467
everyday mathematics 155, 466; in the context of Western societies 399
evolving or “living” e-textbooks 640
exemplars, using focal 704–5
expert direct instruction: craft knowledge and 524–6; see also knowledge from teaching and
researching
eXpresser software 232–3, 233f; see also digital technologies in middle and junior secondary schools
(MJSS)
externalization of memory 614
fading 510
field experience: for teaching mathematics and teaching mathematics education 303–4; see also
doctoral programs in mathematics education
Finite and Infinite Games (Carse) 428–30
finite games 428–30
food deserts 388
Force Concept Inventory (FCI) 451–2
force feedback technology 547–9, 548f, 552–4, 552f
formal tests 466
foundational theory 107, 109
foundations 21, 470
fractions 34, 441
Freudenthal Institute 43, 249, 484, 486, 702
functions: defining 191–3, 193t; and limits 34; multirepresentational approach to function 624–5,
625f; relations and functional relations (functions) 195–7; see also elementary school
mathematics
General Pedagogical Knowledge (PK) 21–3
geometry 34; digital technologies in primary school 673–9, 676f–8f; Dynamic Geometry software

programs 230–1, 231f, 598, 647–8; perpendicular bisector exemplar 600–606, 601f–6f; role of
proof and proving in geometry 625–7, 625f; for young children 165–6; see also spatial thinking
geospatial perspective: sociological inequity and 386–9, 391; see also sociology of mathematics
education
Gestalt psychology 98, 107
gesture theory: embodiment and 76–8; see also embodied learning
global theory 696–7
Google Page Rank System 365–6
grade 1 Barrier Game 170–2, 170f–2f
graduate students: research and 692–3; see also doctoral programs in mathematics education
Graphs and Gestures Project 82–91; future directions for 90–1; introduction to 82–3; year 0: starting
from teaching experience and a hunch 83–4; years 1 and 2: pilot projects 84–7; year 3: decisions
about research directions 87–8; years 3 to 8: design experiments in schools 88–90; see also
embodied learning
grounded theory 454–5
guided discovery 163
guided play 163–4
Guidelines for Evaluating Software (Goyne, McDonough, & Padgett) 567
habituation 110, 112–15, 126–7, 129–30
Handbook of Urban Education (Milner & Lomotey) three aspects of urban education 374–5
Hands-On Statistics (Weissglass, Theis, and Finzer) 565
healthy organisms (health care) 417
Heinz-Dieter Meyer criticism of PISA 474–5, 477; see also Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA)
heuristics 315–16, 326–7
holistic theory 108, 109
Holocaust 360
How People Learn (Bransford, et al.) 108, 131
How Students Learn (Donovan & Bransford) 108

How to Solve It (Polya) 315–16
humanities tradition 691
“humble theory” 487
hybrid teaching resources 641
ICMI Study 22 637, 638
ICT see Information and Communications Technology
identity construction 379
identity issues 376
identity politics 124–5
immersive interactive interfaces 563
immigrants see learning in and out of school
implicit learning theory 113–14
incommensurability 104–5
inequalities, equations and inequalities as the comparison of functions 210–12, 211f
inequity, geospatial perspective and 386–9, 391
infinite games 428–30
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 559, 701t
information dissemination 265
Information Processing (IP) model 105
inquiry groups 130
in-service teaching professional development programs 44
instantiation 248
instructional quality 27–33
instrumental context (quantitative studies) 467–9
instrumental genesis approach 664
integrated-concrete knowledge 663
integrating arithmetic, algebra, and geometry 192t, 193; see also elementary school mathematics
integrative e-textbooks 640, 641f; see also e-textbooks
integrative theory 107–8, 109

Intelligent Dialogue interactive units 232–4, 234f; see also digital technologies and MJSS
mathematics; middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS)
interactive e-textbooks 640
International Community of Teachers of Mathematics Modeling Applications 422
International Journal of STEM Education 5
Internet: complex systems and 427; massive open online courses (MOOCs) 428; see also websites
intersubjective operations 117
intertwining of theory and practice for teaching and teachers’ education 504–22; background 504–5;
methodology: Multi-commented Transcripts (MT) 508–9; Model of Awareness and Effective
Attitudes and Behaviors construct 509–18; phases of the methodology with an emphasis on
phase 4: “analysis of one’s own practice” 512–14, 513f, 515t, 516; role of theory for the
development of teachers’ awareness 506–7; the teacher as decision maker 505–6; teachers’ roles
511–12
introjection 122
iPad (Apple) 549
irreducible emergence 121
isolated activities 619–23, 620f
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education 3, 376, 379, 465
KAM see knowledge about mathematics
Kant, E. 424
Kaput Center 549
Kasparov, Garry 614
KCP Technologies 549
KFLM see knowledge of features of learning mathematics
kindergarten see young children’s/kindergarten/preschool mathematics programs
Klein, Felix 297, 300
KMLS see knowledge of mathematics learning standards
KMT see knowledge of mathematics teaching

knowing-to 435, 437
knowledge about mathematics (KAM) 301
knowledge-building communities 130
knowledge from teaching and researching 523–39; craft knowledge defined 523–6; dialogic cycle:
collaborative video analysis of lesson sequences 531–2; dialogic cycle: construction and
conversion of scholarly knowledge and craft knowledge 528–9, 528f; dialogic cycle: design and
analysis of substantial learning environments 529–31, 530f; didacticians 535; knowledge growth
through collective design 532–3; Learning Communities in Mathematics (LCM) 535–6, 535f;
learning study (LS) and Communities of Inquiry (CoI) 532–7, 535f; Object of Learning (OoL)
533–4; scholarly knowledge and the example of Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) 526–8;
terms involved 523
knowledge/knowing: defining 435–7; see also Mathematical Meanings for Teaching Secondary
Mathematics (MMTsm)
Knowledge of Algebra for Teaching (McCrory, Floden, Ferrini-Mundy, Reckase, & Senk) 22
knowledge of content and students 281, 436, 468
knowledge of content and teaching 281–2
knowledge of curriculum 282
knowledge of features of learning mathematics (KFLM) 301, 302
knowledge of mathematics learning standards (KMLS) 301, 302
knowledge of mathematics teaching (KMT) 301, 302
knowledge of the structure of mathematics (KSM) 301
knowledge of topics (KOT) 301
knowledge quartet (foundation, transformation, connection, contingency) 21–3, 470
KOM Project (Danish) 269–70
KOT see knowledge of topics
KSM see knowledge of the structure of mathematics
Kuhn, Thomas 103–6
LaboMEP (Laboratory for Mathenpoche) e-textbook feature 642, 648–9, 649f, 652, 652f
laboratory educational approach 303

Law of Effect 105
LCM see Learning Communities in Mathematics
learner characteristics 423
Learners’ Prospective Study case study 475–6
Learning Communities in Mathematics (LCM) 535–6, 535f; see also knowledge from teaching and
researching
learning in and out of school 395–415; background 395–6; children’s participation in home
mathematics 407–8; from cultural and social mediation to the person as participant 406–10; in
culturally diverse homes 409–10; cultural mediation of mathematical thinking and learning
400–402; cultural psychology and mathematical cognition 397–9; differences between home and
school mathematics 409; different tools in different practices 400–401; everyday mathematics in
the context of Western societies 399; macro-social change impact 405–6; mediating role of social
institutions 403; mediating role of social interactions 403–5; parents’ participation in their
children’s school mathematics 408–10; social mediation of mathematical learning 402–6; studies
of out-of-school mathematics in non-Western cultures 398–9; two perspectives on outside school
mathematics 396–7, 396t; unique appropriation of cultural tools 401; use of tools in transitions
between practices 401–2; see also headings under cultural and culture
learning mathematics 351–2
Learning Mathematics for Teaching (LMT) 436; see also Mathematical Meanings for Teaching
Secondary Mathematics (MMTsm)
learning study (LS) 532–7; see also knowledge from teaching and researching
learning theory 98–149; background/introduction 98–102; classroom implementation 119;
construction 110, 115–20, 127, 129; crossdisciplinary analysis method 125–6; crossdisciplinary
framework 111–12, 112t; culturally shared metaphors for learning 109–10; dialectical relations
and postpositive fragmentation 108–9, 109; education’s uptake of 107–9; enculturation 110,
120–5, 127–28; ethics and 124; foundational theory 107, 109; habituation 110, 112–15, 115,
126–7, 129–30; Healy, Christopher and 134–6; holistic theory 108, 109; identity politics 124;
implicit 113–14; incommensurability 104–5; integrative theory 107–8, 109; learning as
construction 115–20; learning as enculturation 120–5; “math wars” 129–32; metacognition
131–2; paradigm competition 105–6; Piaget, Jean and 115–16, 117–19; problems and prospects

136–8; psychology and education 106–7; radical constructivism 116–17; “reading wars” 128–9;
reform instruction 130–1; six characteristics of excellent teachers 100; skills vs. concepts 114; skills
vs. dispositions 114–15; Skinner, B.F. programmed instruction 126–8, 126t; societal
transformation pedagogies 132–4; sociological theory 121–2; Sociology of Scientific Knowledge
(SSK) 103–7; student-centered and teacher-centered pedagogies 112; student-centered
constructivist pedagogy 115, 117–19; student-centered enculturation pedagogy 122–3; teacher-
centered constructivist pedagogy 115, 119–20; teacher-centered enculturation pedagogy
(acculturation pedagogy) 123–4; theorization in multiparadigmatic science 102; traditional
instruction 129–30; utilizing 110–11; values decisions 101–2; vase-faces graphic 104f
Lesson Study: for professional development 178–9, 289–91; stages of 262
lifelong mathematics learning 220–1; summary of lifelong learning, digital technologies, and
signification in mathematics 234–6; see also middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS)
life-worlds 365–8
linear equations example 623–4
linear relations: multiplicative and linear relations among quantities 207–10, 209f–10f; see also
elementary school mathematics
linear structures 193–4
LMT see Learning Mathematics for Teaching
local phenomenological theory 697
Logo programming language (Papert) 421
London Knowledge Lab 232
Low Numeracy project 669
LS see Learning Study
macro-social change 405–6
mainstream mathematics education 363–4
manipulable digital technologies 663–4; see also headings under digital technologies
mapping 473
massive open online courses (MOOCs) 428
materialism, embodiment and 75–6

mathematical action technologies 597
Mathematical Awareness Program, Count Me In Too (Bobis et al.) 176
mathematical knowledge for teaching (MKT) 21–3, 25–6, 41–2, 300–301, 435–6; see also
Mathematical Meanings for Teaching Secondary Mathematics (MMTsm)
mathematical knowledge, skills, and abilities, doctoral programs and 299–301
Mathematical Meanings for Teaching Secondary Mathematics (MMTsm)/researching mathematical
meanings 435–61; aggregating data 455–6; assessment as a context and source for research 457;
connecting assessments of mathematical meanings to classroom instruction 456–7; continuous
variation and covariation 445–51, 445t, 446f–9f, 447t, 449t–51t; decide early on an item’s focus
454; defining knowledge and knowing 435–7; example 1: meanings of “over” 438–41, 438f,
439t–41t, 451; example 2: meanings for “slope” 441–3, 442f, 442t; Force Concept Inventory (FCI)
and 451–2; Learning Mathematics for Teaching (LMT) 436; leverage the implicative nature of
meanings 453; mathematical knowledge for teaching (MKT) 435–6; pilot items early and often
454; Precalculus Concept Assessment (PCA) and 451–2; raise issues of conflicting meanings that
arise 453; request symbolic responses sparingly 453–4; research as source for assessment 457;
scoring and refining phase 1: grounded theory 454–5; scoring and refining phase 2: group
responses 455; scoring and refining phase 3: codify criteria for grouping responses 455; scoring
and refining phase 4: small-scale interscorer trials 455; scoring and refining phase 5: interscorer
agreement and scoring all responses 455; start with meanings that matter to students, both
positively and negatively 452–3, 453f; striving for common measures 458; teachers’
mathematical meanings 443–4, 444t
mathematical quality of teachers’ instruction (MQI) 436
Mathematical Sign System (MSS) 225–6; see also middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS)
Mathematics Education, role of theory and 504
mathematics education and democracy 359–73; Algebra Project (Moses) 364; an aporetic condition
360–2; democracy word origin/definition 359; the Dewey harmony 360, 362; justice 359; life-
worlds 365–8; mathematics in society and technology 365–6; mathematics in students’ life-
worlds 367–8; Mode-2 society 361; Modern Outlook/Modernity 360–2, 365, 368–9; open
landscape 368–9; pedagogical imagination 362, 364–8; racism and 360; school mathematics
tradition 363–4; for social justice 362–3

mathematics education research—a strategic view 689–711; the academic value system and 698–9;
building a body of accepted knowledge 700–703; building and funding collaborative research
708; classroom level 706; defined 463; dimensions of efficacy (trustworthiness, generalizability,
importance by Schoenfeld) 697; “good research” list of academic priorities 698; graduate students
and 692–3; levels of research and development 690, 690t; making evaluation-in-depth central
703–4; principles for effective teaching (NCETM) 701t; the research community 690–1, 693–5; six
features for improving (Burkhardt & Schoenfeld) 699; students and 695–6; surveys 691–2; system
level: the case for “big education” 707–8; teacher level 706–7; testing theoretical models 702–3,
702f; theory: for whom and for what? 696–8; three traditions (humanities, science, and
engineering) 691–2; using a common set of instruments 704; using focal exemplars 704–5; see
also reform in mathematics education research
Mathematics Education Research Journal 471
mathematics teachers’ specialized knowledge (MTSK) 301
“Mathematics Teaching Is Democratic Education” (Hannaford) 360
Mathematics Teaching, Learning, and Liberation in the Lives of Black Children (Jackson) 380
mathematization 474
Mathenpoche (mathematics in the pocket) 641–2; see also e-textbooks
“Math Wars” 99, 129–32, 463
meaningful mathematics 617
meaning notion 472
MEAs see model-eliciting activities
measurement challenges 462–80; background 462–5; construct validity 470; cultural mathematics
467; design experiments 469; “direct instruction” vs. “reform” approaches 465; disciplined
noticing (Mason) 463; environmental context (qualitative) 466–7, 468–9; Heinz-Dieter Meyer
open letter criticizing PISA data 474–5, 477; instrumental (quantitative) 467–9; internal and
external 462; Journal for Research in Mathematics Education and 465; Learners’ Prospective
Study case study 475–6; mathematical education research defined 463; mathematization concept
474; math wars 463; measure defined 462; measures and measurements in mathematics
education 469–73; observation 470; pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and 467–8, 470–1; of
pluralism and localization 469; privileging forms of (mathematics education) knowledge 465–9;

Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) case study 466, 474–5;
qualitative/quantitative divide and mixed-methods approach 462–3, 470–3; Rasch measurement
471–3; Schoenfeld’s criteria of found measurements 463, 473, 475; StatSmart case study 476–7;
types of studies 462; workplace or everyday mathematics 466
mediation: cultural mediation of mathematical learning 400–402; social mediation of mathematical
learning 402–6; see also learning in and out of school
Meditations (Descartes) 63
Meno (Plato) 63
metacognition 131–2
meta-cognitive thoughts 512
metaphor and language: embodiment and 68–70; use of 249
method 510
middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS) 219–38; the age problem 227–8; algebraic read-writing
(sense production in math learning) 225–8; background of algebraic learning in 219–20;
comprehension of mathematics as semiosis processes 223–5; democratic access defined 219–20;
digital technologies and MJSS mathematics 220, 230–6, 231f, 233f–4f; English Concepts in
Secondary School Mathematics and Science (CSMS) and 222; lifelong mathematics learning in
the 219–21; Mathematical Sign System (MSS) 225–6; Nagel point N of a triangle ABC 224–5,
225f; a new way of viewing mathematics learning 230; Principles and Standards for School
Mathematics (NCTM) and 221; realistic mathematics and mathematics in context 221; sense and
assigning meaning in mathematics 221–30; the sign “=” 221–2; signs and meanings in
mathematics generalization 228–30, 229f; summary of lifelong learning, digital technologies, and
signification in mathematics 234–6; symbol and structure sense in the learning of algebra 222–3;
texts 219–20, 225, 227, 230; see also digital technologies in middle and junior secondary schools
(MJSS); semiotics
MJSS see middle and junior secondary schools
MKT see mathematical knowledge for teaching
MMTsm see Mathematical Meanings for Teaching
Mode 2 educational model for doctoral education 305, 361
model-eliciting activities (MEAs) 328

modeling/models, defining 328–9, 510
Model of Awareness and Effective Attitudes and Behaviors construct 509–18; see also intertwining
of theory and practice
Model of Learning in EDA Graphing Environments (Fitzallen) 567
mode of existence 615
modernity see Modern Outlook/Modernity
Modern Outlook/Modernity 360–2, 365, 368–9; see also mathematics education and democracy
MOOCs see massive open online courses
Motion Math-Fractions 668
MQI see mathematical quality of teachers’ instruction
MTSK see mathematics teachers’ specialized knowledge
Multi-commented Transcripts (MT) 508–9; see also intertwining of theory and practice for teaching
and teachers’ education
multiculturalism 347–9; see also learning in and out of school
multimedia cases, teacher education and 291
multimodal technologies 543–62; Cabri-Geometre 545; classroom connectivity 546–7; discussion and
future perspectives 556–9, 557f; dynamic interactive mathematics 545–6; embodiment 550–1;
Etchasketch 550t; exemplary activity 1: force feedback 552–4, 552f; exemplary activity 2:
multiple inputs correspond to mathematical variables 554–6, 554f; force feedback technology
547–9, 548f; literature review and background 543–7; PHANTOM Omni® (Senasable) 547–9,
548f; semiotic mediation 545; Sketchpad® (Geometer) 545; translation as a composition of two
reflections 549f
multiplicative and linear relations among quantities 207–10, 209–10f; see also elementary school
mathematics
multiplicative structures 193–4
multitouch technology 549, 549f–50f, 670–3, 671f–2f, 673t; see also headings under digital
technologies
NAEP see National Assessment of Educational Progress
NAEYC see National Association for the Education of Young Children

Nagel point N of a triangle ABC 224–5, 225f
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 471, 691–2
National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) 153, 155, 156, 179
National Centre for Excellence in the Teaching of Mathematics (NCETM, UK), principles for
effective mathematics teaching 700–701, 701t
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards (NCTM) 153, 155, 156, 179, 695, 698;
Curriculum and Evaluation Standards 705; How Many Under the Shell? 669; knowledge of
mathematics and 277; Principles and Standards for School Mathematics 165; reform in research
and 258, 264, 268–9
National Literacy and Numeracy Strategies (Aubrey et al.) 176
National Longitudinal Study of Mathematical Abilities (NLSMA) 259
National Research Council (NRC) 156
National Science Foundation (NSF) 543, 708
A Nation at Risk (National Commission on Excellence in Education) 318, 382
NCTM see National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards
nested systems 418, 418f, 425f
NetLogo 421–2
networking theories 35–6, 427; see also complex systems
new materialism, embodiment and 75–6
“New Mathematics Movement” 192
Next Generation Science Standards, STEM disciplines and 4
NLSMA see National Longitudinal Study of Mathematical Abilities
nonlinear dynamical systems (mathematics) 417
NRC see National Research Council
NSF see National Science Foundation
Numberbonds 667
number learning see digital technologies in primary school
number lines see elementary school mathematics
The Number Race 669, 670f
number sense 34

Number Worlds program (Rightstart, Griffin, Case, and Siegler) 158–9, 176
numeracy 323
Numeracy Development Project (Bobis et al.) 176
Object of Learning (OoL) 533–4; see also knowledge from teaching and researching
one-dimensional expertise 366
One Field, Many Paths (1999 U.S. national conference on doctoral programs in mathematics
education) 307–8
one-on-one design studies 481
online settings, teacher education and 291–2
ontological individualism 121
OoL see Object of Learning
operant theory 106
orchestration types 664
organizational design studies 481
organized complex systems (information science) 417
“over” meanings 438–41, 438f, 439t–41t, 451
Overseas activity 620–3
paper-and pencil tests 25–6
parabolas 602–6, 603f–6f
paradigmatic professions 98
paradigmatic sciences 98
paradigm competition 106
Paradigm Extension 105
Paradigm Initiation 105
Paradigm Projection 106
parents, participation in children’s school mathematics 408–10
Partnerships for 21st-Century Skills 322
pascaline 666, 666f

Pattern and Structure Mathematical Awareness Program (Mulligan and Mitchelmore) 159–60, 176
Patterns and Early Algebra Professional Development Program (Papic) 176
PCK see pedagogical content knowledge
Pedagogical Awareness 278
pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) 21–3, 41, 42, 278, 283–5, 289, 467–8, 470–1
Pedagogical Content Knowledge Consolidation 278
Pedagogical Content Knowledge Emergence 278
pedagogical imagination 362, 364–8
pedagogical knowledge, skills, and abilities, doctoral programs and 301–2
peer reviews 306
pentomino challenge (two-dimensional) in a kindergarten class 166–7, 167f–70f, 169–70
performance theory, embodiment and 78–81
perpendicular bisector (geography) exemplar 600–606, 601f–6f
Personal Numeracy 278
PHANTOM Omni® (Sensable) haptic device 547–8, 548f
phonics 128
Piagetian developmental psychology 98, 115–19, 131, 424, 443
PISA see Programme for International Student Assessment
Plato 62–3, 359
play: guided 163–4; unguided 162
points on the line 193
positivist paradigm 472
Postmodern standpoint, embodied learning and 60, 64–7
postpositive fragmentation 108–9
power issues 376
practice-focused professional learning programs 177
practice/research split/gap 5–7
practicum 289–91
Precalculus Concept Assessment (PCA) 451–2
preschool see young children’s/kindergarten/preschool mathematics programs

preservice teaching education programs 44
Principles and Standards for School Mathematics (NCTM) 165; middle and junior secondary schools
(MJSS) and 221
Principles for Analysing Visual Representation (Kidman & Nason) 567
“problem-solving cycles” 24
problem solving in mathematics curriculum 313–35; advancing 325–8; background 313–15;
competencies and 321–5; concluding points 329–30; content choices 317, 328; contexts and
authenticity 316, 327–8; defining 253; drivers of change 317–18, 317–19; heuristics and general
skills 315–16, 326–7; mathematical modeling 328–9; problem posing 315; problems faced in the
21st-century life and work 319–21; process and content 326; teaching problem solving vs.
teaching mathematics through problem solving 315
process oriented explanation 490
professional development (PD) design studies 491–97; accounting for the relations between teachers’
activity across settings 493; argumentative grammar 496–7; background 491–2; conducting
retrospective analysis 496–7; current limitations of 497–9; data collection 495–6; delineating an
envisioned learning trajectory 494–5; documenting instructional starting points 494;
experimenting to support learning 495–6; interpretive framework 492–3; placing the study in
theoretical context 495; practice-specific professional development theory 491; preparing for a PD
design study 493–5; professional development defined 491–2; situating teachers’ activity with
respect to school settings 492; situating teachers’ activity with respect to the PD learning
environment 492–3; specifying goals for teachers’ learning 493–4; see also classroom design
studies; design research studies
professional development for teachers of young children 176–9; classroom-embedded and practice-
focused professional learning programs 177; clearly articulated and specific objectives for 177–8;
implementation and use of information from child assessments 178; Lesson Study 178–9;
sustained professional development of sufficient duration 178
professors see doctoral programs in mathematics education
professors’ professional identity 306–7
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 4, 466, 691, 695; case study 466, 474–5;
Israel’s poor performance on 269

programming, learning mathematics through 678
proof 246–9, 252–3; see also Advanced Mathematical Thinking
propaedeutic meanings 444
properties 243
prospective teacher education 275–96; content knowledge 278; development of prospective teachers’
identity 287–8; development of prospective teachers’ knowledge of mathematics for teaching
280–1; development of prospective teachers’ knowledge of mathematics teaching 283–5, 284t;
examples of key items of approaches for knowledge of mathematics teaching studies 284t;
examples of perspectives of teachers’ mathematics studies 278t; features of prospective teachers’
identity 285–7, 286t; general aspects 289; issues with prospective teachers’ knowledge of
mathematics 278–80, 279t; issues with prospective teachers’ knowledge of mathematics teaching
282–3; landscape/background of 275–7, 276f; ongoing issues 293–4; pedagogical content
knowledge (PCK) and 278, 283–5, 289; perspectives of knowledge of mathematics 277–8, 278t;
perspectives of knowledge of mathematics teaching 281–2, 282t; practicum and lesson study
289–91; teacher education settings, activities, and tools 288–9; trends in findings 293; trends in
research process 292–3; types of knowledge (of content and students, of content and teaching, of
curriculum) 281–2; unidimensional construct with four increasing hierarchical levels 278; video
and multimedia cases and online settings 291–2; see also doctoral programs in mathematics
education; teacher knowledge, teaching, and learning linkages
proxemics (personal space) 121–2
pseudo-change 258, 266–71; see also reform in mathematics education research
psychology, education and 106–7
public pedagogy 350–1
qualitative studies: environmental context 466–7, 468–9; quantitative studies and (mixed-methods
approach) 462–3, 470–3
quantitative studies: instrumental context 467–9; qualitative studies and (mixed-methods approach)
462–3, 470–3
racism 360

radical constructivism 116–17
Rasch measurement 471–3
“Reaching for Common Ground in K-12 Mathematics Education” (Ball et al.) 266
reading and writing the world with mathematics 362
“Reading Wars” 128–9
Realistic Mathematics Education (Freudenthal Institute in The Netherlands) 43, 249, 484, 486, 628
Recognizing, Building-with, Construction+Consolidation (RBC+C) model 629–33; see also
computerized environments in classrooms
reflected abstraction 116
reflection 510, 512
reflective practice 506
reform in mathematics education research 257–74; action or participatory research 261–2;
background 257–8; change, the response to change, and pseudo-change 258, 266–71; Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics and 265–6, 270; communication and 263–6; content,
values, and cooperation 271–2; cyclical or iterative character 262; Lesson Study stages 262;
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards (NCTM) and 258, 264, 268–9; National
Longitudinal Study of Mathematical Abilities (NLSMA) and 259; organizations 258–9; “reform
researchers” and their methodologies 260–3; research as a component and result of reform
258–60; School Mathematics Study Group (SMSG) and 259, 261; textbooks and 263–5;
traditional research methodologies 260–1; see also mathematics education research—a strategic
view
reform instruction 130–1
regularity type of causal description 490
relations: additive 197–207; defining 191–3, 192t; and functional relations (functions) 195–7;
multiplicative and linear relations among quantities 207–10, 209f–10f; see also elementary
school mathematics
representation register 509
The Republic (Plato) 63
research and development, four levels of (learning, teaching, typical teachers, system change) 690,
690t

research community 690–1, 693–5; see also mathematics education research; research/studies
research/practice gap 5–7; see also intertwining of theory and practice for teaching and teachers’
education
research/studies: complex systems 416–32; on early algebra 191; examples of features of prospective
teachers’ professional identity studied 286t; examples of key items of approaches for knowledge
of mathematics teaching studied 284t; examples of prospective teachers’ knowledge of
mathematics teaching studied 282t; on functions 192; Mathematical Meanings for Teaching
Secondary Mathematics (MMTsm) 435–61; on mathematical structure 242–6; of out-of-school
mathematics in non-Western cultures 398–9; questions that drive research in the sociology of
education 378; recommendations for educational research 179; research experience and doctoral
education 305–6; Schoenfeld’s criteria for 463, 473; studies of additive and multiplicative
structures 191–2; trends and findings in teacher education (summary) 292–4; see also design
research/studies; intertwining of theory and practice for teaching and teachers’ education;
knowledge from teaching and researching; Mathematical Meanings for Teaching Secondary
Mathematics (MMTsm); mathematics education research; measurement challenges; reform in
mathematics education research
resource system 647
RME see Realistic Mathematics Education
role constructivist theories 258; see also National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standards
Rubin, Edgar 104
scaffolding 510
scholarly knowledge: Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) and 526–8; see also knowledge from
teaching and researching
School Mathematics Project (SMP) 261
School Mathematics Study Group (SMSG) 259, 261
school mathematics tradition 363–4
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education 35, 328, 330; balancing the
four discipline areas 5; complex systems and 421–2; importance of mathematics 5; international
developments in 4–5; online data and 5; publishing about 4–5; for young children 165, 166

science tradition 691–2
semiotics: age problem 227–8; algebraic read-writing (sense production in math learning) 225–8;
comprehension of mathematics as semiosis processes 223–5; embodiment and 72–3; mediation
and 545; sense and assigning meaning in mathematics 221–30; signs and meanings in
mathematics generalization 228–30, 229f; summary of lifelong learning, digital technologies, and
signification in mathematics 234–6; symbol and structure sense in the learning of mathematics
222–3; see also middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS)
SERP see Strategic Education Research Partnership
SES see socioeconomic status
Sésamath e-textbook 641–2, 647–9, 652–5, 652f, 655f
simplexity 429
simplicity/complexity to form the terms simplexity and complicity 429–30
simulation and modeling exemplar 611–14, 612f–14f
single static book 642
situative view 133
Sketchpad® (Geometer) 545, 549
SketchpadExplorer® 549
skills: vs. concepts 114; vs. dispositions 114–15
Skinner, B.F. 106; programmed instruction 126–8, 126t
slope 441–3, 442f, 442t
Smith, David Eugene 297
SMK see Subject-Matter Knowledge
SMP see School Mathematics Project
SMSG see School Mathematics Study Group
The Social Contract (Rousseau) 359
socialization in education 378–81
social justice 362–3
social mediation of mathematical learning 402–6; macro-social change impact 405–6; role of social
institutions 403; role of social interactions 403–5; see also learning in and out of school
social systems (sociology) 417

societal transformation, pedagogies of 132–4
socioeconomic status (SES), preschool mathematics and 154, 155
sociological theory 121–2
sociological theory of learning 103–7
sociology of mathematics education 374–94; background 374–5; conclusion 389–91; credentialing
381–6; geospatial perspective 386–9, 391; Handbook of Urban Education (Milner & Lomotey)
three aspects of urban education 374–5; Journal for Research on Mathematics Education (JRME)
376, 379; Mathematics Teaching, Learning, and Liberation in the Lives of Black Children
(Jackson) 380; socialization 378–81; The Sociology of Mathematics Education: Mathematical
Myth/Pedagogical Texts (Dowling) and 377; Teach for America (TFA) and 384–6; urban middle
school vignette 375–6, 380–1, 385–6, 387–91
The Sociology of Mathematics Education: Mathematical Myth/Pedagogical Texts (Dowling) 377
Sociology of Scientific Knowledge (SSK) 103
sociomathematical norms 122–3
sociopolitical issues 349–50
“Some Shifts in Emphasis in Educational Research in Mathematics and Science” (Kelly & Lesh) 262
spatial thinking: young children and 164–66; see also geometry
specialized content knowledge 279
StarLogo 421
statements, mathematical proof and 246
statistical process control 319
statistical software 563–94; assessing understanding 576–81, 577f, 579f–81f; background 563–6;
conclusion 589–90; constraints 584–9, 585f–9f; other mathematics learning 582–4, 583f; students
learning statistics 569–74, 570f–1f; teachers learning to teach statistics 574–6, 575f; Theory of
Affordances defined 563–4; TinkerPlots: Dynamic Data Exploration 565–90; see also TinkerPlots:
Dynamic Data Exploration
StatSmart case study 476–7
STEM: Country Comparisons (Marginson et al.) 4, 5
STEM education see science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education
STEM Task Force Report (2014, California Department of Education) 4–5

strategic design 692
Strategic Education Research Partnership (SERP) 708
structural thinking 248
structured play 163
structure in mathematics 240–6, 252–3; literature about 242–6; see also Advanced Mathematical
Thinking
structure sense 244
student-centered pedagogy 112, 115, 117–19, 122–3
student mathematical learning 33–9
studies see research/studies
Subject-Matter Knowledge (SMK) 21–3, 42
substantial learning environments 529–31, 530f; see also knowledge from teaching and researching
subtraction: and addition as functions 198–200; see also elementary school mathematics
survey work 691–2
symmetries of the figure 241
syntactical structures 195
systems (cybernetics) 417
teacher-as-inquirer 507
teacher-centered pedagogy 112, 115, 119–20, 123–4
teacher change, defining 506
teacher effectiveness research (TER) 29–31
teacher knowledge, teaching, and learning linkages 19–59; 1. understanding a key teacher resource
(teacher knowledge) 20–7, 44; 2. teaching and instructional quality 27–33, 44; 3. student
mathematical learning 33–9, 44; 4. bringing together the 3 components above 39–44;
applicability and 23–4; background 19–20; challenges which leads to opportunities 44; classroom
observations 32–3; conceptualizing and studying teaching and teaching quality 27–31;
conceptualizing student mathematical learning 34–8; conceptualizing the entire chain of
interactions 40–2; conceptualizing the knowledge needed to teach mathematics 21–5; Core
Practices 28; defining core practices 28; defining teaching 27–8; foundations, transformations,

connections, and contingency 21; Knowledge Quartet (KQ) 21–3; mathematical knowledge for
teaching (MKT) 21–3, 25; measuring student mathematical learning 38–9; measuring teaching
and teaching quality/challenges of 31–3; measuring the knowledge needed to teach mathematics
25–7; methodological challenges in considering the entire chain of interactions 42–4; studies
reviewed for 20; Subject-Matter Knowledge (SMK), General Pedagogical Knowledge (PK), and
Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK) 21–3; teacher effectiveness research (TER) 29–30;
transferability and 24; see also doctoral programs in mathematics education; prospective teacher
education
Teachers College, Columbia University doctoral programs 297; see also doctoral programs in
mathematics education
teachers’ identity 285–92, 286t; development of 287–8; features of 285–7, 286t; professors’
professional identity 306–7; see also prospective teacher education
Teach for America (TFA) 384–6
teaching: defining 27–8; six characteristics of excellence 100
Teaching Children Mathematics (NCTM) 264
The Teaching Gap (Stigler & Hiebert) 262
technology in the classroom 270; see also computerized environments in classrooms; digital
technologies in middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS); digital technologies in primary
school; e-textbooks; multimodal technologies; statistical software
TER see teacher effectiveness research
tertiary-level mathematics see Advanced Mathematical Thinking
textbooks: need for textbook production reform 263–5; see also e-textbooks
texts in algebra 219–20, 225, 227, 230; see also middle and junior secondary schools (MJSS)
TFA see Teach for America
theorem in motion 615
theoretical testing of models 702–3, 702f
Theories of Mathematics Education: Seeking New Frontiers (Sriraman and English) 34
Theory of Affordances (Gibson) 563–4; see also statistical software; TinkerPlots: Dynamic Data
Exploration
theory of scientific paradigms (Kuhn) 103–6

theses 305
Third International Mathematics and Science Study 637
three-, four-, and five-cube challenge for discovering equivalence of 3d figures 172–4, 173f–5f
“Three Worlds of Mathematics” (Tall) 240
TIMSS see Trends in Mathematics and Science Study
TinkerPlots: Dynamic Data Exploration 565–90; affordances of 568–9; assessing understanding
576–81, 577f, 579f–81f; conclusion 589–90; constraints 584–9, 585f–9f; description 566–7, 566f;
examples of affordances 569; literature 567; other mathematics learning 582–4, 583f; potential
affordances of 567; students learning statistics 569–74, 570f–1f; teachers learning to teach
statistics 574–6, 575f
touching 77
transferability 23, 24
transfer problem 245
transformations 21, 470
Trends in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 474, 691, 695
trustworthiness 490–1, 697
Turtle Geometry (Papert) 662
Two Treatises of Government (Locke) 359
uncertainty conditions 627
understanding, forms of 443–4, 444t
unguided play 162
urban middle school vignette, of sociology of mathematics education 375–6, 380–1, 385–6, 387–9
validity: consequential 471; construct 470
values decisions 101–2
vase-faces graphic 104f
video recordings: analysis of lesson sequences 531–2; teacher education and 291
virtual manipulatives (VMs) 663; defined 666–8, 666f, 668f; see also digital technologies in primary
school

visual-haptic scene 548, 548f
VisualMath e-textbook (algebra) 642–4, 644f, 645–7, 645f
VMs see virtual manipulatives
Vygotskian sociocultural theory 98, 131, 509–10, 664–5
websites (selected):Base Blocks from the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives 667;
ClassroomAid 639; Common Core State Standards for Mathematics 4; Decision Research 318;
International Journal of STEM Education 5; Learner’s Prospective Study 475; London Knowledge
Lab 232; Next Generation Science Standards 4; PHANTOM Omni® (Sensable) 547; Programme
for International Student Assessment (PISA) 466; remedial interventions for numbers 669;
Sésamath e-textbook 641; StarLogo and NetLogo 421; Strategic Education Research Partnership
(SERP) 708; Trends in Mathematics and Science Study 474
webs of signification 342
whole-language advocates 128
workplace mathematics 466; see also everyday mathematics
young children’s/kindergarten/preschool mathematics programs 153–90; advancing the equity
agenda 182; the belief that mathematics learning should emerge from children’s unguided play
162; best practices/studies/background 153–5; Big Math for Little Kids (Greenes et al.) 160;
Building Blocks—Foundations for Mathematics Thinking Program (Clements and Sarama)
157–8; challenges to 161–3; conclusions/summary/recommendations 160–1, 179–82; early years
mathematics programs 156–61; everyday mathematics and equity 155; expanding and refining
the range of tools for measuring outcomes 181; exploring congruence in a kindergarten
classroom: a two-dimensional pentomino challenge 166–7, 167f–70f, 169–70; foundations to
quality programming 160; growing knowledge and interest in the affordances of a spatial
approach to 164–6; increasing the focus on mathematics 180–1; intentional teaching 156;
location, orientation, and positional language: grade 1 Barrier Game 170–2, 170f–2f;
mathematics in kindergarten as the best predictor of later academic success 155–6; narrow
conceptions of what should be taught 162–3; National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC) and 153, 155, 156; National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)

and 153, 155, 156; National Research Council (NRC) and 156; negative attitudes, beliefs, and lack
of interest in mathematics content and pedagogy 161–2; new research findings on the
effectiveness of a playful pedagogy 163–4; the Number Worlds program (Rightstart, Griffin,
Case, and Siegler) 158–9; Pattern and Structure Mathematical Awareness Program (Mulligan
and Mitchelmore) 159–60; policy directions and visions of school mathematics 156; professional
developments for teachers of 176–9; pushing the upper boundaries of mathematics curriculums
181–2; socioeconomic status (SES) and 154, 155; studying the processes involved in teaching 180;
three-, four-, and five-cube challenge for discovering equivalence of 3d figures 172–4, 173f–5f;
see also professional development for teachers of young children

